A/61/PV.84

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

84

th plenary meeting
Friday, 22 December 2006, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al-Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Saparmurat
Niyazov, President of Turkmenistan
The President: Before proceeding to the items on
our agenda, it is my sad duty to pay tribute to the
memory of the late Saparmurat Ataevich Niyazov,
President of Turkmenistan, who passed away on
Thursday, 21 December 2006.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I request the
representative of Turkmenistan to convey our
condolences to the Government and the people of
Turkmenistan and to the bereaved family of His
Excellency Saparmurat Niyazov.
May I now invite representatives to stand and
observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of
His Excellency Saparmurat Niyazov.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Niger, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of African States.
Mr. Abani (Niger) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the Group of African States, I would like to extend
to the Government and the people of Turkmenistan, as
well as to the bereaved family of the deceased, our
deepest condolences on the demise on 21 December
2006 of His Excellency President Saparmurat Niyazov.
May his soul rest in peace.

At this difficult moment, the African Group
would like to convey its sympathy and solidarity to the
brotherly people of Turkmenistan. This is also the
place and the time to pay a well-deserved tribute to
President Saparmurat Niyazov for his outstanding work
throughout his entire presidency on behalf of his
country and international peace and security. The
people of Turkmenistan will long remember him as an
exceptional leader who supported national unity and
who, through his tireless efforts, greatly contributed to
their well-being and development.
The African Group earnestly hopes that the
people of Turkmenistan can overcome this great loss
and continue to pursue development in peace and
stability. For its part, Africa remains prepared to
continue and strengthen the cooperation and friendly
relations it has initiated with Turkmenistan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Asian States.
Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): On behalf of the
Group of Asian States, I wish to extend our deep
respect to the Government and the people of
Turkmenistan on the sad occasion of the passing of His
Excellency Mr. Saparmurat Niyazov, President of
Turkmenistan.
The late President Niyazov will be remembered
by his people for his leadership in making
Turkmenistan a proud sovereign nation that is able to
stand on its own among independent and sovereign

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-22624 (E)

*0722624*

A/61/PV.84

nations today, including in the General Assembly. He
brought about change to the lives of his beloved people
and country. He was a man of vision — a vision of a
prosperous and progressive Turkmenistan.
It is with profound sadness that I convey the
sincere condolences of the members of the Asian
Group to the Government and the people of
Turkmenistan and to the bereaved family members of
the late President Saparmurat Niyazov on his passing.
We pray that they find strength in this period of
bereavement.

The late President will be remembered for
leading his country to independence and for promoting
and maintaining traditional Turkmen culture. Since
joining the United Nations, in 1992, under President’s
Niyazov’s leadership Turkmenistan has contributed to
the work of the United Nations, in particular to the
peace processes in Tajikistan and Afghanistan.
The Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States expresses its wish for a smooth transition of
power and for the continued growth and prosperity of
the country.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Eastern European States.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Western European and other States.

Mr. Muharemi (Croatia): I stand here on behalf
of the Group of Eastern European States to express our
sincere condolences to the citizens, the people and the
Government of Turkmenistan on the passing away of
their President, His Excellency Mr. Saparmurat
Niyazov, who was also known as Turkmenbashi.

Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I should like, on behalf of
the Group of Western European and other States, to
convey our condolences to the Government and the
people of Turkmenistan on the death of their President,
Mr. Saparmurat Niyazov. Our condolences go also to
the members of his family grieving at his loss.

The late President Niyazov will be remembered
as the first President of independent Turkmenistan,
since 1991, and as the well known leader of
Turkmenistan for more than 20 years. The Group of
Eastern European States hopes that the leaders and the
people of Turkmenistan will manage to hold peaceful
and democratic elections for the new leadership
following Mr. Niyazov’s sad passing. We also hope that
the new leadership will act to promote cooperation
with the countries of the Central Asian region and the
world as a whole.

Mr. Niyazov had been the President of
Turkmenistan since it gained independence, on
27 October 1991. Starting from humble beginnings and
orphaned at an early age, Mr. Niyazov moved
forcefully forward towards the leadership of his
country, both before and following independence in
1991.

All our thoughts remain with the people of
Turkmenistan at this sad time.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Grenada, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Ms. Rouse (Grenada): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the States members of the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States, and to join previous
speakers in extending condolences to the Government
and the people of Turkmenistan on the sudden demise
of His Excellency President Saparmurat Niyazov. We
would also like to take this opportunity to extend
condolences to the bereaved family of the late
President during this time of loss.

2

The people of Turkmenistan have a long history,
a proud culture and great economic potential. In recent
years Turkmenistan has sought to play a role in the
promotion of stability in its region of Central Asia,
including through its policy of permanent neutrality. It
is an active member of the international community in
such key institutions as the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
As the Secretary-General has recalled, Turkmenistan
has made important contributions to the United Nations
peace processes in Tajikistan and Afghanistan.
We hope that, once their period of mourning is
over, the people of Turkmenistan will find renewed
opportunities to pursue their road to development in
freedom, peace and the rule of law, thereby
contributing also to the further promotion of security
and stability in their region and beyond.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States, who will speak on
behalf of the host country.

07-22624

A/61/PV.84

Mr. Melrose (United States of America): The
United States extends its condolences to the family of
the late President and to the people of Turkmenistan on
their loss. We look forward to continuing our relations
with Turkmenistan, to build a stable, democratic and
prosperous future that provides justice and opportunity
for the people of Turkmenistan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan, who will speak on behalf
of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan) (spoke in
Russian): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) to honour the memory of Saparmurat Niyazov,
President of Turkmenistan, who, to our deep grief,
passed away on 21 December 2006. Mr. Niyazov will
remain in our memory as an eminent political leader
and statesman, and as a man with unwavering vital
energy and tireless optimism.
President Niyazov played a key role in
establishing and strengthening the statehood of an
independent Turkmenistan and in developing the
country’s economic potential. His policy of neutrality
helped to determine Turkmenistan’s place in the
contemporary system of international relations and his
country’s involvement in international economic
relations, as well as in establishing multilateral
cooperation based on the principles of mutual security
and respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Turkmenistan and the States of CIS are linked by
a common history and cultures, as well as by political
and economic interests. Developing relations of
friendship, peace and mutually beneficial cooperation
is in the vital interests of the peoples of our States and
benefits the cause of peace and security.
On behalf of the members of the Commonwealth
of Independent States, I would like to express our
sincere condolences to the people and the Government
of Turkmenistan and to the family and friends of
President Saparmurat Niyazov.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine, who will speak on behalf of
the Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, Moldova group.
Ms. Martina (Ukraine): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the States members of the Georgia,
Ukraine, Azerbaijan, Moldova group (GUAM).

07-22624

The GUAM States would like to express their
deepest condolences at the death of the President of
Turkmenistan, Saparmurat Ataevich Niyazov. We pay
tribute to a leader whose role in the development of
Turkmenistan was a historic one. A statesman of
outstanding personality, he was our countries’ good
friend. It is our strong belief that the ancient wisdom of
the people of Turkmenistan will help that brotherly
nation to overcome this loss with dignity, thereby
paving the way to democracy and remaining a stable
and reliable partner to many countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkmenistan.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian):
First of all, on behalf of the Government and the
people of Turkmenistan, I would like to express our
deep appreciation to the Chairpersons of the regional
groups, Permanent Representatives of United Nations
Member States and heads of missions of international
organizations to the United Nations for the words of
condolence they have addressed to the people of
Turkmenistan and to my country’s Government at this
difficult time. We deeply appreciate the support and
solidarity of the international community. I am grateful
to everyone gathered today in this Hall to share our
grief and pain.
The people of Turkmenistan have suffered a great
loss. On 21 December at 1.10 a.m., cardiac arrest
quickly resulted in the death of Saparmurat Niyazov,
President of Turkmenistan. Mr. Niyazov was the leader
of Turkmenistan for 21 years. Our people’s new era —
one of reborn statehood — is inextricably associated
with our leader. A true leader, President Niyazov was
able to carry out our ancestors age-old dream of
establishing a united and independent State.
In heading the country and determining the true
role of the Turkmen people in world history, President
Niyazov ensured that the entire world knew of the
heroism of our ancestors and the contribution of the
people of Turkmenistan to the development of world
civilization. The glorious years during which
Mr. Niyazov led our country confirmed his gift of
vision and skill in determining true priorities, his
uncommon abilities in leading a State and people and
his talent as a diplomat and wise and humane person.
Once Turkmenistan achieved independence,
Mr. Niyazov developed the major principles upon
which to build our State. The thoughtful and consistent

3

A/61/PV.84

domestic and foreign policy of Saparmurat Niyazov
ensured that we would have the major conditions and
opportunities for the successful development of an
independent State. The goals he set epitomized the
interests of the people. Our major accomplishments
were in keeping with the spirit of the people, and were
heartily embraced by every citizen of Turkmenistan.
Mr. Niyazov restored and successfully developed the
nearly moribund spiritual and cultural life of our
people, of which we are so proud: its glorious history,
its priceless literary heritage, its ancient mother tongue
and its illustrious ceremonies and traditions.
Mr. Niyazov was equally respectful of the
representatives of all nations and peoples living in
Turkmenistan. He affirmed in the country the
principles of unity, solidarity and mutual trust. He
raised human dignity in Turkmenistan to a high level
and was a major treasure of our society.
Under his leadership, we accomplished a
tremendous amount with regard to our economy and
raised the standard of living of our people. As a result
of Turkmenistan’s peaceful relations with States
throughout the world, we were able to gain a place of
authority in the international arena. Through the
initiative and leadership of President Niyazov,
Turkmenistan declared and carried out a foreign policy
of permanent neutrality, which was recognized by the
international community through the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 50/80 A on 12 December
1995.
President Niyazov made an outstanding
contribution to the achievement and strengthening of
peace, security and stability in the Central Asian
region. Through his initiative, and in close cooperation
with the United Nations, several rounds of negotiations
were held in Turkmenistan in 1995 and 1996 that made
it possible to reach a peace settlement to the civil
conflict in Tajikistan. President Niyazov made a
tremendous personal contribution in organizing and
carrying out in Turkmenistan, under the auspices of the
United Nations, direct talks between the warring
parties to the conflict in Afghanistan. Subsequently,
through his decision, Turkmenistan made available its
territory and infrastructure, as well as the necessary
technical and logistical support, for the transport of
international humanitarian cargo to the Afghan people.
That continues today.

4

At this difficult time, the people of Turkmenistan,
being committed to the principles of Turkmen national
statehood established by President Niyazov as the
foundation of an independent State, will continue to
follow the political course of our leader. Our country’s
domestic and foreign policy will remain intact, based
on the principles of peace, humanism and justice.
Turkmenistan will also continue to follow its policy of
neutrality based on good-neighbourly relations, mutual
respect, equality and mutually beneficial cooperation
with all State around the world, while at the same time
fully meeting its obligations under the Charter of the
United Nations through bilateral and multilateral
agreements, treaties and conventions to which we are a
party.
The Turkmen people’s faith in and love for
President Niyazov is limitless and unchanging. The
people of Turkmenistan wholeheartedly live by the
vows of our leader. We will be dedicated to him and to
what he has done as a great man. We shall continue
what he has begun.
Agenda item 157
Support by the United Nations system of the efforts
of Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies
Draft resolution (A/61/L.51)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar to introduce draft resolution
A/61/L.51.
Mr. Al-Sulaiti (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I have
the honour to report to the General Assembly on the
successful outcome of the Sixth International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies, which
was organized by the Government of the State of Qatar
from 29 October to 1 November 2006, in cooperation
with the United Nations. More than 100 Member States
participated in the Conference, together with
parliamentarians representing 69 countries and
representatives of 100 civil society organizations.
I now have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/61/L.51, entitled “Support by the United
Nations system of the efforts of Governments to
promote and consolidate new or restored democracies”.
Let me express the deep appreciation and profound
gratitude of the Permanent Mission of the State of
Qatar to Her Excellency Sheikha Haya Rashed

07-22624

A/61/PV.84

Al-Khalifa, President of the General Assembly, whose
distinguished presence, active participation, warm
friendship and effective support at the Doha
Conference enriched and added depth to its
deliberations.
The International Conferences of New or
Restored Democracies began a distinct movement to
promote democratic values, stimulate a new brand of
international cooperation in favour of democratization.
They bring a new focus to the international
development agenda. The previous five important
International Conferences were held in Manila,
Philippines; Managua, Nicaragua; Bucharest, Romania;
Cotonou, Benin; and Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
The Sixth International Conference of New or
Restored Democracies reaffirmed the core principles
and values of democracy and offered new perspectives
and dimensions regarding the need to promote,
preserve and consolidate the democratization process
throughout the world. The Conference had two main
objectives: to enhance the linkages among democracy,
peace and social progress on the global development
agenda and to initiate systematic implementation and
follow-up measures to consolidate the achievements
and recommendations resulting from the previous
important International Conferences of New or
Restored Democracies, the first of which was held in
1988.
A major feature of the Sixth International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies was its
interactive dialogues, round tables and forums, which
brought
together
Government
representatives,
parliamentarians and representatives of civil society
organizations. The Conference had three substantive
outcomes: the Doha Declaration, adopted by the
Governments; a Joint Statement of Government
representatives, parliamentarians and representatives of
civil society; and a final report to be prepared by the
United Nations.
The Doha Declaration reaffirmed the resolve of
numerous United Nations Member States to adhere to
universally relevant democratic values, principles and
standards. It also reflected the support of concerned
member States of the Conference for the establishment
of follow-up steps to enhance the efficiency and
effectiveness of the International Conference
movement. The Doha Declaration requested the Chair
of the Sixth International Conference to take the

07-22624

necessary
measures to guarantee appropriate
implementation and follow-up of the recommendations
of the International Conferences, with the assistance of
an advisory board, over a three-year period.
The
Joint
Statement
of
Government
representatives, parliamentarians and representatives of
civil society organizations announced the commitment
to cooperate and build effective partnerships among
those three prominent groups in pursuit of core
democratic values and principles. The Joint Statement
welcomed the Doha Declaration and called for the
establishment of a democracy advisory commission
and an international steering committee to implement
the recommendations of the Parliamentary Forum and
the Civil Society Forum, respectively. The final report
of the Conference is being prepared in collaboration
with the United Nations Development Programme and
the Department of Political Affairs of the United
Nations Secretariat.
The Permanent Mission of the State of Qatar to
the United Nations recently submitted several
communications to the Secretary-General, the
President of the General Assembly and all Permanent
Missions to the United Nations. On 14 November
2006, the Permanent Mission of the State of Qatar sent
a letter to the Secretary-General (A/61/581)
transmitting the Doha Declaration and the Joint
Statement. On 16 November 2006, the Permanent
Mission sent a letter to the President of the General
Assembly (A/61/235) requesting the inclusion of an
additional item in the agenda of the sixty-first session
of the General Assembly. That request was approved
with the addition of agenda item 157, entitled “Support
by the United Nations system of the efforts of
Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies”. Finally, the text of a draft
resolution was transmitted on 29 November 2006 to all
Permanent
Missions,
and
several
informal
consultations were held earlier this month with many
Permanent Missions. We are grateful to our partners for
their support.
The draft resolution before members today,
entitled “Support by the United Nations system of the
efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate
new or restored democracies”, draws on agreed
language, particularly from General Assembly
resolutions 60/253, 58/13 and 58/281. The draft
resolution has four objectives: to provide information
about the concrete outcomes of the Sixth International

5

A/61/PV.84

Conference, that is, the Doha Declaration and the Joint
Statement; to emphasize the close cooperation in that
regard between the United Nations and Governments,
as well as among parliaments, civil society and
Governments; to highlight the special focus of the
Sixth International Conference, which was the need for
systematic implementation of the recommendations of
the International Conferences; and to request the
Secretary-General to include in his report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-second session a
summary of the outcomes of the Sixth International
Conference under the item entitled “Support by the
United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to
promote and consolidate new or restored democracies”.
The Permanent Mission of the State of Qatar
would like to express its deep appreciation and
gratitude to all those Governments that participated in
the Doha Conference and to those who cooperated with
us in preparing the draft resolution. I should like to
announce that, since the introduction of the draft
resolution, the following countries have joined the list
of sponsors: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Australia,
Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Burkina Faso, the
Central African Republic, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, the Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Maldives, Mali, Malta, the
Republic of Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Nicaragua,
the Russian Federation, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Turkey, Ukraine and the United Republic
of Tanzania. I thank all the countries that have become
sponsors of the draft resolution.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/61/L.51. May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/61/L.51
(resolution 61/226).

was

adopted

The President: I shall now call on the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
who wishes to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted. May I remind delegations that
explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Giménez-Jiménez (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian

6

Republic of Venezuela has always played a leading role
in the consolidation of democratic values and the
values of peace and solidarity. Today, we welcome this
consensus decision further committing us to support
the United Nations system in its endeavour to promote
and consolidate new or restored democracies.
However, I would point out that the 2005 World
Summit Outcome Document, referred to in the fourth
preambular paragraph, does not represent any mandate
for our Republic.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of position. I call now on
representatives wishing to make statements on this
item.
Mr. Shinyo (Japan): The Government of Japan
welcomes the adoption by consensus of the resolution
entitled “Support by the United Nations system of the
efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate
new or restored democracies”. We would like to take
this opportunity to express our sincere gratitude to the
Government of Qatar and its delegation for hosting the
Sixth International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies in Doha last month and for its efforts to
take the initiative on this resolution.
Japan attaches great importance to democracy as
a universal value, along with fundamental freedoms,
the rule of law and human rights, which are the basis
for the realization of happiness and the prosperity of
each individual. We consider that the consolidation and
strengthening of democratic institutions will lead to the
establishment of peaceful and prosperous societies and,
in turn, will contribute to the peace and stability of the
whole world.
Last month, our Foreign Minister, Taro Aso,
made a speech entitled “Arc of freedom and prosperity:
Japan’s expanding diplomatic horizons”, in which he
stressed the importance, as we advance our diplomatic
endeavours, of universal values such as democracy,
freedom, human rights, the rule of law and the market
economy.
In the resolution just adopted, the General
Assembly urges the Secretary-General to continue to
improve the capacity of the Organization to respond
effectively to the requests of Member States by
providing adequate support for their efforts to achieve
the goals of good governance and democratization,
including through the activities of the Democracy Fund
at the United Nations. My delegation wishes to take

07-22624

A/61/PV.84

this opportunity to announce that the Government of
Japan has decided to make a contribution to the
Democracy Fund in the amount of $10 million.

“The General Assembly, having considered
the report of the Credentials Committee and the
recommendation contained therein,

Japan sincerely hopes that this assistance through
the United Nations to those countries that wish to
promote and consolidate their democracies will
contribute to the realization of a more peaceful and
prosperous world.

“Approves the report of the Credentials
Committee.”

Mr. Mohamed (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): My
country joined the consensus on the item entitled
“Support by the United Nations system of the efforts of
Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies”, based on our participation in
many conferences and activities relating to the draft
resolution just adopted.
First among them was the Forum on Emerging
Democracies, held in Sana’a in 1999, with the
participation of a number of young or emerging
democracies from Asia, Africa and Latin America,
other Governments, several international and regional
organizations, including the United Nations, and
representatives of civil society. The Forum was the first
of its kind and resulted in the Sana’a Declaration. The
General Assembly took note of the Forum in resolution
55/96 of 4 December 2000.
The Sana’a Declaration included a number of
important
recommendations
for
strengthening
democracy, particularly in developing countries. Most
unfortunately, however, the resolution just adopted
makes no reference to resolution 55/96.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 157?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the sixty-first
session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee (A/61/648)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 12 of its report. The draft resolution reads as
follows:

07-22624

I now give the floor to the Chairman of the
Credentials Committee, Mr. Gilles Noghès of Monaco.
Mr. Noghès (Monaco), Chairman of the
Credentials Committee (spoke in French): It is my
honour to inform the Assembly that, in addition to the
Member States listed in paragraph 5 of the report of the
Credentials Committee for the sixty-first session of the
General Assembly (A/61/648), credentials were also
duly submitted under rule 27 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly by Liechtenstein, Monaco,
Montenegro, Peru and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela.
In addition to the Member States mentioned in
paragraph 6 of the report of the Credentials Committee,
Belgium, Belize, Ethiopia, Mozambique and Saint
Lucia have communicated to the Secretary-General
information concerning the appointment of their
representatives to the sixty-first session of the General
Assembly by means of a facsimile communication
from the Head of State or Government or Minister of
Foreign Affairs or by means of a letter or note verbale
from the Permanent Mission concerned.
The President: The General Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Credentials Committee in paragraph 12 of its
report. The Credentials Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/227).
The President: Before giving the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, who
wishes to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote or position are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Mottaghi Nejad (Islamic Republic of Iran):
My delegation joined the consensus on the resolution
just adopted. However, I would like to express my
delegation’s reservation on those parts of the report

7

A/61/PV.84

contained in document A/61/648 that may be construed
as recognition of the Israeli regime.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of position.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 3.
Agenda item 48 (continued)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Draft resolution A/61/L.50
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a joint debate on agenda item
48 and agenda item 62 and its sub-items (a) and (b) at
the 28th to 30th plenary meetings, held on 12 and
13 October.
I give the floor to the representative of the Niger
to introduce draft resolution A/61/L.50.
Mr. Adamou (Niger): On behalf of the African
Group and all of the sponsors, I have the honour to
introduce, under agenda item 48, the draft resolution
entitled “2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa”,
contained in document A/61/L.50.
The Secretary-General reports that up to 3 billion
people in 107 countries and territories are affected by
malaria. While most of the burden is on Africa, malaria
is a global problem continuing to hinder social and
economic development in Asia, Latin America, the
Middle East, Europe and the Pacific.
Each year, more than 500 million people suffer
from acute malaria, which causes more than 1 million
deaths, at least 86 per of which occur in sub-Saharan
Africa. Malaria is, however, is a disease that is
preventable, treatable and curable. It is thus in an effort
to roll back malaria, as well as to implement
Millennium Development Goal 6, that the African
Union is again this year presenting a draft resolution
entitled “2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa”.
The draft resolution is an update of a similar
resolution that was adopted last year. The draft
resolution has been updated to take into account new
developments and measures to combat malaria,

8

especially those relating to issues concerning vector
control, protection and treatment for children and
pregnant women, increased access to affordable
medicine, increased investment in and efforts aimed at
research and development, transfers of technology and
private sector contributions.
My delegation would like to thank all of the
delegations that participated in negotiations on the
draft resolution. Their constructive contributions
enabled us to get a text that will provide a framework
for action by all stakeholders in the fight to eradicate
malaria. We would especially like to thank Joyce
Kafanabo of the Permanent Mission of the United
Republic of Tanzania for having facilitated the
negotiations on the text.
In introducing the draft resolution, my delegation
hopes that, as in previous years, it will be adopted by
consensus.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/61/L.50. I should like to
announce that, since its introduction, the following
countries have become sponsors: Belgium, Brazil,
Cape Verde, the Central African Republic, Chile,
Denmark, France, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Morocco, the
Niger, Portugal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Turkey and Ukraine. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/61/L.50?
Draft resolution A/61/L.50 was adopted (resolution
61/228)
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 48?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 62 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa's Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(a) New Partnership for Africa's Development:
progress in implementation and international
support
Draft resolution (A/61/L.23/Rev.1)
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa

07-22624

A/61/PV.84

Draft resolution (A/61/L.41/Rev.1)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a joint debate on agenda item
62 and its sub-items (a) and (b) and agenda item 48 at
the 28th to 30th plenary meetings, held on 12 and
13 October.
In
connection
with
draft
resolution
A/61/L.23/Rev.1, I give the floor to the representative
of the Secretariat.
Ms. Kelley (Director, General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs Division): In
connection with draft resolution A/61/L.23/Rev.1,
entitled “New Partnership for Africa's Development:
progress in implementation and international support”,
I wish to put on record the following statement of
financial implications on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
By operative paragraphs 28 and 30 of draft
resolution A/61/L.23/Rev.1 , the General Assembly
would decide
“to hold within existing resources a high-level
meeting on ‘Africa’s development needs: state of
implementation
of
various
commitments,
challenges and the way forward’ during its sixtythird session”,
and would also request the Secretary-General
“to continue to take measures to strengthen the
Office of the Special Adviser on Africa in order
to enable it to effectively fulfil its mandate,
including monitoring and reporting on progress
related to meeting the special needs of Africa”.
Pursuant to operative paragraph 28 of the draft
resolution, it is understood that the high-level meeting
would be held in the context of the regular plenary
meetings of the General Assembly. Provision for
conference servicing costs for the sixty-third session of
the General Assembly will be included in the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009. Any
additional conference servicing requirements for
related activities, such as parallel meetings of the
General Assembly, round tables, hearings and/or panels
will be reviewed and evaluated later, when the format
and modalities of the high-level meeting are
determined.

07-22624

Pursuant to paragraph 30 of the draft resolution,
resources amounting to $7,082,000 have been provided
under the programme budget for the biennium
2006-2007 for the Office of the Special Adviser on
Africa. Related requirements for the next biennium
will be considered in the context of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution
A/61/L.23/Rev.1 would not give rise to any financial
implications under the programme budget for the
biennium 2006-2007.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolutions A/61/L.23/Rev.1 and
A/61/L.41/Rev.1.
The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution A/61/L.23/Rev.1, entitled “New Partnership
for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation
and international support”. I should like to announce
that, since the introduction of the draft resolution, the
following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution
A/61/L.23/Rev.1:
Belgium,
Canada,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Israel,
Japan, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Portugal, Romania,
Sweden, Ukraine and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/61/L.23/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/61/L.23/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 61/229).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/61/L.41/Rev.1, entitled
“Implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa”. I should like to
announce that, since the introduction of the draft
resolution, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/61/L.41/Rev.1: Belgium,
Canada, Croatia, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland,
Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, Romania, Sweden and
Ukraine. May I take it that the Assembly decides to
adopt draft resolution A/61/L.41/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/61/L.41/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 61/230).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of

9

A/61/PV.84

sub-items (a) and (b) of agenda item 62 and of agenda
item 62 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft decision (A/61/L.52)
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft decision A/61/L.52, entitled “Mandate
review”. May I take it that the Assembly decides to
adopt draft decision A/61/L.52?
Draft decision A/61/L.52 was adopted.
The President: On the subject of mandate
review, members will recall that, during 2006,
Ambassador David Cooney of Ireland and Ambassador
Munir Akram of Pakistan have been conducting
discussions and complex negotiations in the context of
the informal consultations. On behalf of the General
Assembly, I would like to take this opportunity to
express my sincere thanks to both of them for their
able leadership. I am sure that members of the
Assembly join me in extending to them our sincere
appreciation.
Ambassador Akram has informed me that, due to
other engagements, he will not be able to continue as
one of the Co-Chairs. I would therefore like to inform
members that I have requested Ambassador Iftekhar
Ahmed Chowdhury of Bangladesh to serve, as of next
year, as one of the Co-Chairs of the informal
consultations. He has graciously accepted to do so.
I shall now give the floor to representatives who
wish to explain their positions on the decision just
adopted.
Mr. Afifi (Egypt): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the members of the joint
group of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of
77 and China. This statement pertains to the adoption
of the draft decision entitled “Mandate review”.
Allow me, at the outset, on behalf of the members
of the joint group of the Non-Aligned Movement and
the Group of 77 and China, to express our gratitude for
the tireless and successful efforts you are exerting,
Madam President, to facilitate the work of the General
Assembly at its sixty-first session.

10

In the context of our decision today relating to
extending the process of mandate review to the end of
the Assembly’s current session, the joint group would
like to reiterate its firm position, which it has held
since the beginning of the process. We believe that
mandate review is a unique opportunity to strengthen
the United Nations and to increase its effectiveness. In
that context, the members of the group expressed their
willingness to become engaged in the process of
reviewing mandates older than five years and not
renewed, in order to address some of the waste and
redundancy that permeate the United Nations system.
After concluding this phase, during which the
group played a leading and constructive role, the group
agreed to become engaged in the second phase of the
process, which is to renew mandates older than five
years but which have been renewed, in a spirit of
flexibility and responsibility with a view to realizing
the aims and objectives of the Organization.
However, the members of the group affirmed, in
the context of the informal plenary meeting held on
24 November 2006, that their engagement in this phase
of the process will be governed by certain guidelines;
this which was not contested by any of the other
groups or Member States. Those guidelines, which will
still govern the engagement of the group of the process
until the end of the sixty-first session, are as follows.
First, the exercise shall be undertaken in a
transparent, open and all-inclusive manner that respects
the equality of Member States, as enshrined in the
Charter. Second, the objective of the exercise is to
strengthen the programme of work of the Organization,
including through providing additional financial and
human resources if required. Third, the mandate review
is not a cost-cutting exercise and does not aim at
reducing the budget levels of the Organization. Fourth,
all decisions pertaining to this exercise shall be based
primarily on the principle of consensus, without
prejudice to the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly
concerning
decision-making.
Fifth,
politically sensitive mandates — which include
mandates in the areas of the maintenance of
international peace and security, development and
other categories — fall outside the scope of this
exercise, and no mandate shall be discontinued except
with the consent of parties concerned.
Sixth, the scope of the exercise is limited to
mandates older than five years at the date of the

07-22624

A/61/PV.84

adoption of the World Summit Outcome, in September
2005. Seventh, any resources that might be freed up
from the review of mandates shall be redirected to the
same issue area, unless otherwise agreed by Member
States. Eighth, the informal working group at the
expert level shall be the appropriate mechanism to
undertake the substantive review of mandates, and it
shall submit a report to the informal working group of
the plenary. In undertaking this task, the expert-level
working group shall entrust the Main Committees of
the Assembly with a substantive review of mandates
that fall within the respective purview of each Main
Committee.
Ninth, mandate review exercise shall conclude by
the end of 2006, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the World Summit Outcome, unless
otherwise decided by the General Assembly, as is the
case today. Finally, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council are invited to follow the
same principles I have referred to in their respective
reviews of mandates.
The joint group of the Non-Aligned Movement
and the Group of 77 and China is willing to continue to
work actively and constructively in the context of the
process of mandate review, as long as there is a
common understanding that this will take into
consideration the interests and concerns of all Member
States and as long as the final aim is to strengthen the
effectiveness of the Organization and increase its
ability to address the challenges it faces, rather than
trying to reduce its expenditures and reduce the level
of its budget.
The group would like this statement to be
circulated as an official document of the General
Assembly.
Mr. Mukai (Japan): Japan welcomes the decision
to continue the mandate review process during the
sixty-first session of the General Assembly. We would
therefore like to thank Ms. Haya Rashed Al-Khalifa,
President of the General Assembly, as well as her
Office, the Secretariat and the Co-Chairs —
Ambassador Munir Akram of Pakistan and Ambassador
David Cooney of Ireland — and their respective
delegations, as well as other delegations, for their
efforts to move the process further along.
My delegation is ready to work together with
you, Madam President, and with the Co-Chairs for next
year — Ambassador Iftekhar Ahmed Chowdhury of

07-22624

Bangladesh and Ambassador David Cooney of
Ireland — as well as with other delegations on this
exercise next year, based on the progress report made
by the Co-Chairs of the informal plenary of the
General Assembly on mandate review in their letter
dated 19 December 2006.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 113?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 37 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
by the specialized agencies and the international
institutions associated with the United Nations
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/61/413)
The President: Members will recall that, at its
79th plenary meeting, held on 14 December 2006, the
Assembly postponed its consideration of the draft
resolution recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee in paragraph 8 of its report,
in order to allow time to consider an proposed oral
amendments.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic to introduce an amendment to
the draft resolution recommended by the Fourth
Committee in its report.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syria): The members of the Special
Committee on decolonization have held consultations
with the European Union (EU) on the proposed EU
amendments to paragraphs 12 and 13 of the draft
resolution on the implementation of the Decolonization
Declaration by the specialized agencies, contained in
paragraph 8 of the Committee’s report contained in
document A/61/413.
In that connection, we have reached agreement on
amended language. Accordingly, paragraph 12 would
now read as follows:
“Welcomes the adoption by the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(ECLAC) of its resolution 574 (XXVII) of
16 May 1998 calling for the creation of
mechanisms
for
the
Non-Self-Governing

11

A/61/PV.84

Territories that are associate members of the
Commission to participate in the special sessions
of the General Assembly, subject to the rules of
procedure of the Assembly, to review and assess
the implementation of the plans of action of those
United Nations world conferences in which the
Territories originally participated in the capacity
of observer, and in the work of the Economic and
Social Council and its subsidiary bodies, and
takes note of ECLAC resolution 598 (XXX) of
2 July 2004 on the issue”.
Operative paragraph 13 will remain as originally
adopted by the Fourth Committee.
Accordingly, I would like to introduce that agreed
change to the text as an amendment, with the
understanding that the oral amendment proposed at the
79th meeting is no longer necessary.
The President: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has introduced an oral amendment to
the draft resolution contained in paragraph 8 of the
report (A/61/413) of the Fourth Committee. In
accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure, the
Assembly shall first take a decision on the oral
amendment submitted by the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt the oral amendment submitted by the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic?
The oral amendment was adopted.
The President: Since the oral amendment to the
draft resolution has been adopted, we shall now
proceed to take a decision on the draft resolution
contained in paragraph 8 of the report of the Fourth
Committee contained in document A/61/413, as orally
amended. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil,
Brunei
Darussalam,
Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic

12

Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Moldova, Monaco,
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The draft resolution, as orally amended, was
adopted by 100 votes to 1, with 52 abstentions
(resolution 61/231).
[Subsequently, the delegations of the Dominican
Republic, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Mauritania, the Philippines and Togo advised the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote on the resolution just adopted.
Ms. Brazier (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the participation of associate
members of the Economic Commission for Latin

07-22624

A/61/PV.84

America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) in the relevant
meetings of the United Nations. Indeed, United
Kingdom delegations to a number of recent meetings,
including those of the Beijing Plus Ten review and the
Commission on Sustainable Development, have
included representatives from ECLAC associate
members. However, the United Kingdom believes that
the participation of ECLAC associate members should
be through the official delegations of United Nations
Member States, rather than as separate entities. The
United Kingdom continues to interpret ECLAC
resolution 574 (XXVII) in that way.
Mr. Miller (United States of America): The
United States voted against resolution 61/231. We
agree in principle that United Nations funds,
programmes and specialized agencies can usefully
provide support to territories that are not United
Nations Members, so long as the domestic laws and
policies of a territory’s administering Power allows
such United Nations support.
However, the United States considers that it is
inappropriate to link the work of specialized agencies
to the Declaration or to the issue of colonial peoples.
The United States objects in particular to provisions in
the resolution that make recommendations with respect
to the participation of territories in the activities and
bodies of the United Nations. It is the responsibility of
the administering Power, not the General Assembly or
the Economic and Social Council, to decide the nature,
if any, of its territory’s participation.
Under the United States Constitution, the federal
Government has the sole responsibility for the conduct
of United States foreign relations, and that includes
foreign relations that relate to United States territories.
These arrangements have been accepted by such
territories.
For the United States, the very term “non-selfgoverning” seems inappropriate for territories able to
establish their own constitution, elect their own public
officers, have representation in Washington, D.C., and
choose their own economic path. The United States
was fully supportive when countries chose
independence, and was proud to welcome them as
equal and sovereign partners. In the case of territories
that did not choose independence, however, the United
States has also supported the right of people in those
territories to a full measure of self-government,
including the rights to integration and free association.

07-22624

The United States calls upon all Member States to
respect the choices made by residents of non-selfgoverning territories.
Finally, the United States would like to point out
that by including paragraph 13, the sponsors of the
resolution ignored decisions made by the Economic
and Social Council, a principal organ of the United
Nations, and its subsidiary body, the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean,
since those United Nations bodies declined to adopt the
resolution noted in that paragraph, for many of the
reasons we have already mentioned.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 37?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of all the reports of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) before it.
The Assembly will take up the remaining reports
of the Third Committee, on agenda items 67 (c) and 68,
as well as the reports of the Fifth Committee, as soon
as the Fifth Committee has concluded its work. I
propose therefore to suspend the meeting.
The meeting was suspended at 4.35 p.m. and
resumed at 10.10 p.m.
The President: The General Assembly will now
take up the remaining reports of the Third Committee
on sub-item (c) of agenda item 67 and agenda item 68.
Thereafter, it will take up the reports of the Fifth
Committee on agenda items 115; 116 together with
117; 118; 120; 121; 122; 124; 125; 126; 129; 130; 131;
47 together with 113, 116, 117, 122, 123, 132, 147 and
149; 47 together with 113, 116, 117, 122, 123, 132 and
149; 134; 139; 151; 144 (b); 117; and 116.
As there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss these two Committee reports
which are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of these

13

A/61/PV.84

Committees have been made clear in the Committees
and are reflected in their relevant official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting unless that
delegation’s vote is different from its vote in the
Committee”.
May I also remind delegations that, in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Third
Committee and the Fifth Committee, I should like to
advise representatives that we are going to proceed to
take decisions in the same manner as was done in the
Committees, unless notified otherwise in advance. That
means that where separate or recorded votes were
taken, we will do the same. I hope that we may proceed
to adopt without a vote those recommendations that
were adopted without a vote in their respective
Committees.
Agenda item 67 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee
(A/61/443/Add.3)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/666)
The President: We shall now proceed to take
action on draft resolution II recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 70 of its report. Draft
resolution II is entitled “Situation of human rights in
Myanmar”. The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of the draft resolution
has been issued as document A/61/666, in English only.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Finland.
Mrs. Pohjankukka (Finland): I wish to notify
the Secretariat of a technical correction that needs to be

14

made to a change made by the editors. This correction
is needed in order to bring draft resolution II as
presented in the Third Committee report in document
A/61/443/Add.3 into line with the text adopted by the
Committee on the situation of human rights in
Myanmar
(A/C.3/61/L.38/Rev.1).
In
operative
paragraph 2 (a), immediately after “ethnic nationalities
of Myanmar”, instead of “in particular” it should read
“including”. Therefore, operative paragraph 2 (a)
should read as originally adopted by the Third
Committee in A/C.3/61/L.38/Rev.1, as follows:
“The ongoing systematic violations of
human rights and fundamental freedoms of the
people of Myanmar, as described in resolution
60/233 and previous resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Commission on Human Rights,
as well as the reports of the Special Rapporteur
and of the International Labour Organization,
including discrimination and violations suffered
by persons belonging to ethnic nationalities of
Myanmar, including extrajudicial killings, rape
and other forms of sexual violence …”.
The remainder of the paragraph is as it appears in the
report.
The President: I give
representative of Myanmar.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Swe (Myanmar): I would like to thank the
representative of the European Union for reading out
this technical amendment, but I would like to be sure
that the text is the same as the one that was adopted by
the Third Committee. Therefore, I would like to
request the Secretariat to check and verify that that is
indeed the case.
The President: We have taken note of the request
of the representative of Myanmar.
We shall now take a decision on draft resolution
II, as orally corrected. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Albania,
Andorra,
Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Chile, Congo,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,

07-22624

A/61/PV.84

Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uruguay
Against:
Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, China, Cuba, Egypt,
Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Myanmar, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Barbados, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Cape
Verde, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Malawi,
Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal,
Niger, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand, Trinidad
and Tobago, United Arab Emirates, Yemen,
Zambia
Draft resolution II, as orally corrected, was
adopted by 82 votes to 25, with 45 abstentions
(resolution 61/232).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Congo
advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
against, and the delegations of Angola, Eritrea
and Kuwait advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to abstain.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of

07-22624

sub-item (c) of agenda item 67 and of agenda item 67
as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 68 (continued)
Report of the Human Rights Council
Report of the Third Committee (A/61/448 and
Corr.2)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 29 of its report. The
draft decision is entitled “Report of the Human Rights
Council”. We shall now take action on the draft
decision. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
adopt the draft decision recommended by the Third
Committee?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
68.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Third Committee.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 115; 116 and 117; 118; 120; 121; 122; 124; 125;
126; 129; 130; 131; 47 together with 113, 116, 117,
122, 123, 132, 147 and 149; 47 together with 113, 116,
127, 122, 123, 132 and 149; 134; 139; 151; 144 (b);
117 and 116.
I request Mr. Diego Simancas of Mexico,
Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee, to introduce in one
intervention the reports of the Fifth Committee that are
before the Assembly.
Mr. Simancas (Mexico), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee (spoke in Spanish): This evening, I have the
honour to present to the General Assembly the reports
of the Fifth Committee containing recommendations on
issues that require the adoption of measures during the
main part of the Assembly’s sixty-first session.
The Fifth Committee met from 29 September to
22 December 2006 and held 37 plenary meetings, more
than 60 informal consultations and numerous “informal
informals”. The Committee held extensive consultations

15

A/61/PV.84

on the issues before it and adopted all of its
recommendations without a vote, except for those related
to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and to a
number of programme budget implications. Therefore, I
have the honour to present the following brief report on
the work of the Fifth Committee.
Agenda item 115 is entitled “Financial reports
and audited financial statements, and reports of the
Board of Auditors”. The report of the Committee on
that item is contained in document A/61/631, in
paragraph 7 which the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution,
which the Committee adopted without a vote.
Under agenda item 116, entitled “Review of the
efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, and agenda item
117, entitled “Programme budget for the biennium
2006-2007”, the Committee recommends to the
Assembly, in paragraph 7 of its report (A/61/652), the
adoption of a draft resolution on enhancing the role of
the subregional offices of the Economic Commission
for Africa. The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote.
Under agenda item 118, entitled “Programme
planning”, the Committee recommends to the
Assembly, in paragraph 8 of its report (A/61/653), the
adoption of a draft resolution on programme planning,
which the Committee adopted without a vote.
Under agenda item 120, entitled “Administrative
and budgetary coordination of the United Nations with
the specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency”, the Committee recommends to the
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report (A/61/632), the
adoption of a draft decision, which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.

draft resolution, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
Agenda item 124 is entitled “Joint Inspection
Unit”. The report of the Committee on that item is
contained in document A/61/654. The draft resolution
recommended in paragraph 6 of the report was adopted
by the Committee without a vote.
Under agenda item 125, entitled “United Nations
common system”, the Committee recommends to the
Assembly, in paragraph 8 of its report (A/61/663), the
adoption of a draft resolution, which was adopted by
the Committee without a vote.
Agenda item 126 is entitled “United Nations
pension system”. The report of the Fifth Committee on
that item is contained in document A/61/664. The draft
resolution recommended in paragraph 9 of the report
was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Agenda item 129 is entitled “Financing of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994”. The
report of the Committee on that item is contained in
document A/61/655. In paragraph 6 of the report, the
Committee recommends to the Assembly the adoption
of a draft resolution, which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.

Under agenda item 121, entitled “Pattern of
conferences,” the Committee recommends to the
Assembly, in paragraph 7 of its report (A/61/597), the
adoption of a draft resolution, which was adopted by
the Committee without a vote.

Agenda item 130 is entitled “Financing of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991”. The report of the
Committee on that item is contained in document
A/61/656. In paragraph 6 of the report, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft resolution, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.

Agenda item 122 is entitled “Scale of
assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
the United Nations”. The report of the Fifth Committee
on that item is contained in document A/61/512/Add.1.
In paragraph 6 of its report, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a

Agenda item 131 is entitled “Scale of
assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
United Nations peacekeeping operations”. The report
of the Committee on that item is contained in
A/61/665. In paragraph 6 of the report, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a

16

07-22624

A/61/PV.84

draft resolution, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
With regard to agenda items 47, 113, 116, 117,
122, 123, 132, 147 and 149, concerning human
resources management, the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report
(A/61/659), the adoption of a draft resolution, which
the Committee adopted without a vote.
On agenda items 47, 113, 116, 117, 122, 123, 132
and 149, concerning the comprehensive review of
governance and oversight within the United Nations
and its funds, programmes and specialized agencies,
the Committee recommends, in paragraph 8 of its
report (A/61/658), the adoption of draft resolution I, on
governance and oversight, and draft resolution II, on
procurement reform. Both were adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
With regard to the draft proposals on the
financing of peacekeeping operations, I should like to
inform the General Assembly that, with the exception
of the proposal under agenda item 144 (b), entitled
“Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces
in the Middle East: United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon”, all the draft proposals were adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
Reports of the Fifth Committee are presented
under the following agenda items: 134, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire” (A/61/621); 139, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea”
(A/61/617); and 151, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations
Integrated
Mission
in
Timor-Leste”
(A/61/644).
The report of the Fifth Committee under agenda
item 144 (b), entitled “Financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping forces in the Middle East: United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”, is contained in
document A/61/657. In considering the draft resolution
recommended in that report, the Committee decided to
retain the fourth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraphs 4, 5 and 21 in a single recorded vote of 93
in favour, 6 against and 47 abstentions. In paragraph 9
of the report, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution
as a whole, which the Committee adopted by a
recorded vote of 142 in favour and 4 against, with 1
abstention.

07-22624

With regard to agenda item 117, entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007”, in
paragraph 6 of its report in document A/61/592/Add.1,
the Committee recommends to the Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution on the capital master
plan, which the Committee adopted without a vote. In
paragraph
37
of
its
report
in
document
A/61/592/Add.2, the Committee recommends the
adoption of two draft resolutions and two draft
decisions.
Draft resolution I concerns the questions relating
to the programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007,
and draft resolution II relates to the revised budget
appropriations for the biennium 2006-2007, the revised
income estimates for the biennium 2006-2007 and the
financing of the appropriations for the year 2007. Draft
decision I deals with the United Nations Fund for
International Partnerships, and draft decision II deals
with the programme budget implications of
recommendations contained in draft resolution
A/C.5/61/L.15. All draft proposals were adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
Regarding agenda item 116, entitled “Review of
the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations,” the Committee
recommends to the Assembly in paragraph 8 of its
report (A/61/667) the adoption of a draft resolution on
the proposed programme budget outline for 2008-2009.
Also, in paragraph 9 of the same report, the Committee
recommends the adoption of a draft decision relating to
questions deferred to a later date. The Committee
adopted both proposals without a vote.
Agenda item 115
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and report of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/631)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a
decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/233).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 115.

17

A/61/PV.84

Agenda items 116 and 117
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/652)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a
decision on the draft resolution, entitled “Enhancing
the role of the subregional offices of the Economic
Commission for Africa”. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/234).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda items 116 and
117.
Agenda item 118
Programme planning
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/653)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a
decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/235).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 118.
Agenda item 120
Administrative and budgetary coordination of the
United Nations with the specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy Agency
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/632)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take action on
the draft decision, entitled “Budgetary and financial
situation of the organizations of the United Nations

18

system”. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
decision without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
120.
Agenda item 121
Pattern of conferences
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/597)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a
decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/236).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
121.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/512/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution is, for the time being, contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.38. We will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/237).
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Grönberg (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union.

07-22624

A/61/PV.84

The European Union is a staunch supporter of the
United Nations and the ideals and principles it stands
for. The European Union also supports the consensus
principle, which is fundamental for our decisions on
budgetary matters in the Fifth Committee. It is with
that in mind that the European Union joined the
consensus on the scale of assessments.
At the same time, however, it should be clear to
all that the European Union proposed changes to the
methodology. In our opinion, there are better, fairer
and more balanced ways to share the budgetary
responsibilities of the United Nations among all
Member States. The status quo is not sustainable in the
long term.
We went into the negotiations with an open mind,
looking forward to a debate. We recognize that we
were not able to convince others to take our concerns
into account. With this in mind, the General Assembly
has now requested the Committee on Contributions to
review the matter and to present us with alternatives
for the methodology, reflecting capacity to pay.
As the role of the United Nations in the world has
been growing in recent years, the budget of the United
Nations has likewise increased and seems likely to
continue to do so. The European Union, as the largest
contributor of resources, has great interest in ensuring
that resources are spent in an efficient, effective and
transparent way. In this regard, we will continue to
fully support efforts by the Secretary-General to
improve the functioning of the Organization.
The growing budget also makes the United
Nations more dependent on timely payment of
contributions. The European Union has consistently
shown its responsibility in this regard, and we once
again appeal to all Member States to do the same: to
pay in full, on time and without conditions.
We wish to extend our thanks to all of our
partners. While sometimes adversaries in negotiations,
we all share a concern for the future of this planet. By
achieving agreement today, we have made it possible
for this one global body — a body that we, as the
European Union, consider so special and important —
to continue operating. For that we are grateful, and we
would like to wish all delegations all the best for the
holiday season.
Ms. Lock (South Africa): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of 77 and China on

07-22624

agenda item 122, entitled “Scale of assessments for the
apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations”.
By adopting resolution 61/237, on the scale of
assessments for the period 2007 to 2009, the Assembly
has reaffirmed that the principle of capacity to pay
remains the fundamental criterion in determining how
the expenses of the Organization should be apportioned
among its Member States. The Group of 77 and China
joins this consensus and remains ready to ensure that
the Organization receives adequate and predictable
financing in order to successfully implement the
numerous mandates that Member States have bestowed
upon it. The final outcome does not reflect some of the
concerns of developing countries, but we believe that it
is a good outcome for the Organization.
The Group of 77 and China wishes to thank the
coordinator, Mr. Seyed Morteza Mirmohammad, for
the manner in which he guided the members of the
Fifth Committee during the negotiations. We
furthermore wish to thank our negotiating partners for
the constructive manner in which the negotiations were
conducted. The Group also appreciates the invaluable
assistance that the Fifth Committee received from the
Chairman of the Committee on Contributions and the
Secretariat.
The negotiations on the scale of assessments are
traditionally challenging, and Member States were at
times faced with very difficult decisions. The Group of
77 and China, however, is encouraged that the
negotiations were transparent and conducted in a spirit
of compromise, and that all the negotiating groups and
delegations showed good faith throughout. That
enabled the Committee to arrive at a consensus
decision. We also appreciate the invaluable support
provided by you, Madam President, and your Office
during the negotiations.
Turning to the resolution, the Group of 77 and
China welcomes the reaffirmation in the resolution that
the determination of the scale of assessments shall
remain the prerogative of the General Assembly. The
resolution further reaffirms that the Committee on
Contributions is a technical body and that, in its
consideration of the elements of future methodologies,
it should be guided by relevant General Assembly
resolutions and the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly. We also welcome the reaffirmation that the
scale of assessments should continue to reflect the
fundamental principle of capacity to pay. To this end,

19

A/61/PV.84

we wish to state our position on a number of
fundamental principles relating to the elements of the
methodology of the scale of assessments.
First, the Group of 77 and China holds the view
that the main element affecting and distorting the
application of the principle of capacity to pay is the
ceiling. That is contrary to the intention of the General
Assembly when it agreed to set a maximum assessment
rate for the main contributor: that the application of the
ceiling should not distort the principle of capacity to
pay. It also places an unfair burden on the rest of the
membership.
It will be recalled that, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 55/5 C, the rationale for
reducing the ceiling to 22 per cent was to facilitate the
payment of contributions and arrears by the main
contributor and thereby improve the financial situation
of the United Nations. The consensus decision in 2000
was based on the understanding that the rationale for
requesting the reduction would be honoured. The
Group of 77 and China believes that the compact
arrived at in 2000 remains to be honoured by the main
contributor and that it thus would be incumbent upon
the General Assembly to continue to undertake the
review decided on in paragraph 2 of its resolution 55/5
C. Despite our opposition to unilateral attempts to
artificially reduce the ceiling, the Group of 77 and
China, in 2000, and once again now in 2006, joined the
consensus for the sake of the financial well-being of
the Organization.
Secondly, the Group of 77 and China wishes to
emphasize that the low per capita income adjustment is
an integral part of the scale methodology used by the
Organization since its creation in 1948. We strongly
support maintaining it as a fundamental element of the
methodology and will continue to oppose any attempts
to undermine the principle and application of this
adjustment. The General Assembly from the beginning
has recognized that the comparative income per head
of population should be taken into account in order to
prevent anomalous assessments resulting from the use
of comparative estimates of national income.
Therefore, the Group opposed attempts to introduce a
multiple gradient thereby applying a different criterion
to some developing countries by ignoring the impact
that large populations place on the capacity of
developing countries to pay. We will continue to
oppose attempts to shift the burden resulting from the
reduction of the ceiling to developing countries. The

20

proposal for a multiple gradient was not fair and
undermined the principle of capacity to pay.
Thirdly, the Group of 77 and China maintains the
position that the debt burden adjustment reflects an
important factor in the capacity to pay of Member
States and should be maintained as an integral element
of the scale methodology based on the debt stock
approach. We were concerned by the attempts of
developed countries in this negotiation to eliminate the
debt burden adjustment. We wish to place on record
that we will not support any attempts to undermine or
change this crucial element of the methodology.
The Group of 77 and China was concerned that,
once again, a number of Member States faced
substantial increases in their rates of assessment. We
consequently submitted a concrete proposal for a
phasing-in mechanism that was aimed at finding a
technical solution to this recurring and endemic
problem. Whilst we appreciate the positive response
that our proposal received from some delegations, it is
regrettable that it was not included in the final
consensus outcome.
This difficulty was finally resolved through the
redistribution of points received from the Russian
Federation and mitigation provided by other
developing countries in the Group of 77 and China. We
appreciate the gesture by the Russian Federation and
by other developing countries to assist in mitigation.
However, the Group expects that the Committee
on Contributions will focus on this question and make
proposals to address such increases through a phasingin mechanism in order not to impose an excessive
burden on Member States, particularly developing
countries, facing large increases in their rates of
assessment.
As we are nearing the end of this session, I have
the honour to convey to you, Madam President, the
gratitude of the Group of 77 and China for your
guidance and able leadership. You have steered us
through very difficult times and instilled a sense of
transparency in our deliberations. We also wish to pay
tribute to the States members of the Group of 77 and
China for their unity and support to South Africa
during our chairmanship. In the face of attempts to
divide developing countries, we were heartened by the
solidarity and commitment of the Group to this
Organization.

07-22624

A/61/PV.84

Ms. Roth (Liechtenstein): Under the terms of the
new scale of assessments, Liechtenstein’s contribution
to the United Nations budget will increase by 66 per
cent, attaining a rate of assessment of 0.01 per cent.
This rate had already been apportioned to Liechtenstein
before the year 2000. In 2000, the then-new machine
scale triggered a decrease in Liechtenstein’s rates of
assessment for the following years. Although
Liechtenstein considered this rate as not accurately
reflecting its capacity to pay, we accepted the new
scale but at the same time reaffirmed our expectation to
be assessed at a higher percentage. Since then,
Liechtenstein has been paying the difference between
the former rate of 0.01 per cent and the subsequent
rates of 0.005 and 0.006 per cent in the form of
voluntary contributions to various United nations
entities and activities, focusing on programmes funded
from voluntary contributions that we believe should be
funded from the regular budget.
We are pleased to see that for the period 20072009, Liechtenstein’s rate has attained the level we
have always considered to be appropriate. The reason
for this increase does not lie in the methodology used,
but in the availability of previously unavailable official
figures, which replaced the formerly used United
Nations Statistics Division estimates. Given this
situation, Liechtenstein will cease to make the
aforementioned kind of additional contributions.
However, Liechtenstein will continue to make other
kinds of voluntary contributions.

In the broader context of our discussions, we
have repeatedly asked that the United Nations be
brought up to date and that it reflect the realities of
today’s world. This needs to apply also to the issue of
the scale of assessment. Contributions need to be an
accurate reflection of the involvement of each Member
State in the global context.
With the approval of the scale of assessments for
the three-year period 2007-2009, Mexico has
consolidated its position as the tenth largest contributor
worldwide. In addition, Mexico’s assessment is the
largest in Latin America and the Caribbean: our
assessment is more than half of the total contribution
from our region.
We believe it relevant to point that out in order to
underscore my country’s great interest in ensuring that
the programmes of the United Nations system conform
to clearly defined priorities and to evident and clear
functionality in terms of its tasks, with transparency in
the use of financial resources, and that proposals with
an impact on the budget of the Organization be
formulated with due thoroughness and responsibility.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 122.
Agenda item 124
Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/654)

Mr. Simancas (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation joined the consensus with respect to
continuing to use the current methodology for setting
the scale of assessments, owing to Mexico’s
commitment to ensuring that the work of the United
Nations continues to move forward.

The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a
decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?

As members know, Mexico proposed a
methodology for determining the scale of assessments
for States Members of the Organization. Given the
shortcomings that continue to exist in the current
system, my country hopes that, in the future, Mexico’s
proposal will be taken into consideration. Among other
advantages, that formula would offset distortions that
primarily affect developing countries, because it takes
into account the differences that exist in the national
income levels of Member States, within the parameters
that the membership has agreed upon.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/238).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
124.
Agenda item 125
United Nations common system
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/663)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee

07-22624

21

A/61/PV.84

in paragraph 8 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.27. We will now take a decision on the
draft resolution, entitled “United Nations common
system: report of the International Civil Service
Commission”. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/239).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
125.
Agenda item 126
United Nations pension system
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/664)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 9 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.29. We will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/240).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
126.
Agenda item 129
Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in
the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1
January and 31 December 1994
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/655)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a
decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee

22

adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/241).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
129.
Agenda item 130
Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/656)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a
decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/242).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
130.
Agenda item 131
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of United Nations peacekeeping operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/665)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.26. The Assembly will now take a decision
on the draft resolution, which was adopted by the Fifth
Committee without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly too wishes to adopt it?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/243).
The President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 131.

07-22624

A/61/PV.84

Agenda items 47 (continued), 113 (continued), 116,
117 (continued), 122 (continued), 123, 132, 147 and
149 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Programmed budget for the biennium 2006-2007
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Human resources management
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/659)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled “Human
resources management”. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/244).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation, who wishes
to speak in explanation of position on the resolution
just adopted.
Mr. Kovalenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation would like to state
the following with regard to the General Assembly’s
adoption of resolution 61/244, entitled “Human
resources management”.
We believe that the General Assembly has been
able to agree on a generally balanced resolution that
takes a constructive approach to reform in the area of
human resources, thereby contributing to strengthening

07-22624

the management system at the United Nations in
general. However, we would like to express our
disappointment that the resolution does not include
provisions on issues related to cases of waiving
immunity for United Nations officials other than
Secretariat staff. We would like to confirm that the
Russian delegation believes that in cases that have
arisen with regard to waiving immunity for that
category of officials, the Secretary-General disregarded
procedures established by resolution 56/280, which set
forth a mechanism for consultations between the
Secretary-General and the General Assembly on issues
related to waiving immunity for elected officials.
We are also very surprised that certain
delegations have prevented the Assembly from
receiving information from the Secretary-General on
issues related to waiving immunity for elected United
Nations officials. We believe that such an approach sets
a negative precedent for the Assembly’s future work.
The effectiveness of its work, including on issues
relating to management and organization, depends
greatly on the ability of delegations to receive full
information about the work of the Secretariat and about
its compliance with established procedures. That
information is necessary for Member States to take
well-considered decisions. We are certain that
proposals of delegations need to be considered
conscientiously.
We also believe that it is incorrect to prevent the
General Assembly from considering issues that fall
within its purview on the pretext that doing so may
have an impact on the work of judiciary bodies of
Member States. Such an approach could greatly
complicate the decision-making process in the General
Assembly and set a negative precedent for the future.
We anticipate that the Secretary-General will
shed full light on issues pertaining to immunity in his
report on the application of the regulations governing
the status, basic rights and duties of officials other than
Secretariat officials, which the General Assembly has
once again requested.
We would like to note that we will continue to
raise issues relating to immunity for elected United
Nations officials in the future, as well as to discuss
those matters in the General Assembly.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 47, 113, 116, 117, 122, 123, 132, 147 and 149.

23

A/61/PV.84

Agenda items 47, 113, 116, 117, 122, 123, 132 and 149
(continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Programmed budget for the biennium 2006-2007
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations

Agenda item 134
Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/621)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/247).

Human resources management

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda 134.

Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations

Agenda item 139

United Nations reform: measures and proposals

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/658)

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/617)

The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions.

The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a
decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?

Draft resolution I is entitled “Comprehensive
review of governance and oversight within the United
Nations and its funds, programmes and specialized
agencies”. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
61/245).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Procurement reform”. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
61/246).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 47, 113, 116, 117, 122, 123, 132 and 149.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/248).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda 139.
Agenda item 151
Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/644)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take a
decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/249).

24

07-22624

A/61/PV.84

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda 151.
Agenda item 144
Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping forces
in the Middle East
(b) United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/657)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 9 of its report (A/61/657). We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon”. A single, separate vote has been requested
on the fourth preambular paragraph and on operative
paragraphs 4, 5 and 21 of the draft resolution. As I hear
no objection, I shall now put to the vote the fourth
preambular paragraph and operative paragraphs 4, 5
and 21. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe

07-22624

Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malta,
Moldova, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay
The fourth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraphs 4, 5 and 21 were retained by 95 votes
to 5, with 46 abstentions.
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution as a whole. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova,
Monaco, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation,

25

A/61/PV.84

Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Australia
The draft resolution was adopted by 145 votes to
3, with 1 abstention (resolution 61/250).
The President: I call on the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic, who wishes to speak in
explanation of the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Elji (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation voted in favour of resolution
61/250 on the financing of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon on the basis of a principle that my
delegation has always stressed, namely, that the
responsibility for financing the Force must be borne by
Israel, the aggressor party whose actions led to the
Force’s creation and the occupying Power, as identified
in resolution 1874 (S-IV) of 1963.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 144.
Agenda item 117
Programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007
Reports of the Fifth Committee
(A/61/592/Add.1 and A/61/592/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report (A/61/592/Add.1). We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled
“Capital master plan”. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

26

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/251).
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions and two draft decisions recommended
by the Fifth Committee in its report (A/61/592/Add.2),
the texts of which, for the time being, are contained in
documents
A/C.5/61/L.25
and
A/C.5/61/L.30,
respectively.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Questions relating
to the programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution I without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
61/252).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007”. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
61/253).
The President: Draft decision I is entitled
“United Nations Fund for International Partnerships”.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft decision I was adopted.
The President: Draft decision II is entitled
“Comprehensive review of governance and oversight
within the United Nations and its funds, programmes
and specialized agencies”. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft decision II was adopted.
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolutions or decisions just adopted.
Mr. Elji (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation wishes to explain its position
on resolution 61/252, just adopted, and particularly on
part VII thereof.
At the outset, I should like to express my
delegation’s support for the General Assembly’s
adoption of the resolution to finance special political
missions, promoting the United Nations role in the

07-22624

A/61/PV.84

good offices missions provided for in the Charter. We
also express our satisfaction at the General Assembly’s
recognition of the concerns that my delegation voiced
in its statement before the Fifth Committee on
18 December during the discussion of agenda item 117,
entitled “Programme budget for the biennium 20062007”, on the mandate of the Secretary-General’s
Special Envoy for the Implementation of Security
Council Resolution 1559 (2004) in the logical
framework of the budget. At that time, my delegation
expressed concerns and reservations concerning the
logical framework of the budget of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy for several reasons.
First, the logical framework for the mission,
which was not endorsed by the General Assembly in its
resolution, expands the mandate of the Special Envoy
for the Implementation of Security Council Resolution
1559 (2004) to include some of the requests set out in
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). Such an
expansion of mandates would lead not only to the
duplication of work in the Secretariat, as there is
another Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
concerned with the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006), but also to interpreting resolution 1701 (2006)
outside its context and substance and to an end other
than that for which it was adopted, which is to end
Israeli aggression against Lebanon.
Secondly, the logical framework set out for some
indicators of achievement exceeds the role of the
Secretariat in good offices, contrary to the
commitments provided for in the United Nations
Charter, particularly paragraph 7 of Article 2
prohibiting any intervention by the United Nations in
matters which are essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction of any State. The issues of diplomatic
relations and the delineation of borders between any
two countries are related to national sovereignty and
fall outside the framework of resolution 1559 (2004)
and of the mandate of the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy.
Thirdly, it is difficult to understand why the
logical framework should ignore Israel’s ongoing
occupation of parts of southern Lebanon, its continued
breaches of Lebanese airspace, and its threat to United
Nations forces in southern Lebanon, all of which pose
a genuine danger to Lebanon’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. In other words,
Israel continues to act in violation of resolution 1559
(2004). Instead, the logical framework focuses on

07-22624

premeditated and erroneous interpretations made by the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy to distract attention
from Israel’s failure to comply with resolution 1559
(2004).
Moreover, although resolution 1559 (2004)
provides for the withdrawal of all foreign forces from
Lebanon, the Secretariat neglected to cite that as an
expected accomplishment. That represents a very odd
disregard of the continued presence of Israeli forces on
Lebanese territory. Indeed, they are present there in
several places at this very moment. That demonstrates
the bias and lack of neutrality in the logical framework
of that part of the budget.
We welcome the General Assembly’s recognition
of the concerns expressed by my delegation and its call
on the Secretary-General to review all special political
missions. In that respect, I note in particular the budget
of the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for the
Implementation of Security Council Resolution 1559
(2004). We also stress the General Assembly’s adoption
of a review of the logical framework to ensure that
programmatic aspects and resource requirements are in
line with legislative mandates. We look forward to
receiving the report on that review requested by the
General Assembly from the Secretary-General as soon
as possible, and no later than the second resumed
session. We believe that such is the understanding
reached this evening.
In that regard, we expect the Secretariat to take
the concerns I have just expressed seriously in its
preparation of the revised logical framework and the
proposed budget for special political missions. In that
respect, my delegation also notes that the General
Assembly has reduced the budget proposed by the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, as it was not convinced by the justifications
put forward regarding resources, including those
related to financing the budget of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy for the Implementation of
Security Council Resolution 1559 (2004). That is a
fundamental issue around which a strong negotiating
position emerged in support of our view.
We welcome the emphasis which the resolution
places on the need to respect the provisions of
paragraph 9 of resolution 55/231, in which the General
Assembly requested the Secretary-General to ensure
that expected accomplishments and, where possible,
indicators of achievement were included to measure

27

A/61/PV.84

achievements in the implementation of the programmes
of the Organization and not those of individual
Member States. We note the General Assembly’s
request to the Secretary-General that he submit his
future budget proposals in full compliance with its
resolution 55/231.
In conclusion, allow me to stress the substance of
paragraph 5 of part VII of the resolution, which
underlines the continued importance of the SecretaryGeneral’s ensuring, when appointing his Special
Representatives and Envoys, the highest standards of
integrity,
competency,
impartiality
and
professionalism. We are convinced that the SecretaryGeneral Designate will rely fully on those guidelines in
appointing all his new special envoys and
representatives.
Mrs. Pohjankukka (Finland): The European
Union wishes to speak briefly on part VII, concerning
special political missions, of resolution 61/252.
We wish to underscore the great importance we
attach to all 27 special political missions. We would
therefore like to make clear our understanding of how
the adjustments in resource levels agreed in the
resolution will be applied within part III of the budget.
We understand, and heard several delegations in the
formal meeting of the Fifth Committee confirm, that
those would be applied in accordance with the
recommendations set out in paragraph 91 of the report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions (ACABQ) and as clarified by the
ACABQ Chairman when he introduced his report in a
formal meeting of the Fifth Committee.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 117.
Agenda item 116
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/667)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report (A/61/667) and a draft
decision recommended by the Committee in paragraph
9 of the same report. The text of the draft resolution is
contained, for the time being, in document
A/C.5/61/L.21. The text of the draft decision is
contained, for the time being, in document

28

A/C.5/61/L.31. We will now take a decision on the
draft resolution and on the draft decision.
The draft resolution is entitled “Proposed
programme budget outline for the biennium 20082009”, and the Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/254).
The President: We will now take action on draft
decision entitled “Questions deferred for future
consideration”. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The
Assembly
has
thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
116 and has thus concluded its consideration of all the
reports of the Fifth Committee before it.
Programme of work
The President: With regard to the programme of
work of the General Assembly apart from the
organizational methods and items that may have to be
considered by operation of the rules of procedure of the
Assembly, and bearing in mind that the Assembly has
already considered and acted on a majority of items, I
should like to inform members that the following
remain open for consideration during the sixty-first
session: agenda items 11, 12 to 15, 17, 19 to 27, 32, 33,
42, 44 to 47, 52, 68, 90, 100, 105(a), (b), (d) and (e),
106(h), 107, 108(a), (h), (l), (o) and (p), 110 to 147,
149 and 151 to 155.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
take note of those agenda items that remain open for
consideration during the sixty-first session of the
Assembly?
It was so decided.
The President: This is the final plenary meeting
of the main part of the sixty-first session of the General
Assembly. It has been an honour for me to preside over
this busy and productive period during the past few
months.
The plenary met 84 times and the General
Committee five times, and there were 20 informal

07-22624

A/61/PV.84

consultations. We adopted 254 resolutions. We also
held four meetings of the tenth emergency special
session.
I would like to thank the Chairpersons of the
Main Committees for the leadership they have shown,
which has enabled us to conclude our busy schedule in
an efficient and timely manner. I wish also to extend
my sincere appreciation to the Vice-Presidents and to
the Bureaux of the six Main Committees for supporting
the Assembly’s work.
As I noted in my opening statement at the 1st
meeting of the session, we are an organization of hope
based upon commitment, consensus and co-existence.
We all have a stake in achieving a safer and fairer
world. It is only by working together to address the
many challenges our world is facing that we can make
such an achievement a reality.
During this part of the session, I have worked
with Member States and Secretary-General Kofi Annan
to build bridges and trust. I intend to continue to do the
same when Secretary-General-designate Ban Ki-moon
takes office in the New Year.
The Assembly has shown that when we are united
in partnership and when we overcome mistrust, we can
achieve much more for each other. The adoption of the
resolution on strengthening Economic and Social
Council is a good example of this fact.
We have also made progress in many other areas
of our common agenda. We had important debates on
Security Council reform and General Assembly
revitalization. We adopted two important international
conventions, the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities, and the International Convention for
the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance.
During this important and busy transition phase,
we were also able to finalize the appointment of the
Secretary-General-designate, Ban Ki-moon and to pay
tribute to the successful tenure of Secretary-General
Kofi Annan and bid him farewell.
I was encouraged by the constructive spirit that
prevailed during the debate on Security Council
reform. And I believe that there is clearly a growing
desire to establish a credible process for achieving a
meaningful outcome in this outstanding area of reform.
Although some differences remain, I believe that in the

07-22624

New Year we will be able to look at this matter in a
fresh light.
We also had a successful debate on the
revitalization of the General Assembly. Many members
noted that we should become more focused on strategic
issues and more action-oriented so that our work would
have greater visibility and impact.
The informal thematic debate on development
was an example of the General Assembly increasing its
visibility. We broadened our discussions to involve the
private sector and civil society. The Islamic
Development Bank announced the creation of a $10
billion poverty eradication fund, to which even the
poorest developing countries will contribute.
We have made progress on Secretariat and
management reform and worked hard to obtain a
satisfactory conclusion to the debate on a new scale of
assessments. In addition, work on the renovation of the
United Nations Headquarters in New York will soon
commence with the adoption of the resolution on the
capital master plan.
Working together, we have built confidence
among Member States in order to make good progress
in the mandate review exercise, which has now been
extended until the end of the sixty-first session.
We have also established a process on
environmental governance in order to reach agreement
on steps to enable the United Nations system to have a
more effective impact on environmental issues.
I hope that, building on the work of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, we can fully
implement the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and in the New Year reach
consensus on a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism.
Promoting gender equality and the empowerment
of women is an integral aspect of achieving the
Millennium Development Goals. In March next year,
the General Assembly will hold its second informal
thematic debate on the promotion of gender equality
and empowerment of women, in order to help make
such equality and empowerment a reality. A successful
outcome will again demonstrate that the General
Assembly can have an impact on the issues that really
count.
While the forces of globalization and mass
communication have brought us closer together, they
have also made us more aware of our cultural

29

A/61/PV.84

differences. In order to promote greater dialogue and
tolerance among civilizations and cultures, I intend to
convene a third informal interactive thematic debate in
the summer of 2007.
We have many important matters of common
concern that require our close attention when we
return. I hope that we can begin the New Year by
working even more closely together in a spirit of
cooperation, mutual trust and collective responsibility.

30

Finally, I would also like to commend the
dedication and commitment of all the staff working in
the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management, the interpreters and everyone else
working behinds the scenes to ensure that our work
runs smoothly. I thank them once again for all their
support and hard work, and wish them all a very happy
holiday.
The meeting rose at 11.50 p.m.

07-22624
