S/2017/97

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 February 2017
Original: English

Fourth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed
by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States
in countering the threat
I. Introduction
1.
In adopting its resolution 2253 (2015), the Security Council expressed its
determination to address the threat posed to international peace and security by
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL, also known as Da’esh) 1 and associated
individuals and groups, and emphasized the importance of cutting off its access to
funds and preventing it from planning and facilitating attacks. In paragraph 97 of
the resolution, the Council requested that I provide an i nitial strategic-level report,
followed by updates every four months thereafter.
2.
The present report is the fourth such report (see S/2016/92, S/2016/501 and
S/2016/830) and was prepared with the input of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, in close collaboration with the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to Security Council resolu tion 1526 (2014)
and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh),
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011)
and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al -Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, the Counter -Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, the United Nations Counter -Terrorism Centre and other
relevant United Nations actors and international and regional organizations. In
addition to providing an update on the gravity of the threat posed by ISIL and
associated groups and entities, I also consider the presence and influence of ISIL
outside Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, including in Europe, the Maghreb 2 and
West Africa. Also addressed are the efforts of Member States of those regions to
implement measures in a number of thematic areas, including in order to counter the
threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters who either return to their home States or
travel to other States, as well as the efforts of the United Nations, its partners and
__________________
1
2

17-01378 (E)

Listed as Al-Qaida in Iraq (QDe.115).
Algeria, Mauritania, Morocco, Tunisia and Libya.

020217

*1701378*

S/2017/97

international and regional organizations to support the undertakings of Member
States.

II. Overview of the current threat
A.

Emphasis by ISIL on external attacks
3.
ISIL is militarily on the defensive in several regions, notably in Afghanistan,
Iraq, Libya and the Syrian Arab Republic. According to reports from Member
States, the group has not been able to withstand the sustained pressure within
several conflict zones, 3 however, ISIL is partially adapting to this situation. For
example, Member States highlighted that the internal communication and
recruitment methods of the group are increasingly moving towa rds more covert
methods, such as the use of the dark web, encryption and messengers. Furthermore,
attacks perpetrated by ISIL in the Levant demonstrate the group ’s operational
capabilities to expand its immediate areas of attack to neighbouring countries b y
using links to existing local cells. The group continues to encourage its followers
and sympathizers outside conflict zones to perpetrate attacks. In several cases,
Member States highlighted that foreign terrorist fighters with the core of ISIL
reached out to specific individuals in their countries of origin to encourage attacks.
The threat to the aviation sector remains high, as demonstrated by recent attacks
against airports in Brussels in March and in Istanbul, Turkey, in June, and against a
Daallo Airlines flight in February 2016. Recognizing the seriousness of this
particular threat, the Security Council adopted resolution 2309 (2016) in September,
emphasizing international efforts to counter the thre at to aviation.

B.

Foreign terrorist fighters and returnees
4.
Member States emphasized that the flow of foreign terrorist fighters to Iraq
and the Syrian Arab Republic has slowed considerably due to increased control
measures of Member States and the diminished “attractiveness” of the core of ISIL
as a result of military pressure. One Member State reported that it anticipates that
many foreign terrorist fighters will remain in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic,
given that most of them who intended to leave had already done so. Several Member
States assessed that those who remain in the conflict zone will present a significant
threat if they eventually return, given that most are staunchly committed to ISIL
ideology. Some Member States neighbouring Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, as
well as in the Maghreb, highlighted that they are currently dealing with returnees
from the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq travelling through their territory and the
significant number of foreign terrorist fighters who wer e stopped en route to the
Syrian Arab Republic. Some of those returnees will travel to their countries of
origin or residence. Others may choose to travel to conflict zones in the region and
beyond, thereby posing new risks. Therefore, the flow of returnee s entails the risk of
spreading the threat posed by individuals loyal to ISIL to new regions.

__________________
3

2/20

Several Member States reported that the volume of ISIL core pro paganda has declined as a result
of military pressure. One also reported a change in the content of propaganda, which increasingly
focuses on military engagements rather than on “state-building”.

17-01378

S/2017/97

C.

Financial decline of the core of ISIL continues
5.
Since my previous report, the financial condition of ISIL has continued to
deteriorate, forcing it to operate on a “crisis” budget. 4 The ability of ISIL to attract
new recruits has diminished, and fighters are increasingly leaving the battlefield.
Furthermore, as described in my previous report, ISIL has continued to impose an
array of fees and fines, 5 while internal corruption and theft also continue to plague
the group (see S/2016/830, paras. 4 and 5).
6.
The significant pressure on the finances of ISIL notwithstanding, the
composition of its revenue streams has not changed substantially, given that the
group continues to rely mainly on income from hydrocarbon resources and extortion
and “taxation”, which together account for as much as 70 to 80 per cent of the
group’s income. 6 However, its income from hydrocarbon resources decreased
markedly in 2016. The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
estimates that, in 2016, ISIL earned approximately $260 million from illicit oil
sales, mainly from oil fields in Deir Ezzor province, Syrian Arab Republic,
compared with as much as $500 million in 2015 (see S/2016/92, para. 17). Oil
prices are fluctuating considerably, and fuel is scarce. ISIL has nevertheless
demonstrated its resourcefulness in fixing or adapting equipment and infrastructure
damaged by international air strikes. Furthermore, ISIL appears to have sufficient
funds to continue the fight, and many of its hardcore fighters appear prepared to
remain and fight without a salary, given that it prioritizes its war machine over
minimal services to the population. 7 In addition, despite being under extensive
pressure militarily, ISIL continues to exploit cultural sites.
7.
While the group’s income will continue to shrink as it loses territory, it is
crucial for the international community to remain vigilant against the efforts of ISIL
to increase its previously minor income stream, or to cultivate new ones and its
attempts to find innovative ways to move funds using channels subject to less
stringent compliance procedures. Specifically, with the return of journalists and
humanitarian workers to areas recaptured from ISIL, Member States have expressed
concern about a potential increase in kidnapping for ransom, as well as its increased
reliance on donations, including through the abuse of non-profit organizations and
fundraising websites.
8.
One Member State indicated that it intercepted ISIL facilitators carrying funds
to the conflict zone and funds flowing out of the conflict zone. The same Member
State reported that some foreign terrorist fighters maintain access to their home
bank accounts. They ask sympathizers to transfer money to these accounts, which
ISIL facilitators outside the conflict zone then withdraw and provide to ISIL.
According to another Member State, due to the reduction by ISIL in fighters’
salaries (see S/2016/501, para. 9), fighters are increasingly seeking financial aid

__________________
4

The following is based on official information provided by Member States, unless otherwise
indicated.
5
According to UNAMI, ISIL imposed fines on those selling cigarettes illegally in Mosul, and
petty smugglers were fined between $30 and $50.
6
Other sources of income include kidnapping for ransom, looting of antiquities, external
donations, the sale of electricity and agricultural products, and human trafficking.
7
According to a Member State, ISIL has been reducing its administrative and social expenses.

17-01378

3/20

S/2017/97

from relatives in that Member State, resulting in an increase in financial tran sfers
from that State to Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. The transfers are made using
remittance companies, and the funds are collected in third countries and delivered
by couriers to the conflict zone.

III. Evolving threat posed by ISIL
9.
To highlight the threat presented by ISIL to various regions of the globe, in
this report I focus on Europe, the Maghreb and West Africa.

A.

Threat to Europe
10. ISIL declared its intent to attack Europe in a speech by Abou Mohamed Al
Adnani (QDi.325) in September 2014, in which he called for attacks on the United
States of America and countries in Europe in retribution for air strikes against ISIL.
ISIL has since conducted a range of attacks in Europe, some of which have been
directed and facilitated by personnel specifically sent from its core in the Syrian
Arab Republic, such as the attacks in Paris in November 2015 and Brussels in
March 2016. In addition, the group enabled attacks in Europe by providing guidance
or assistance and inspired a wide range of further attacks through its propaganda.
11. Member States reported that ISIL enablers, primarily based in the Syrian Arab
Republic, have encouraged ISIL supporters to mount attacks in their countries of
residence. These enablers are organized on a country, regional and language basis
and engage online with individuals in their country of origin or previous residence
to conduct attacks. The wide range of nationalities, languages and previous places
of residence among foreign terrorist fighters in territor y held by ISIL increases their
global reach.
12. ISIL uses sophisticated online publications to highlight a range of attack
methodologies and provide designs for improvised explosive devices. The use of a
truck to attack the Christmas market in Berlin on 19 December 2016 mirrors the
methodology of the attack in Nice, France, on 14 July 2016. As demonstrated by the
tragic loss of life resulting from the attacks in Nice and Berlin and the subsequent
attack in a nightclub in Istanbul on 1 January 2017, attack s by individuals inspired
by ISIL require few resources but can have devastating consequences. Many of the
attacks that appear to have been inspired, conducted in the name of and claimed by
ISIL were initially reported as “lone actor” attacks, although sub sequent
investigations demonstrate that the individuals often received support or resources
from other extremists and/or criminal groups.
13. Since my previous report, ISIL has failed to direct any complex, large -scale
attacks in Western Europe. According to Member States, this may be due to several
factors. The pressure on the core of ISIL in the conflict zone has absorbed
considerable resources of the group. In addition, ISIL fighters have experienced
increased difficulty travelling from the conflict zone to Europe owing to measures
taken by Member States. Moreover, large-scale police and security measures in a
range of countries have disrupted both plots and cells across Europe. Member States
currently assess, however, that the threat of large-scale attacks remains: according to

4/20

17-01378

S/2017/97

one Member State, not all of the operatives of ISIL believed to have been
dispatched to Europe to conduct the Paris and Brussels attacks have so far been
identified and arrested.
14. Member States have reported that the flow of European foreign terrorist
fighters to ISIL in the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq slowed considerably during
2016 due to a combination of factors. The military campaigns, which have resulted
in ISIL losing large numbers of fighters and territory, together wit h the group’s
deteriorating financial situation have considerably reduced its draw for foreign
terrorist fighters. The measures taken by many European Member States to restrict
travel to conflict zones, and in particular measures taken by the Government of
Turkey, have also hindered the ability of European foreign terrorist fighters to travel
to ISIL-held territory in the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq.
15. As reported by the Monitoring Team in its eighteenth report, the number of
foreign terrorist fighters returning to European countries, potentially intending to
perpetrate attacks, in combination with those being radicalized within those
countries, presents a growing security challenge (see S/2016/629, para. 4). European
Member States have reported that between 15 and 40 per cent of their nationals and
residents who travelled to Iraq and the Syrian Arabic Republic have now returned.
Some highlighted that this includes a rising number of female returnees. A
proportion of those returning present a significant threat and are facing appropriate
legal and control measures. Other returnees are reported to have become
disillusioned with the fighting and the distorted ideology of ISIL and therefore
represent a lower threat.
16. A number of Member States reported that they expect that only a small
proportion of European foreign terrorist fighters remaining in Iraq and the Syrian
Arab Republic will return home or relocate to other fighting zones. One Member
State reported that some are likely to be deterred from returning to their home
country for fear of arrest. Others who would like to leave are unable to, due to the
group’s own control measures. In addition, casualty rates among ISIL fighters are
very high and such high rates will continue. One Member State estimated that only
1 in 10 of those remaining and previously resident in Europe will attempt to return,
however, those remaining would be hardened fighters and present a significant
threat.

B.

Threat to Maghreb and West Africa
17. In Libya, the military offensive has dislodged ISIL from the city of Sirte, one
of its most important strongholds outside Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic.
According to Member States, this has reduced the group’s access to resources and
operational space. Member States also highlighted that the threat posed by ISIL to
Libya and neighbouring countries has not been eliminated. The group’s defeat in
Sirte led its fighters to disperse and move to other parts of the country. Member
States highlighted that overall ISIL has maintained operational capabilities in Libya,
as illustrated by recent operations, such as a suicide attack in Benghazi on
18 December 2016, in which several soldiers were killed. 8 Estimates of Member

__________________
8

17-01378

“Suicide bomber kills seven in Libyan city of Benghazi: officials”, Reuters, 18 December 2016.

5/20

S/2017/97

States vary as to the number of the group’s fighters in Libya, ranging from several
hundred to as many as 3,000.
18. ISIL continues to present a serious threat to countries neighbouring Libya. On
6 November 2016, ISIL claimed responsibility for the killing of a Tunisian soldier
in Kasserine, 9 and, on 15 November, it claimed responsibility for an improvised
explosive device attack that wounded 12 Tunisian soldiers. 10 On 11 December 2016,
a suicide attack in a cathedral in Cairo killed 25 people. ISIL claimed that the
assailant was one of its fighters and threatened to stage further attacks in Egypt. 11
19. Member States assess that the continuing pressure on ISIL in Libya could lead
to ISIL adopting a modus operandi that is more akin to other Al -Qaida affiliates,
which could mean that some cells within ISIL may look for a rapprochement with
Al-Qaida’s affiliates in the region.
20. Although ISIL in Libya experienced setbacks since my previous report, the
group has increased its presence in West Africa and the Sahel, as demonstrated by
recent ISIL-related attacks in the Niger and Burkina Faso. 12 However, currently the
group does not control significant amounts of territory in these regions.
21. Amaq News Agency, one of the propaganda outlets of ISIL, announced on
30 October 2016 that one splinter faction of Al Mourabitoun led by Lehbib Ould Ali
had pledged loyalty to ISIL. 13 This development may result in an elevated risk
environment within the region. Several Member States emphasized that the core of
ISIL had not confirmed the affiliation of this splinter faction. According to the
assessment of Member States, this faction may therefore be highly motivated to
commit large-scale terrorist acts in order to demonstrate the added value it brings to
the core of ISIL as an affiliate.
22. According to Member States, Boko Haram, 14 which declared its loyalty to ISIL
in March 2015, is plagued by an internal power struggle and has split into two
factions (see S/2016/629, para. 38). One faction continues to be led by Abubakar
Mohammed Shekau (QDi.322), and the other is led by Abu Musab Al Barnawi (not
listed), the former spokesman of the group. Al Barnawi aims at maintaining an
affiliation with ISIL as the group’s “West Africa province”. 15 Member States
highlighted that the Shekau faction, in particular, is under continuous military
pressure and confined to the south of the state of Borno and the Sambisa forest.
23. Boko Haram is mainly locally funded. It relies on donations, extortion, theft,
including of cattle, commercial activities, such as sponsoring food vendors, and
__________________
9

Amaq News Agency, press release on social media, 6 November 2016.
“Claimed by ISIL”, Amaq News Agency, press release on social media, 15 November 2016.
11
“Killing and wounding nearly 80 crusaders in martyrdom-seeking operation in downtown Cairo”,
communiqué released on social media, 13 December 2016.
12
Information provided by a Member State.
13
Amaq News Agency announcement, distributed by Telegram, 30 October 2016. Al-Sahrawi
individually had once before pledged allegiance to ISIL in May 2015. Lehbib Ould Ali also uses
the nom de guerre “Adnan Abu al-Walid al-Sahrawi”.
14
Listed as Jama'atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda'awati Wal-Jihad (QDe.138).
15
Information provided by a Member State. Al-Naba newspaper, affiliated with ISIL, published an
interview with Al Barnawi on Telegram and Twitter, 2 August 2016 identifying Al Barnawi as
“governor” of ISIL’s “West Africa province”.
10

6/20

17-01378

S/2017/97

kidnapping for ransom. 16 Both factions of Boko Haram are financially under strain,
and many of their attacks are actually supply runs to steal provisions, such as food
and equipment. 17 Member States further indicated that both factions of Boko Haram
are no longer able to pay all of their fighters a monthly salary. This has already led
to some defections from the group.
24. Boko Haram nevertheless remains a serious threat to regional security, with
several thousand combatants still under its command. 18 Most of them have been
locally recruited, in addition to the foreign terrorist fighters recruited from the same
ethnic tribes as Nigerian Boko Haram fighters. Boko Haram continues to use
vulnerable members of the population as suicide bombers, in particular women and
children, which remains of concern to Member States.
25. Some Member States highlighted their concern about the ongoing attempts by
Boko Haram to spread its influence and commit terrorist acts beyond Nigeria. They
noted that Boko Haram is using improvised explosive devices and suicide attacks
for sporadic actions outside of Nigeria.

IV. Responses to the evolving threat
A.

Overview
26. The United Nations, Member States and international, regional and
subregional organizations continue to strengthen national and international
frameworks to respond to the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters and to
specifically address the global threat posed by ISIL-related trends. On 12 December,
at the high-level briefing on international judicial cooperation in the fight against
terrorism, and in Security Council resolution 2322 (2016), the Council called upon
all States to consider establishing laws and mechanisms that allow for the broadest
possible international cooperation, including by downgrading, where appropriate,
intelligence for the purposes of sharing it, exchanging biometric and b iographic
information, engaging in informal police cooperation, exchanging financial
information and strengthening mutual legal assistance, and emphasized the need for
a coordinated and robust response. 19
27. Pursuant to the presidential statement of 29 May 2015 (PRST/2015/11), the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, with the Counter -Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Monitoring Team developed a capacity building implementation plan to stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters. The
37 project proposals address the life cycle of the phenomenon of foreign terrorist

__________________
16

Information provided by a Member State and Financial Action Task Force -Intergovernmental
Action Group against Money Laundering in West Africa-Action Group against Money
Laundering in Central Africa, Terrorist financing in West and Central Africa (Paris, FATF, 2016),
pp. 10-17 and 33.
17
Information provided by a Member State.
18
Information provided by a Member State.
19
In its resolution 71/248, the General Assembly established the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic
since March 2011.

17-01378

7/20

S/2017/97

fighters. Funding in the amount of $27 million, or 22.8 per cent of the total budget
of the plan, has been confirmed (see S/2016/92, S/2016/501 and S/2016/830). The
Task Force is in the process of reviewing the plan to respond to the changing nature
of the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.
1.

Measures to curtail travel and transit
28. In its resolution 71/19, adopted by consensus, the General Assembly called for
the strengthening of cooperation between the United Nations and the Internati onal
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) on transnational organized crime and
terrorism, including preventing foreign terrorist fighter travel. Addressing critical
gaps in global screening efforts is essential to stem the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters. 20 INTERPOL noted that, between October 2016 and January 2017, there
was a 63 per cent increase in the number of profiles of foreign terrorist fighters
accessible in real time through its criminal information system and a 750 per cent
increase in the sharing of information by Member States. As at 20 December, there
were 14,338 such profiles in the INTERPOL criminal analysis file on foreign
terrorist fighters.
29. Designing and implementing comprehensive border-management strategies
continues to be difficult for many Member States. The Security Council has called
upon Member States to require that airlines operating in their territories provide
advance passenger information to the appropriate national authorities, 21 but only
56 Member States have done so to date. 22 The United Nations is currently providing
related assistance to States that are among the 78 identified as the most affected by
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters and have not yet implemented advance
passenger information systems. 23 During the reporting period, the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre and partners continued to organize regional workshops on
advance passenger information in Central Asia, the Caucasus and Africa. The
workshops focused on international standards and national legal, institutional and
technical requirements in order to allow for in-depth capacity-building.
30. The Security Council has also called upon Member States to require that
airlines under their jurisdiction provide passenger name records to national
authorities, where appropriate, but implementation continues to be uneven. Some
States have also voluntarily begun to apply passenger name records requirements to
ocean and sea traffic and cruise ships, but a lack of appropriate regulation continues
to represent a significant vulnerability.

__________________
20

The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, relevant United Nations entities and Member States contributed to a Centre/Global
Counter-terrorism Forum document on good practices in the area of border security and
management in the context of counter-terrorism and stemming the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters, issued in September, that promotes a comprehensive, cooperative, coordinated, and
integrated border security management; and the development of a five -year border security
management project of the Centre.
21
See Security Council 2309 (2016); S/2015/377; and Security Council resolution 2178 (2014).
22
Data as at November 2016.
23
The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre is implementing the project jointly with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the Monitoring Team, the International Air
Transport Association, the International Civil Aviation Organization, the International
Organization for Migration and INTERPOL.

8/20

17-01378

S/2017/97

2.

Measures to counter the financing of ISIL
31. During a joint special meeting of the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities and the Financial Action Task Force on depriving terrorist
groups from accessing, raising and moving funds: practices and lessons learned,
held in December, participants noted that ISIL continued to use a wide range of
funding methods, including extortion, exploitation of natural resources, small
businesses and trafficking activities. The Task Force secretariat has gathered data on
the group’s funding sources with a view to making available to the member States
of the Task Force and similar regional bodies triannual analyses to assist in their
efforts to deprive ISIL of funds. Since February 2016, thwarting the financing of
ISIL has been included in the agenda of plenary meetings as a permanent item.

3.

Prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration
32. United Nations entities continue to support the efforts of Member States to
strengthen criminal justice. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) published a new Handbook on the Management of Violent Extremist
Prisoners and the Prevention of Radicalization to Violence in Prisons at the end of
November. 24 Drawing on this guidance, UNODC and the United Nations Counter Terrorism Centre, in close consultation with the Counter -Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, have developed a proposal for a technical assistance
programme, to be funded by the European Union, the Centre and other donors. The
programme aims at strengthening the capacities of national prison administrations to
manage violent extremist prisoners in order to prevent radicalization leading to
violence by establishing safe, secure and humane conditions in prisons, supporting
prisoners in their disengagement from violence and assisting in their reintegration
into society upon release.

4.

Addressing conflict-related sexual violence and vulnerable groups
33. At the 7847th meeting of the Security Council, on 20 December 2016, which
was a ministerial-level open debate, the Council discussed the issue of trafficking in
persons in conflict situations, and Member States acknowledged that armed
conflicts generate mass displacement of particularly vulnerable groups and create
circumstances conducive to exploitation and urged the adoption of human rights compliant approaches to the management of conflict-driven refugee and migrant
flows. In its resolution 2331 (2016), the Security Council recognized the connection
between trafficking in persons, sexual violence and terrorism and other transnational
organized criminal activities, and condemned all acts of trafficking in persons for
the purpose of supporting terrorist organizations or individual terrorists as serious
crimes that Member States must appropriately prosecute and penalize. In previous
reports, I recalled that ISIL and other groups were using trafficking and sexual
violence as a weapon of terror and a source of revenue and that ISIL had engaged in
the sexual enslavement of women and girls through trafficking (see S/2016/92,

__________________
24

17-01378

For the English version, see www.unodc.org/pdf/criminal_justice/Handbook_on_VEPs.pdf. Other
language versions of the Handbook, including in Arabic, French and Russian will be made
available in February 2017.

9/20

S/2017/97

S/2016/501, S/2016/766, and S/2016/949). 25 In a letter dated 20 December
addressed to the President of the Security Council, my predecessor conveyed a
special report of the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary -General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict on crimes committed by ISIL, so as to enhance the
knowledge and understanding of the members of the Council of the systematic use
of sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism and its links to the trafficking in persons
(S/2016/1090).
34. In response, some States have instituted special procedures to scre en refugees
and asylum seekers, particularly those arriving from areas affected by ISIL, to
identify victims of trafficking (see S/2016/949). However, the sheer numbers of
refugees and asylum seekers could strain existing capacities. 26 UNODC has also
assisted government agencies and non-governmental organizations in developing
proactive and systematic approaches to the screening and identification of victims
of trafficking among refugees and displaced persons fleeing from conflicts.
5.

Use of information and communications technology, enhanced cooperation with
the private sector and the ability to prosecute
35. On 1 December, at the special meeting of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism on
preventing the exploitation of information and communications technologies for
terrorist purposes, while respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms,
participants recognized that the use of media platforms had enabled ISIL, Al -Qaida
and associated individuals and entities to spread propaganda, share training
materials, engage in illicit trading in weapons, identify potential recruits, generate
funds and carry out attacks. 27 The online activity of ISIL has fuelled unprecedented
growth in the number of foreign terrorist fighters travelling to and from Iraq, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Libya, while a lack of legislative coherence across
Member States and the absence of an international definition of “terrorist content”
pose practical challenges for Governments attempting to gather and share digital
information and evidence for investigations and prosecutions.
36. In efforts to combat ISIL online, Member States and international, regional
and subregional organizations have increasingly sought to form partnerships with
communications service providers and other private companies. In December,
Facebook, Microsoft, Twitter and YouTube announced their intention to develop a
joint database containing “digital fingerprints” of violent extremist images,
designed to facilitate the removal of content that violates website terms and
conditions.

__________________
25

See also Human Rights Council conference room paper A/HRC/32/CRP.2.
The Global Report on Trafficking in Persons 2016 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.16.IV.6) found that an increasing number of trafficking victims from conflict-affected
States, such as the Syrian Arab Republic, Iraq and Somalia, was detected in States in Europe,
Asia and the Middle East. See also Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, “As Mosul displacement continues, UNHCR steps up assistance”, briefing note,
11 November 2016, available from www.unhcr.org/en-us/news/briefing/2016/11/5825912b4/
mosul-displacement-continues-unhcr-steps-assistance.html; and A/71/384.
27
The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate organized a technical meeting on the
same topic on 30 November, as well as a side event on the misuse of social media for terrorist financing purposes on 13 December.
26

10/20

17-01378

S/2017/97

B.

Europe

1.

Measures to curtail travel and transit
37. The increased use of INTERPOL screening databases reflects increased efforts
to interdict foreign terrorist fighters. The number of searches conducted in
November 2016 was greater than that for the whole of 2015, an increase of 56 per
cent across the European Union and 129 per cent within the Schengen zone. A
European intelligence platform, under the auspices of the Counter -Terrorism Group
on 1 July 2016, was established to facilitate the sharing of real -time intelligence
information about suspected foreign terrorist fighters and other terr orists. Article 7
of the Additional Protocol to the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of
Terrorism provides for the implementation of a network, available on a 24 hours a
day, seven days a week basis, for the exchange of timely information on foreign
terrorist fighters. As at December 2016, 33 States members of the Council of Europe
had designated contact points. 28
38. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) promotes
cooperation between its participating States by harmonizing border -related policies
and practices, and its Border Security and Management National Focal Point
Network and its Policing On-Line Information System, known as POLIS, also serve
as platforms to exchange border-related information and experiences.
39. Few European States have implemented advance passenger information
systems (see S/2015/683). Although some have introduced advance passenger
information requirements, airlines are not all required to collect and transmit this
information to national authorities on a systematic basis. The European Union
directive adopted in April 2016 on the use of passenger name records for the
prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of terrorist offences and serious
crimes notwithstanding, to date, only three European States have introduced a
requirement for the use of passenger name records.
40. The launch of the European Border and Coast Guard in October 2016
constituted a major step in strengthening the security of the external borders of the
European Union. Each State member of the European Union is required to
contribute to a standing corps of border guards and other relevant staff, which can
be mobilized at short notice to address an emergency at the external border or
launch a rapid border intervention.
41. The vast majority of refugees, both in Europe and globally, have no connection
to terrorism and have fled their States of origin to escape persecution. Nevertheless,
there have been isolated incidents in which persons who have sought, or been
granted, asylum in Europe have subsequently been implicated in successful or foiled
terrorist attacks. The Security Council has repeatedly called upon Member States to
take measures to ensure that terrorists do not misuse asylum procedures, and to do
so in a manner consistent with international refugee and human rights law.
42. In practice, Member States often encounter difficulties in taking such
measures in a timely manner, especially where asylum seekers constitute part of a

__________________
28

17-01378

Security Council resolution 2322 (2016) recognizes the I-24/7 network of INTERPOL as a good
practice.

11/20

S/2017/97

large influx of migrants. South-Eastern Europe, in particular, continues to face
challenges in this respect, owing to ongoing conflicts in neighbouring regions that
have resulted in large flows of migrants, including refugees and asylum seekers, to
and through the region, as well as the transit of foreign terrorist fighters to and from
conflict zones. Regional bodies indicate that ISIL may continue to seek to abuse
asylum procedures. 29 In response to these challenges, some European States rely on
advanced capacities, such as radar and satellite technology, that enable coastguards
to monitor the movement of vessels in real time. Some European States have also
started to utilize data from the smartphones of asylum seekers who arrive without
passports to check their identities and for screening and risk -assessment purposes.
2.

Addressing inspired or enabled attacks
43. Some States indicate that the military setbacks sustained by ISIL may have
prompted pre-existing terrorist networks in Europe to accelerate their plans for
attacks in their States of origin and/or residence, without travelling to conflict
zones.
44. Some States noted the benefits of establishing joint investigative teams for a
fixed period and a specific purpose on the basis of an agreement between or among
two or more law enforcement authorities in European Union member States. The
European Police Office (Europol) and Eurojust provide support to joint
investigative teams in terrorism cases to facilitate the timely exchange of
information by States and to reduce the need to rely on more formal, and often
lengthier, mutual legal assistance processes. Member States note that posting liaison
magistrates or investigators in relevant agencies of other Member States, or in
relevant organizations such as Europol or INTERPOL, can have similar benefits.

3.

Measures to counter the financing of ISIL
45. Despite substantial progress made by European States, they continue to face
challenges in effectively operationalizing measures that broaden the criminalization
of terrorist financing to cover the financing of travel undertaken by foreign terrorist
fighters (see S/2016/501).
46. Recognizing that transactions financing terrorism often involve small amounts
of money, some States are evaluating whether current declaration thresholds for the
cross-border transfer of cash or bearer-negotiable instruments are appropriate. In
addition to imposing new regulations aimed at mitigating the vulnerabilities
associated with prepaid debit cards, France has introduced the requirement that all
transactions of 1,000 euros or more be traceable (cash pa yments are no longer
accepted) and that cash deposits or withdrawals in excess of 10,000 euros per month
and per customer be systematically reported to the financial intelligence unit.
Belgium’s financial intelligence unit recently put into place an action plan aimed at
strengthening coordination among the various agencies involved in countering
money-laundering and terrorist financing, granting it access to non -financial
intelligence.
47. South-Eastern European States continue to face challenges relating t o the
cross-border illicit flows of money, as well as an elevated terrorism -financing risk

__________________
29

12/20

Europol, “Changes in modus operandi of Islamic State (IS) revisited”, November 2016.

17-01378

S/2017/97

derived from the activities of non-profit organizations and informal remittance
companies, and those States have taken some steps to address these issues,
including undertaking national risk assessments on terrorism financing.
48. While the number of prosecutions for terrorism-financing offences remains
low, there have been individual successes, including the recent conviction of two
individuals in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland for
knowingly sending funds through an ISIL courier to a family member who had
joined ISIL in Syria and the conviction of two others for providing cash, in person,
to an individual suspected of involvement in the attac ks in Brussels in March 2016.
4.

Prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration
49. Delays in receiving responses to requests for mutual legal assistance continue
to impede investigations and prosecutions. Member States highlighted the benefits
of introducing informal, flexible methods of information -sharing with Member
States with which they have close relationships to address challenges relating to
evidence obtained from intelligence sources. Such informal arrangements can also
facilitate swift responses within the framework of time-sensitive investigations.
50. Member States noted that radicalized individuals, disillusioned with life with
ISIL in Iraq or the Syrian Arab Republic, who return to their country of origin or
previous residence may not be willing to work with Governments to provide
information or help to prevent the radicalization of others.
51. Eurojust continues to monitor related developments and trends in the
legislation of Member States, and the European Commission works with relevant
regional bodies to implement training programmes on counter -radicalization for
prison and probation staff. In September 2016, the United Nations Interregional
Crime and Justice Research Institute organized a scenario -based tabletop exercise,
using real cases, with the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to identify
potential gaps and solutions for rehabilitation and reintegration approaches.

5.

Preventing and countering violent extremism
52. Member States are developing comprehensive approaches to countering and
preventing violent extremism, including broadening partnerships with a range of
stakeholders and non-governmental actors to increase the effectiveness of such
strategies (see S/2015/939 and S/2016/501).
53. In follow up to the call by the European Commission, in April 2016, for
renewed focus in the area of counter-radicalization, the European Union developed
the “IMPACT Europe” project, which consists of an evaluation toolkit that draws on
a knowledge database on radicalization factors and existing intervention, a training
course and a manual, and the project on preventing interdicting and mitigatin g
extremism, known as the “PRIME” project, to develop a model of “lone actor”
extremist events. 30 These initiatives rely on the participation of individuals who are
credible in the eyes of the targeted individual, such as former members of extremist
groups, highlight the role of family, friends and the local community in the
de-radicalization process and recognize the need to address psychological factors

__________________
30

17-01378

For more information on the projects, see http://impacteurope.eu and www.fp7 -prime.eu.

13/20

S/2017/97

and offer alternatives to individuals at risk of radicalization. OSCE also has ongoing
initiatives in this area.
54. The European Commission is establishing a network aimed at enabling local
stakeholders to invite positive role models from various backgrounds, including
entrepreneurs, artists and athletes, to visit schools, youth associations, sports clubs
and prisons to share experiences. The “No hate speech” movement of the Council of
Europe seeks to raise the awareness of young people and the population at large
about the risks of engaging in hate speech. Implemented through national campaigns
in 45 States, the project provides alternative ways for young people to engage with
each other, online and off line, for positive causes and has rallied partners active in
various religious communities and groups. In July 2016, France opened a
de-radicalization centre where young people at risk of radicalization can receive
guidance on personal and professional matters.
6.

Use of information and communications technology, enhanced cooperation with
the private sector and the ability to prosecute
55. Deeply concerned by the continued abuse of the Internet and social media by
ISIL and its affiliates to recruit new members and incite or glorify the commission
of terrorist acts, some Member States and the Internet Referral Unit of Europol
notify Internet companies hosting websites that contain terrorist content and request
that they remove the content on the grounds that it is in breach of the company’s
terms and conditions. 31
56. In mid-2016, the European Commission, together with Facebook, Twitter,
YouTube and Microsoft, established a code of conduct to combat the spread of hate
speech online. In accordance with the code, companies committed to putting into
place clear and effective processes to review notifications of illegal hate speech on
their services so that they can remove or disable access to such content, also
pledging to put into place rules or community guidelines to clarify their prohibit ion
of incitement to violence. 32

C.

Maghreb and West Africa

1.

General
57. States of the Maghreb and West Africa are pooling resources regionally to
combat terrorism, mindful of their similar challenges, including lengthy,
unregulated borders, and endemic problems such as trafficking in weapons, drugs
and persons and the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. In the Lake Chad
Basin region, for example, the Multinational Joint Task Force against Boko Haram
continues to liberate villages, reopen supply lines and secure space for the return of

__________________
31

See ICT4Peace Foundation-Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate “Private sector
engagement in responding to the use of the Internet and ICT for terrorist purposes”, December
2016, available from http://ict4peace.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Private-SectorEngagement-in-Responding-to-the-Use-of-the-Internet-and-ICT-for-Terrorist-Purposes-2.pdf.
32
European Commission, “Code of conduct on countering illegal hate speech online”; European
Union response to Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate questionnaire regarding a
comprehensive international framework to effectively counter terrorist narratives.

14/20

17-01378

S/2017/97

normal governance. In West Africa, the security platform of the Group of 5 for the
Sahel was launched in November to promote regional cooperation among law
enforcement agencies in the region on issues relating to terrorism and transnational
organized crime. The Group has also stepped up its strategic engagement with the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and UN ODC, under the
auspices of the of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre’s Integrated
Assistance for Countering Terrorism Initiative (I-ACT) in the Sahel, to identify
priority capacity-building projects and secure essential support.
58. Following a year and a half of consultations, supported by the Counter Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the President of Tunisia signed a
comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy, which entered into force on 7 November.
In December, at a workshop organized by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the United Nations country team,
participants sought to develop cooperation between the recently established
National Counter-Terrorism Committee of Tunisia, the United Nations and civil
society and to support efforts to ensure that the implementation of the strategy
adheres to international human rights norms and standards. Supported by the United
States Agency for International Development and the United Nations Development
Programme, Mali is also developing a comprehensive national counter -terrorism
and preventing violent extremism strategy. Under I-ACT in Mali, the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, the Executive Directorate and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) are
contributing to the drafting process, which is expected to be completed in March
2017.
2.

Measures to curtail travel and transit
59. States of the Maghreb, especially Tunisia and Morocco, have increased their
sharing of data on foreign terrorist fighters and their use of INTERPOL databases.
Tunisia is extending the use of the INTERPOL I-24/7 global police communications
system to its entire territory. INTERPOL has provided training in the Middle East
and North Africa region in the use of the INTERPOL Illicit Arms Records and
Tracing Management System, continues to support capacity-building efforts and
provides equipment to exploit digital evidence and training in Tunisia.
60. In 2016, the Airport Communication Project of UNODC was extended to the
Middle East and North Africa region with the aim of strengthening law enforcement
capacity at international airports to detect and interdict suspicious travellers, in
particular foreign terrorist fighters travelling to or from conflict zones. The Project
promotes inter-agency collaboration, as well as direct, secure communication
among international airports and provides on-site access to INTERPOL databases. It
currently covers five countries in the Middle East and North Africa region. In
December, 38 Moroccan police officers were trained in the identification of
fraudulent travel documents. Training of law enforcement, customs and intelligence
services in passenger profiling, risk analysis techniques, carg o screening, airport
security and the analysis of advance passenger information and passenger name
records will commence in early 2017. With the strong engagement of the

17-01378

15/20

S/2017/97

Government of Nigeria, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre is currently
developing a training project aimed at strengthening aviation security in Nigeria.
3.

Addressing attacks inspired or enabled by ISIL
61. In West Africa, INTERPOL assists States in the utilization of digital evidence
recovered from terrorist groups and supports the responses of States in the aftermath
of major attacks, such as the attack in Ouagadougou in January 2016 and the attack
in Grand-Bassam, Côte d’Ivoire, in March 2016.
62. In Mali, supporting the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali (see S/2015/364, annex), the Justice and Corrections Section,
the United Nations Police and the United Nations Mine Action Service at
MINUSMA provide targeted capacity-building to assist authorities in effectively
responding to terrorism and facilitate effective the investigation and prosecution of
terrorist offences. This includes training the security forces of Mali to prevent and
respond to suicide attacks. With support from the United Nations Co unter-Terrorism
Centre, MINUSMA will donate 10 training kits on suicide bomb awareness to Mali.
As at 31 October, 65 officers of the national police, gendarmerie and national guard
of Mali had been trained. MINUSMA also supported a training funded by the C entre
for 50 officers of the national police and the gendarmerie of Mali on the
development of an anti-suicide bomb strategy in January 2017.
63. Pursuant to the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, UNODC has
delivered technical assistance and capacity-building on proactive and special
investigation techniques and on prosecution in terrorism cases, in accordance with
the principles of the rule of law and human rights, in countries of the Sahel, in
particular Burkina Faso and the Niger.

4.

Measures to counter the financing of ISIL
64. In October 2016, the Financial Action Task Force, the Intergovernmental
Action Group against Money-Laundering in West Africa and the Action Group
against Money-Laundering in Central Africa published a joint study on the
financing of terrorism in West and Central Africa. 33 The authors of the study
considered a number of existing funding sources, the vulnerability of some sectors,
in particular money remitters and non-profit organizations, and illicit cross-border
cash transfers, as well as the links between terrorist groups and organized criminal
groups, in particular in the Sahel. Four of the eight States of the West African
Economic and Monetary Union (Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali and the Niger)
recently incorporated into national law the revised uniform law on anti -moneylaundering and countering the financing of terrorism adopted by the Union on 2 July
2015. However, an extremely limited number of terrorist financing cases have been
prosecuted and sentenced, and West African financial intelligence units have
received few suspicious transaction reports in relation to terrorist financing.
65. Most West African States have established a national asset-freezing
mechanism pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001),
but these mechanisms remain untested, even with respect to individuals identified in

__________________
33

16/20

Available from: www.fatf-gafi.org/media/fatf/documents/reports/Terrorist-Financing-WestCentral-Africa.pdf.

17-01378

S/2017/97

connection with the major terrorist attacks that occurred in Burkina Faso, Côte
d’Ivoire, Mali and the Niger in 2016. In April 2016, the Niger and Nigeria
established a secure cooperation mechanism between their financial intelligence
units to exchange operational financial information on Boko Haram and its
supporters.
66. Terrorists continue to use kidnapping to generate funds. A project of the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre on combating kidnapping for ransom aims
at building the capacity of the Member States and non-governmental organizations
of East, West and North Africa to achieve the safe release of hostages while also
denying terrorist groups the benefits of ransom payments or political concessions.
The Centre held the first capacity-building events in East and West Africa, in Addis
Ababa in June and in Accra in November 2016, focusing on Government
policymakers and kidnapping for ransom operators. A second workshop, for West
African non-governmental organizations, was held in Dakar in December. A further
three workshops will be held in North Africa in early 2017.
5.

Prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration
67. In Morocco, returnees who are foreign terrorist fighters are arrested and
investigated at length under the supervision of the prosecution service, in order to
assess their psychological and ideological state before they are brought before a
court. Within prisons, measures have been introduced to provide psychological and
medical care and educational and ideological instruction to detained former fighters.
They are given access to education and professional training, as well as training
aimed at promoting the virtues of tolerance and peaceful coexistence provided by
repentant former fighters and imams to demystify extremist discourse. Families are
also involved in the de-radicalization process. The Mohammed VI Foundation for
the Reintegration of Detainees plays a pivotal role in the reintegration of returnees
through support programmes that encourage former detainees to join microprojects
or become self-employed and that place former detainees in local businesses.
Repentant detainees give interviews to the media to urge their fellow detainees to
renounce violence and choose the path of reconciliation and dialogue.
68. As part of a five-year global project to strengthen the legal regime against
foreign terrorist fighters in Middle Eastern, North African and South -East European
States, funded by the European Union and others, UNODC, in cooperation with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, continues to provi de technical
assistance to Member States, focusing on strengthening judicial cooperation in cases
involving foreign terrorist fighters. To date, 208 officials have been trained. 34 The
challenge of converting intelligence into evidence remains key to the suc cessful
prosecution of foreign terrorist fighters and suspected terrorists. The Executive
Directorate and UNODC continue to work with relevant agencies to strengthen the
capacities of States in this area and facilitated a fifth regional workshop for States
of the Maghreb, held in Tunis in January 2017. Mindful of the link between
terrorism and organized crime, the Niger recently extended the powers of its

__________________
34

17-01378

UNODC has carried out several regional activities on the management of violent prisoners for
Egypt, Iraq, Jordan and Lebanon and is planning two national workshops for Egypt and Lebanon
for 2017.

17/20

S/2017/97

specialized counter-terrorism prosecutorial and adjudication units to deal with cases
of organized crime.
69. Recognizing that a robust, effective prosecution capacity is essential to an
effective criminal justice approach, MINUSMA continues to train magistrates of the
recently established Specialized Judiciary Unit in Mali to investigate and prosecute
terrorism, building on previous support to expand its technological capacity,
establish secure holding cells for suspects under judicial investigation and ensure
safe storage of arms and the proper maintenance of physical evidence. MINUSMA
also continues to work with UNODC to train the Specialized Investigation Brigade
of Mali, established in December 2016. Specialized training supported by Canada
will enable the Brigade to analyse telephone metadata.
70. Within the framework of the partnership project of the European Union, the
Government of Nigeria, UNODC and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate on assisting Nigeria in strengthening rule of law -based criminal justice
responses to terrorism, UNODC conducted 13 capacity -building activities designed
to strengthen Nigeria’s ability to investigate, prosecute and adjudicate terrorism
cases.
71. At the request of the Office of the National Security Advisor of Nigeria, the
European Union, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and
UNODC held technical consultations and a high-level meeting with Nigeria in
December on approaches to prosecuting, rehabilitating and reintegrating persons
associated with Boko Haram. The consultations were the first of their kind to be
held in West Africa and highlighted the broad scope of the challenges involved in
developing prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies for returnees.
72. In Mali, the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute
and MINUSMA continue to train religious leaders and prison psychologists and
provide vocational and educational programmes aimed at preventing radicalization
and violent extremism in prison settings. In December, in collaboration with
MINUSMA, the International Centre for Counter-Terrorism and the National
Directorate of Prisons and Supervised Education of Mali, the Institute trained prison
personnel in the management of potential violent extremist prisoners. A final
workshop, to be held in early 2017, will focus on the approach of Mali to the
rehabilitation and social reintegration of violent extremists and the development of a
medium- and long-term programme of activities in the central prison in Bamako.
73. In Morocco, the Institute conducted two 1-week training courses in October
2016 for psychologists at the National Training Centre for Prison Staff and at the
Prison Administration headquarters, as part of a long -term capacity-building project
in the region on rehabilitation and reintegration in prisons. In addition, the Institute
concluded its research to determine the feasibility of viable alternative programming
to incarceration for young offenders in the juvenile justice system in Morocco.
6.

Addressing conflict-related sexual violence and vulnerable groups
74. The treatment of children recruited by, or otherwise associated with, a terrorist
group poses a significant challenge to many Member States. UNODC provides
support to States of North Africa, the Sahel and West Africa in this regard and has
held several subregional workshops. An expert meeting aimed at the development of

18/20

17-01378

S/2017/97

a UNODC handbook on the treatment of children recruited and exploited by
terrorist and violent extremist groups was held in Vienna in December. In the
context of the liberation of Sirte, the Human Rights D ivision of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya learned that some female migrants, asylum seekers and
refugees, may have been abused, physically and sexually, and subsequently forced
into marriage with ISIL fighters. There are a number of different concerns that must
be taken into account in order to provide appropriate support to women and children
who have been held captive by ISIL and systematically targeted for sexual violence,
recognizing that they have been victimized.
7.

Preventing and countering violent extremism
75. In November, the Sahel Working Group of the Global Counterterrorism
Forum, with the participation of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
held an expert workshop and plenary meeting in Algiers o n national plans to prevent
violent extremism. The discussions focused on national plans to prevent violent
extremism, the establishment of networks among regional and national practitioners
and the identification of resources. A joint meeting of OHCHR, th e Commission of
the African Union and the African Centre for Studies and Research on Terrorism on
gender and preventing violent extremism was also held in Algiers in November and
focused on strengthening the gender dimension of the Commission and its membe r
States, programmes and policies on violent extremism, analysis of promising
practices and areas in need of further research and guidance. The participants shared
good practices from Algeria, Mali, Nigeria and Somalia, as well as from Latin
American States.
76. The United Nations Alliance of Civilizations continues to implement projects
under the four pillars of its mandate, which are youth, education, media and
migration, focusing on empowering civil society groups led by young people. In
November, in-person training for young peacebuilders in West Africa focused on
providing young civil society leaders with the skills required to build more tolerant
and peaceful communities.
77. The United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute is
currently implementing a four-year pilot project on countering radicalization and
violent extremism in the Sahel and the Maghreb, aimed at strengthening the
capacity of civil society and non-State actors, including women’s and youth
organizations, the media, cultural and religious associations and local communities,
to deliver innovative activities and disseminate lessons learned and good practices.
During 2016, the Institute also reviewed initiatives to counter violent extremism
designed by non-governmental organizations in Maghreb and the Sahel, with a view
to identifying certain initiatives for evaluation from 2017 onwards.
78. A project of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force Working Group
on Protecting and Promoting Human Rights and the Rule of Law while Countering
Terrorism continues to train law enforcement officials on human rights law and
human rights-compliant responses to counter terrorism. A training event was held in
Abuja in September for 25 mid-to-senior-ranking Nigerian law enforcement and
security officials engaged in counter-terrorism to strengthen their knowledge of
human rights laws and the principles applicable to their area of practice.

17-01378

19/20

S/2017/97

8.

Use of information and communications technology and enhanced cooperation
with the private sector
79. In December, at the third Dakar International Forum on Peace and Security in
Africa, participants noted that the African Union Convention on Cybersecurity and
Personal Data Protection has not yet entered into force, and many African States
lack the necessary legislation to tackle the threat and protect data. However, there is
a need to assist African populations in protecting themselves online, especially in
view of the continent’s high cellular phone and smartphone penetration rate, and
strengthening counter-narratives and alternative narratives to violent extremism and
terrorism for African populations by developing content in multiple languages and
strengthening digital literacy.

V. Observations
80. International, regional and national actors agree on the continued need for the
development of sustained, coordinated responses to the grave threat posed by ISIL
and associated groups and entities. There are 19 international instruments on
counter-terrorism, as well as related regional instruments on international terrorism,
and relevant General Assembly and Security Council resolutions. More needs to be
done, however, to enable effective international cooperation, as Member States
continue to face significant challenges. This is due, in part, to a lack of harmonized
national legislation. The focused engagement of the international community, in
particular in the development of approaches to the management of returnees who are
foreign terrorist fighters, responses to the use of information and communications
technology and financing by terrorist groups and measures to prevent and prosecute
attacks by ISIL, will continue to play an important role. It would be useful for
Member States to continue to share effective national and regional practices and
offer capacity-building assistance to support effective implementation of the
requirements of relevant General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.

20/20

17-01378
