A/RES/56/59

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 February 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 88

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/56/550)]

56/59.

Work of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian
People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Guided also by the principles of international humanitarian law, in particular
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, 1 as well as international standards of human rights, in
particular the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 2 and the International
Covenants on Human Rights, 3
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolution 2443 (XXIII) of
19 December 1968, and relevant resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights,
Recalling also relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Aware of the lasting impact of the uprising (intifada) of the Palestinian people,
Convinced that occupation itself represents a gross violation of human rights,
Gravely concerned about the continuation of the tragic events that have taken
place since 28 September 2000, including the excessive use of force by the Israeli
occupying forces against Palestinian civilians, resulting in numerous deaths and
injuries,
Having considered the reports of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of
the Occupied Territories 4 and the relevant reports of the Secretary-General, 5

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
Resolution 217 A (III).
3
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
4
See A/56/428 and Add.1 and A/56/491.
5
A/56/214–219.
2

01 48882

A/RES/56/59

Recalling the signing of the Declaration of Principles on Interim SelfGovernment Arrangements by the Government of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization in Washington, D.C., on 13 September 1993, 6 as well as the
subsequent implementation agreements, including the Israeli-Palestinian Interim
Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip signed in Washington, D.C., on
28 September 1995, 7
Expressing the hope that, with the progress of the peace process, the Israeli
occupation will be brought to an end and therefore violation of the human rights of
the Palestinian people will cease,
1.
Commends the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the
Occupied Territories for its efforts in performing the tasks assigned to it by the
General Assembly and for its impartiality;
2.
Demands that Israel cooperate
implementing its mandate;

with

the Special Committee in

3.
Deplores those policies and practices of Israel which violate the human
rights of the Palestinian people and other Arabs of the occupied territories, as
reflected in the reports of the Special Committee covering the reporting period;
4.
Expresses grave concern about the situation in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including Jerusalem, as a result of Israeli practices and measures, and
especially condemns the excessive use of force in the past year which has resulted in
more than seven hundred Palestinian deaths and tens of thousands of injuries;
5.
Requests the Special Committee, pending complete termination of the
Israeli occupation, to continue to investigate Israeli policies and practices in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, and other Arab territories
occupied by Israel since 1967, especially Israeli lack of compliance with the
provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,1 and to consult, as appropriate, with the
International Committee of the Red Cross according to its regulations in order to
ensure that the welfare and human rights of the peoples of the occupied territories
are safeguarded and to report to the Secretary-General as soon as possible and
whenever the need arises thereafter;
6.
Also requests the Special Committee to submit regularly to the SecretaryGeneral periodic reports on the current situation in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including Jerusalem;
7.
Further requests the Special Committee to continue to investigate the
treatment of prisoners in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem,
and other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967;
8.

Requests the Secretary-General:

(a) To provide the Special Committee with all necessary facilities, including
those required for its visits to the occupied territories, so that it may investigate the
Israeli policies and practices referred to in the present resolution;

_______________
6
7

2

A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
A/51/889-S/1997/357, annex.

A/RES/56/59

(b) To continue to make available such additional staff as may be necessary
to assist the Special Committee in the performance of its tasks;
(c) To circulate regularly to Member States the periodic reports mentioned in
paragraph 6 above;
(d) To ensure the widest circulation of the reports of the Special Committee
and of information regarding its activities and findings, by all means available,
through the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat and, where
necessary, to reprint those reports of the Special Committee that are no longer
available;
(e) To report to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session on the tasks
entrusted to him in the present resolution;
9.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-seventh session
the item entitled “Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the
Occupied Territories”.
82nd plenary meeting
10 December 2001

3
