United Nations

A/RES/63/124

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 January 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 75

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 11 December 2008
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/439)]

63/124. The law of transboundary aquifers
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter IV of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its sixtieth session, 1 which contains the draft articles on
the law of transboundary aquifers,
0F

Noting that the Commission decided to recommend to the General Assembly
(a) to take note of the draft articles on the law of transboundary aquifers in a
resolution, and to annex the articles to the resolution; (b) to recommend to States
concerned to make appropriate bilateral or regional arrangements for the proper
management of their transboundary aquifers on the basis of the principles
enunciated in the articles; and (c) to also consider, at a later stage, and in view of the
importance of the topic, the elaboration of a convention on the basis of the draft
articles, 2
1F

Emphasizing the continuing importance of the codification and progressive
development of international law, as referred to in Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that the subject of the law of transboundary aquifers is of major
importance in the relations of States,
Taking note of the comments of Governments and the discussion in the Sixth
Committee at the sixty-third session of the General Assembly on this topic,
1.
Welcomes the conclusion of the work of the International Law
Commission on the law of transboundary aquifers and its adoption of the draft
articles and a detailed commentary on the subject;
Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for its continuing
2.
contribution to the codification and progressive development of international law;
3.
Also expresses its appreciation to the International Hydrological
Programme of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

_______________
1
2

08-47823

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/63/10).
Ibid., para. 49.

A/RES/63/124

and to other relevant organizations for the valuable scientific and technical
assistance rendered to the International Law Commission; 3
2F

4.
Takes note of the draft articles on the law of transboundary aquifers,
presented by the Commission, the text of which is annexed to the present resolution,
and commends them to the attention of Governments without prejudice to the
question of their future adoption or other appropriate action;
Encourages the States concerned to make appropriate bilateral or
5.
regional arrangements for the proper management of their transboundary aquifers,
taking into account the provisions of these draft articles;
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session an
6.
item entitled “The law of transboundary aquifers” with a view to examining, inter
alia, the question of the form that might be given to the draft articles.
67th plenary meeting
11 December 2008

Annex
The law of transboundary aquifers
…
Conscious of the importance for humankind of life-supporting groundwater
resources in all regions of the world,
Bearing in mind Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the Charter of the United
Nations, which provides that the General Assembly shall initiate studies and make
recommendations for the purpose of encouraging the progressive development of
international law and its codification,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 1803 (XVII) of 14 December 1962 on
permanent sovereignty over natural resources,
Reaffirming the principles and recommendations adopted by the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development of 1992 in the Rio
Declaration on Environment and Development 4 and Agenda 21, 5
3F

4F

Taking into account increasing demands for freshwater and the need to protect
groundwater resources,
Mindful of the particular problems posed by the vulnerability of aquifers to
pollution,
Convinced of the need to ensure the development, utilization, conservation,
management and protection of groundwater resources in the context of the
promotion of the optimal and sustainable development of water resources for
present and future generations,

_______________
3

Ibid., para. 51.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
5
Ibid., annex II.
4

2

A/RES/63/124

Affirming the importance of international cooperation and good-neighbourliness
in this field,
Emphasizing the need to take into account the special situation of developing
countries,
Recognizing the necessity to promote international cooperation,
…
Part one
Introduction
Article 1
Scope
The present articles apply to:
(a)

Utilization of transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems;

(b) Other activities that have or are likely to have an impact upon such
aquifers or aquifer systems; and
(c) Measures for the protection, preservation and management of such
aquifers or aquifer systems.
Article 2
Use of terms
For the purposes of the present articles:
(a) “aquifer” means a permeable water bearing geological formation
underlain by a less permeable layer and the water contained in the saturated zone of
the formation;
(b) “aquifer system” means a series of two or more aquifers that are
hydraulically connected;
(c) “transboundary aquifer” or “transboundary aquifer system” means,
respectively, an aquifer or aquifer system, parts of which are situated in different
States;
(d) “aquifer State” means a State in whose territory any part of a
transboundary aquifer or aquifer system is situated;
(e) “utilization of transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems” includes
extraction of water, heat and minerals, and storage and disposal of any substance;
(f) “recharging aquifer” means an aquifer that receives a non-negligible
amount of contemporary water recharge;
(g) “recharge zone” means the zone which contributes water to an aquifer,
consisting of the catchment area of rainfall water and the area where such water
flows to an aquifer by run-off on the ground and infiltration through soil;
(h) “discharge zone” means the zone where water originating from an
aquifer flows to its outlets, such as a watercourse, a lake, an oasis, a wetland or an
ocean.

3

A/RES/63/124

Part two
General principles
Article 3
Sovereignty of aquifer States
Each aquifer State has sovereignty over the portion of a transboundary aquifer
or aquifer system located within its territory. It shall exercise its sovereignty in
accordance with international law and the present articles.
Article 4
Equitable and reasonable utilization
Aquifer States shall utilize transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems
according to the principle of equitable and reasonable utilization, as follows:
(a) They shall utilize transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems in a manner
that is consistent with the equitable and reasonable accrual of benefits therefrom to
the aquifer States concerned;
(b) They shall aim at maximizing the long-term benefits derived from the
use of water contained therein;
(c) They shall establish individually or jointly a comprehensive utilization
plan, taking into account present and future needs of, and alternative water sources
for, the aquifer States; and
(d) They shall not utilize a recharging transboundary aquifer or aquifer
system at a level that would prevent continuance of its effective functioning.
Article 5
Factors relevant to equitable and reasonable utilization
1.
Utilization of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system in an equitable and
reasonable manner within the meaning of article 4 requires taking into account all
relevant factors, including:
(a) The population dependent on the aquifer or aquifer system in each
aquifer State;
(b) The social, economic and other needs, present and future, of the aquifer
States concerned;
(c)
(d)
system;
(e)

The natural characteristics of the aquifer or aquifer system;
The contribution to the formation and recharge of the aquifer or aquifer
The existing and potential utilization of the aquifer or aquifer system;

(f) The actual and potential effects of the utilization of the aquifer or aquifer
system in one aquifer State on other aquifer States concerned;
(g) The availability of alternatives to a particular existing and planned
utilization of the aquifer or aquifer system;
(h) The development, protection and conservation of the aquifer or aquifer
system and the costs of measures to be taken to that effect;
(i)

4

The role of the aquifer or aquifer system in the related ecosystem.

A/RES/63/124

2.
The weight to be given to each factor is to be determined by its importance
with regard to a specific transboundary aquifer or aquifer system in comparison with
that of other relevant factors. In determining what is equitable and reasonable
utilization, all relevant factors are to be considered together and a conclusion
reached on the basis of all the factors. However, in weighing different kinds of
utilization of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system, special regard shall be
given to vital human needs.
Article 6
Obligation not to cause significant harm
1.
Aquifer States shall, in utilizing transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems in
their territories, take all appropriate measures to prevent the causing of significant
harm to other aquifer States or other States in whose territory a discharge zone is
located.
2.
Aquifer States shall, in undertaking activities other than utilization of a
transboundary aquifer or aquifer system that have, or are likely to have, an impact
upon that transboundary aquifer or aquifer system, take all appropriate measures to
prevent the causing of significant harm through that aquifer or aquifer system to
other aquifer States or other States in whose territory a discharge zone is located.
3.
Where significant harm nevertheless is caused to another aquifer State or a
State in whose territory a discharge zone is located, the aquifer State whose
activities cause such harm shall take, in consultation with the affected State, all
appropriate response measures to eliminate or mitigate such harm, having due
regard for the provisions of articles 4 and 5.
Article 7
General obligation to cooperate
1.
Aquifer States shall cooperate on the basis of sovereign equality, territorial
integrity, sustainable development, mutual benefit and good faith in order to attain
equitable and reasonable utilization and appropriate protection of their
transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems.
2.
For the purpose of paragraph 1, aquifer States should establish joint
mechanisms of cooperation.
Article 8
Regular exchange of data and information
1.
Pursuant to article 7, aquifer States shall, on a regular basis, exchange readily
available data and information on the condition of their transboundary aquifers or
aquifer systems, in particular of a geological, hydrogeological, hydrological,
meteorological and ecological nature and related to the hydrochemistry of the
aquifers or aquifer systems, as well as related forecasts.
2.
Where knowledge about the nature and extent of a transboundary aquifer or
aquifer system is inadequate, aquifer States concerned shall employ their best efforts
to collect and generate more complete data and information relating to such aquifer
or aquifer system, taking into account current practices and standards. They shall
take such action individually or jointly and, where appropriate, together with or
through international organizations.
3.
If an aquifer State is requested by another aquifer State to provide data and
information relating to an aquifer or aquifer system that are not readily available, it
5

A/RES/63/124

shall employ its best efforts to comply with the request. The requested State may
condition its compliance upon payment by the requesting State of the reasonable
costs of collecting and, where appropriate, processing such data or information.
4.
Aquifer States shall, where appropriate, employ their best efforts to collect and
process data and information in a manner that facilitates their utilization by the
other aquifer States to which such data and information are communicated.
Article 9
Bilateral and regional agreements and arrangements
For the purpose of managing a particular transboundary aquifer or aquifer
system, aquifer States are encouraged to enter into bilateral or regional agreements
or arrangements among themselves. Such agreements or arrangements may be
entered into with respect to an entire aquifer or aquifer system or any part thereof or
a particular project, programme or utilization except insofar as an agreement or
arrangement adversely affects, to a significant extent, the utilization by one or more
other aquifer States of the water in that aquifer or aquifer system, without their
express consent.
Part three
Protection, preservation and management
Article 10
Protection and preservation of ecosystems
Aquifer States shall take all appropriate measures to protect and preserve
ecosystems within, or dependent upon, their transboundary aquifers or aquifer
systems, including measures to ensure that the quality and quantity of water retained
in an aquifer or aquifer system, as well as that released through its discharge zones,
are sufficient to protect and preserve such ecosystems.
Article 11
Recharge and discharge zones
1.
Aquifer States shall identify the recharge and discharge zones of
transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems that exist within their territory. They shall
take appropriate measures to prevent and minimize detrimental impacts on the
recharge and discharge processes.
2.
All States in whose territory a recharge or discharge zone is located, in whole
or in part, and which are not aquifer States with regard to that aquifer or aquifer
system, shall cooperate with the aquifer States to protect the aquifer or aquifer
system and related ecosystems.
Article 12
Prevention, reduction and control of pollution
Aquifer States shall, individually and, where appropriate, jointly, prevent,
reduce and control pollution of their transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems,
including through the recharge process, that may cause significant harm to other
aquifer States. Aquifer States shall take a precautionary approach in view of
uncertainty about the nature and extent of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system
and of its vulnerability to pollution.

6

A/RES/63/124

Article 13
Monitoring
1.
Aquifer States shall monitor their transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems.
They shall, wherever possible, carry out these monitoring activities jointly with
other aquifer States concerned and, where appropriate, in collaboration with
competent international organizations. Where monitoring activities cannot be
carried out jointly, the aquifer States shall exchange the monitored data among
themselves.
2.
Aquifer States shall use agreed or harmonized standards and methodology for
monitoring their transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems. They should identify
key parameters that they will monitor based on an agreed conceptual model of the
aquifers or aquifer systems. These parameters should include parameters on the
condition of the aquifer or aquifer system as listed in article 8, paragraph 1, and also
on the utilization of the aquifers or aquifer systems.
Article 14
Management
Aquifer States shall establish and implement plans for the proper management
of their transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems. They shall, at the request of any
of them, enter into consultations concerning the management of a transboundary
aquifer or aquifer system. A joint management mechanism shall be established,
wherever appropriate.
Article 15
Planned activities
1.
When a State has reasonable grounds for believing that a particular planned
activity in its territory may affect a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system and
thereby may have a significant adverse effect upon another State, it shall, as far as
practicable, assess the possible effects of such activity.
2.
Before a State implements or permits the implementation of planned activities
which may affect a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system and thereby may have a
significant adverse effect upon another State, it shall provide that State with timely
notification thereof. Such notification shall be accompanied by available technical
data and information, including any environmental impact assessment, in order to
enable the notified State to evaluate the possible effects of the planned activities.
3.
If the notifying and the notified States disagree on the possible effect of the
planned activities, they shall enter into consultations and, if necessary, negotiations
with a view to arriving at an equitable resolution of the situation. They may utilize
an independent fact-finding body to make an impartial assessment of the effect of
the planned activities.
Part four
Miscellaneous provisions
Article 16
Technical cooperation with developing States
States shall, directly or through competent international organizations,
promote scientific, educational, technical, legal and other cooperation with
developing States for the protection and management of transboundary aquifers or
aquifer systems, including, inter alia:
7

A/RES/63/124

(a)
fields;

Strengthening their capacity-building in scientific, technical and legal

(b)

Facilitating their participation in relevant international programmes;

(c)

Supplying them with necessary equipment and facilities;

(d)

Enhancing their capacity to manufacture such equipment;

(e) Providing advice on and developing facilities for research, monitoring,
educational and other programmes;
(f) Providing advice on and developing facilities for minimizing the
detrimental effects of major activities affecting their transboundary aquifer or
aquifer system;
(g) Providing
assessments;

advice

in

the

preparation

of

environmental

impact

(h) Supporting the exchange of technical knowledge and experience among
developing States with a view to strengthening cooperation among them in
managing the transboundary aquifer or aquifer system.
Article 17
Emergency situations
1.
For the purpose of the present article, “emergency” means a situation,
resulting suddenly from natural causes or from human conduct, that affects a
transboundary aquifer or aquifer system and poses an imminent threat of causing
serious harm to aquifer States or other States.
2.

The State within whose territory the emergency originates shall:

(a) Without delay and by the most expeditious means available, notify other
potentially affected States and competent international organizations of the
emergency;
(b) In cooperation with potentially affected States and, where appropriate,
competent international organizations, immediately take all practicable measures
necessitated by the circumstances to prevent, mitigate and eliminate any harmful
effect of the emergency.
3.
Where an emergency poses a threat to vital human needs, aquifer States,
notwithstanding articles 4 and 6, may take measures that are strictly necessary to
meet such needs.
4.
States shall provide scientific, technical, logistical and other cooperation to
other States experiencing an emergency. Cooperation may include coordination of
international emergency actions and communications, making available emergency
response personnel, emergency response equipment and supplies, scientific and
technical expertise and humanitarian assistance.
Article 18
Protection in time of armed conflict
Transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems and related installations, facilities
and other works shall enjoy the protection accorded by the principles and rules of
international law applicable in international and non-international armed conflict
and shall not be used in violation of those principles and rules.
8

A/RES/63/124

Article 19
Data and information vital to national defence or security
Nothing in the present articles obliges a State to provide data or information
vital to its national defence or security. Nevertheless, that State shall cooperate in
good faith with other States with a view to providing as much information as
possible under the circumstances.

9
