S/2021/519

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 June 2021
Original: English

Situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2531 (2020), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) until 30 June 2021 and requested the Secretary-General to report to the
Council every three months on the implementation of the resolution. The present
report covers major developments in Mali since the previous report (S/2021/299)
dated 26 March 2021. As requested in the statement by the President of the Security
Council dated 15 October 2020 (S/PRST/2020/10), it also includes updates on how
the Mission supports the ongoing political transition in the country.

II. Major developments
2.
After some progress in the implementation of the transition road map, notably
the issuance of the electoral calendar and the launch of preparations for the upcoming
elections, there was some political upheaval during the reporting period, marked by
the arrest and subsequent forced resignation of the President of the transitional
Government, Bah N’Daw, and the Prime Minister, Moctar Ouane. Previously,
following continued criticism by political and civil society actors, step s had been
taken by the transitional Government to render political processes more inclusive.
Progress in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
remains slow and was overshadowed by the assassination, on 13 April, of the
President of the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad (CMA) and Secretary General of the Mouvement arabe de l’Azawad-CMA.
Political developments
3.
Political and civil society actors criticized the transition authorities for a
perceived lack of inclusivity and clarity in the transition process. On 31 March, the
President of the transitional Government, established the Comité d’orientation
stratégique sur les réformes politiques et institutionelles by decree. It will serve as an
advisory committee to support the Prime Minister on political and institutional
reforms, notably on territorial reorganization, constitutional review and electoral
reforms.

21-06729 (E)

040621

*2106729*

S/2021/519

4.
The advisory committee, which comprises 50 members, 10 of whom are women,
includes representatives from the transitional Government, political parties, signatory
armed movements, academia, civil society, private sector, labour unions and
traditional and religious leaders, held its inaugural meeting on 19 April. The 20 per
cent representation of women on the committee falls short of the 30 per cent
requirement stipulated by law. The United Nations and the African Union continued
to promote the participation of women in the political transition through three
dedicated workshops.
5.
A delegation of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
led by the former President of Nigeria, Goodluck Jonathan, visited Mali from 9 to
12 May. With the representation of MINUSMA, the African Union and ECOWAS in
Mali, the delegation met with transition authorities, as well as with representatives of
political parties, civil society, religious leaders and the diplomatic corps. In its final
communiqué, issued on 12 May, ECOWAS welcomed the progress and noted
concerns expressed by stakeholders, notably with regard to the prioritization of
reforms; the urgent need for a consensus on which structure or structures will oversee
forthcoming elections; territorial reorganization; and transparency and inclusivity in
the transition process.
6.
On 14 May, the Prime Minister resigned and was immediately reappointed; and
started negotiations to form a new Government. The reshuffle was preceded by a
series of meetings initiated by the President of the transitional Government with
representatives of political parties and civil society, notably between the President
and the Mouvement du 5 juin-Rassemblement des forces patriotiques (M5-RFP) on
6 May at which the latter called for the transitional Government’s resignation and
adjustments to the transition trajectory. Against the backdrop of these developments,
on 16 May, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali and Head of
MINUSMA and the Special Representatives of the African Union and ECOWAS in
Mali, actively engaged national actors in efforts to reduce tensions and facilitate
consensus on the way forward.
7.
On 24 May, the President of the transitional Government issued a decree
announcing the appointment of a new Government. In the new Cabinet, the Ministers
of Defence and Security, both members of the Comité national pour le salut du peuple,
which in August 2020 overthrew the former President, Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta, were
replaced. The same day, the President of the transitional Government, the Prime
Minister and several government officials were arrested and brought to the military
garrison in the town of Kati, were they were detained by the members of the military.
The ECOWAS delegation returned to Bamako on 25 May to request the release of the
detainees and broker a solution. The resignation of the President of the transitional
Government and Prime Minister was announced on 26 May. On 28 May, the Supreme
Court appointed former Vice-President Assimi Goïta, a military officer and member
of the Comité national pour le salut du peuple, as the new President of the transitional
Government. On 30 May, the Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS held an
extraordinary summit in Accra. They condemned what they referred to as a “second
coup d’État” and suspended Mali from the Organization, in line with its regulations.
8.
Strikes by civil servants persisted across various sectors of public
administration. Discussions aimed at assuaging social tensions, initiated by the
Government on 13 May, did not lead to a resolution and the Union nationale des
travailleurs du Mali, whose objectives are perceived by some as going beyond
addressing working conditions in the public and private sectors, began a five -day
strike on 17 May.

2/20

21-06729

S/2021/519

Preparations for the holding of elections
9.
On 14 April, the transitional Government issued the electoral calendar: the
constitutional referendum is expected to be held on 31 October 2021; municipal,
regional and cercle elections will be held on 26 December 2021; and combined
legislative and presidential elections will be held on 27 February 2022. The second
round of presidential and legislative elections, if necessary, are scheduled for 13 and
20 March 2022, respectively.
10. There were mixed reactions to the announcement of the electoral calendar.
While the announcement was welcomed by Yelema and the Alliance pour le
renforcement de la démocratie political parties, the Mouvement du 5 juin Rassemblement des forces patriotiques criticized the perceived lack of inclusive
consultations prior to the publication of the calendar. Civil society actors stressed the
need for transition authorities to address popular grievances before holding elections.
11. On 13 April, the transitional Government convened representatives of political
parties to the fifth session of the Cadre de concertation national, to discuss
outstanding issues, including the composition of the Independent National Electoral
Commission, the replacement of deputies in the National Assembly and territorial
reorganization. Several political parties underscored that they found that the status
quo was not acceptable, with some of them calling for the establishment of a single
electoral management body prior to the holding of elections, but no final decision was
taken on this matter.
12. Voter registration operations across the country began on 1 April and will
conclude on 10 June. Voter registration for the diaspora was launched on 5 May.

III. Implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali
13. On 13 April, the President of CMA and Secretary-General of the Mouvement
arabe de l’Azawad-CMA, Sidi Brahim Ould Sidatt, was assassinated in front of his
home in Bamako by two unidentified armed individuals. The transitional Government
held a ceremony during which he was granted a posthumous award in recognition of
his contribution to the peace process.
14. The assassination of Mr. Siddat was widely condemned by national and
international actors. Both CMA and the Plateforme des mouvements du 14 juin 2014
d’Alger (Plateforme) issued separate statements condemning the assassination.
Members of the international community, including the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, issued statements condemning acts of violence, calling upon the
transition authorities to conduct a transparent, thorough investigation and urging
signatory parties to continue efforts towards the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Transition authorities have initiated a judicial
investigation. MINUSMA stands ready to assist if necessary.
15. The Agreement Monitoring Committee met outside of Bamako for the second
time since its creation. On 29 March, at its 42nd session in Kayes, Kayes Region, the
Committee noted the lack of further progress in the execution of previous
commitments, including the decision to broaden women’s participation in the
mechanisms of the Committee and operationalization of the reconstituted army
battalion already deployed in Kidal. The Committee called for concrete advances on
priority actions, notably the resumption of consultations on defence and security
issues, the launch of the next phase in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, the adoption of the law on the creation of the territorial police

21-06729

3/20

S/2021/519

and the finalization of the territorial reorganization process in the context of the
operationalization of Ménaka and Taoudenni Regions, including Achibogho and
Almoustrat Cercles.
16. On 6 April, CMA and Plateforme established the Cadre stratégique permanent,
a body to synergize efforts in the implementation of the Agreement and to
operationalize joint mechanisms to tackle the deteriorating security and humanitarian
situation in the country. On 6 May, building on the creation of the Cadre stratégique
permanent, CMA and Plateforme leaders signed an agreement in Rome, formally
creating a security and political coalition.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and redeployment of the
reconstituted, reformed and inclusive Malian Defence and Security Forces
17. On 23 March, MINUSMA completed the construction of a transit camp in Kati,
Koulikoro Region, and handed it over to the transitional Government of Mali on
12 April. The camp has the capacity to accommodate up to 250 former combatants
for training prior to redeployment as part of the reconstituted units of the Malian
Defence and Security Forces.
18. On 18 and 19 March 2021, a workshop was held on the modalities and eligibility
criteria for the planned disarmament and demobilization of an additional 1,800
combatants who had opted to be reintegrated into civilian life as a result of the road
map of 28 December 2020. The workshop will be held in the six central and northern
regions (targeting 300 ex-combatants per location). Individuals deemed medically
unfit would also benefit from the socioeconomic support. On 30 April, 422
ex-combatants were integrated into the Malian defence and security forces following
three months of training. They are now awaiting redeployment. This brings to 1,735
the number of ex-combatants from signatory movements integrated into the Malian
defence and security forces. The delay in integrating the remaining 1,265
ex-combatants (of the envisaged 3,000) is due to continued disagreement between the
transitional Government and armed movements on quota allocation and additional
demands by armed movements that the other provisions of the Agreement be
simultaneously implemented.
19. The implementation of the community violence reduction programme continued
across the regions with the aim to support the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process. For the fiscal year 2020/21, 16 community violence reduction
projects targeting 30,057 direct beneficiaries (including 15,027 women) are ongoing
in Kidal, Gao, Timbuktu and Mopti Regions. The projects are focused, inter alia, on
vocational training, basic infrastructural rehabilitation and income-generating
activities.
Redeployment of State administration
20. On 11 April, following negotiations, 30 municipal interim authorities, were
installed for Taoudenni Region (29 per cent of which were female representatives),
as well as the three remaining district-level interim authorities for Foum el’ Alba,
Bou-Djébéha and Al-Ourche, also in Taoudenni Region (with 30 per cent female
representatives). This brings the total number of interim authorities installed at the
municipal level to 44 out of 50 (with 20 per cent female representatives).
21. As at 30 April, 18 out of 131 civil administrators (14 per cent) were physically
deployed to their duty stations in northern regions, including in Gao, Kidal, Ménaka,
Taoudenni and Timbuktu. Overall, 5 out of 24 prefects (20 per cent) and 9 out of 102
sub-prefects (9 per cent) were present at their duty stations, a decrease compared with
the previous reporting period.

4/20

21-06729

S/2021/519

22. The absence of State officials in the regions has created a security vacuum as
armed movements continue to act as the sole security providers, further hampering
the effective restoration of State authority. On 22 March, CMA and Plateforme signed
a memorandum of understanding on the western zone (corresponding to Timbuktu
Region), agreeing to: (a) peaceful and amicable settlements of all issues in the western
zone; (b) the organization of joint missions to provide security for the population and
their property throughout the area; (c) the establishment of a joint security post in
Lerneb, Timbuktu Region and in any other localities when deemed necessary by the
parties; and (d) the establishment of a joint commission to follow up on the
memorandum.
23. In Timbuktu Region, schools reopened in Tonka, Goundam Cercle. Previously,
29 schools in the area had either been closed or transformed into Qur’anic schools.
The reopening follows an agreement brokered by the former traditional judge of
Timbuktu with an extremist group affiliated with Jama'a Nusrat ul-Islam wa
al-Muslimin (JNIM), earlier in March. The agreement called for the respect of the
conditions imposed by extremists, specifically separation of girls from boys, head
covering for girls (hijab) and provision of Arabic lessons. Schools in the villages of
Ata and Koronga, controlled by armed elements, were reportedly not allowed to
re-open, as they were designated to become Qur’anic schools.
24. There was minimal progress in the process leading to the transfer of
decentralized State technical services. Some initial consultations on the process were
launched by the Ministry of Territorial Administration and Decentralization,
including at the local level with MINUSMA support, but they have yet to translate
into tangible outcomes.
25. As contemplated in the national budget for 2021, the overall progress towards
the 30 per cent of State revenues to be transferred to local authorities stands at
25.4 per cent for the fiscal year. MINUSMA intends to intensify engagement with
central and local authorities to ensure effective execution.
Northern Development Zone
26. On 29 April, the steering committee of the sustainable development fund,
chaired by the Prime Minister, finalized the selection of the first 16 pr ojects to be
funded, a major milestone in the fund’s operationalization. Of these, nine projects
target the five regions of northern Mali, representing approximately 31 per cent of the
total funds allocated (three target the centre; four the south). Tensions between the
Ministry of Territorial Administration and Decentralization and the interregional
advisory council for the Northern Development Zone over the relocation of the fund’s
seat from Gao to Bamako continued to hamper the implementation of the proj ects.

IV. Stabilization and the restoration of State authority in
the centre
27. From 19 to 21 March, the Prime Minister, Moctar Ouane, led a delegation of 12
Ministers to the centre of Mali. MINUSMA continued its support to the Cadre
politique de gestion de la crise au Centre du Mali. The aim is to ensure continued
delivery on intended objectives of its stabilization strategy and to support the
development of the new government action plan for the centre.
28. Although the security situation in central Mali remains precarious, there was a
relative decrease in intercommunity violence in a number of districts, notably in
Bankass and Koro districts, Bandiagara Region, following the conclusion of a series
of local peace agreements since September 2020. In Niono district, Ségou Region, a
21-06729

5/20

S/2021/519

ceasefire agreement was brokered on 14 March by the High Islamic Council of Mali.
The one-month ceasefire was extended indefinitely on 14 April. In Douentza Region,
violence continued, including a high number of attacks on positions of the Malian
defence and security forces and the use of improvised explosive devices along the
highway between Mopti and Gao.
29. The Mission continued its efforts to reduce community-based violence and
strengthen reconciliation at the community level in targeted areas. Together with the
regional reconciliation support teams in Mopti and Ségou, MINUSMA supported the
establishment of three communal reconciliation committees, conducted 11
inter-community dialogues and facilitated the implementation of five written and
verbal peace agreements, to reconcile communities and strengthen social cohesion.
Following several visits in March and April to Ogossogou to identify entry points for
mediation and reconciliation, from 20 to 22 May the Mission conducted, together with
the regional reconciliation support teams, the first intercommunity dialogue bringing
the communities of Ogossogou Dogon and Ogossogou Peulh together at the
MINUSMA forward base in Ogossogou.
30. MINUSMA also supported the regional reconciliation support teams in
conducting intercommunity dialogues in the Fakala Commune (Djenne district) on
24 and 25 March. On 28 and 29 March, a dialogue in Fatoma Commune (Mopti
district) led to the signing of a road map outlining the municipality’s path to
intercommunity peace. A dialogue was also conducted in Kewa Commune (Djenne
district) on 10 and 11 April, aimed at addressing the increasing tensions in the area.
Between 27 March and 3 May, intercommunity dialogues were also conducted in the
areas of Bénéna, Zinzana, Dogofri, Moninnpébougou, Niono, San and Yérédon
Saniona. These initiatives resulted in four peace accords through which the
communities agreed to ensure more equal access to natural resources, freedom of
movement, cease armed hostilities and use reconciliation committees for the peaceful
settlement of disputes. In Bandiagara, MINUSMA launched conflict resolution
initiatives focusing on the six communes, which account for some 90 per cent of the
violence in the cercle.
31. Access and management of land and natural resources remain among the root
causes of intercommunity conflicts in central Mali. In response to these challenges,
MINUSMA provided capacity-building for the Government’s land commissions for
improved land management, including for 24 communal committees, and established
150 village committees in Bankass and Djenne Cercles.
32. The MINUSMA force component continued Operations Buffalo and Mongoose
in central Mali to protect civilians in areas repeatedly affected by violence. The
operations continue to facilitate the restoration of the State presence and State
authority and reduce violence. On 23 and 24 April, Operation Buffalo supported, inter
alia, missions of the MINUSMA civilian components to Tori and Soukoura
Communes in Bankass Cercle, together with the regional reconciliation support
teams, which offered the opportunity to follow up on the reconciliation process
between the local communities.
33. In the centre, in Mopti Region, United Nations police trained 103 Malian police
officers in securing electoral processes, protection of civilians and countering
terrorism. One of these training sessions was conducted in cooperation with the
European Union capacity-building mission in Mali.
Restoration of State authority
34. The presence of State authorities remained limited outside the centres of regions
and cercles. In the five regions of central Mali, 7 of 15 prefects (46 per cent), and 18

6/20

21-06729

S/2021/519

of 93 (19 per cent) sub-prefects were physically present at their duty station as of
30 April.
35. To support the restoration of State authority, MINUSMA carried out capacitybuilding training on decentralization and public administration to some 200 officials
and elected authorities in Mopti and Ségou. The Mission also completed the
rehabilitation of the sub-prefecture in Sangha, in Bandiagara Cercle, and initiated a
project for the provision of equipment and material for the sub-prefecture in Konna,
Mopti Region, and for three collèges transitoires in Taoudenni Region. The projects
improved the functioning of, and access to, public administrative structures.
36. MINUSMA finalized the construction of the offices of the gendarmerie brigade
of Somadougou and the gendarmerie post in Sofara.
Fight against impunity
37. On 24 March, in a significant development, an individual was convicted by the
Court of Assizes of Bamako, in relation to two attacks committed against MINUSMA
personnel in Bamako in 2015, including the killing of a peacekeeper on 25 May 2015.
While this individual appeared alone at his trial, his eight co-accused defendants were
convicted and sentenced in absentia. This is the first direct conviction in Mali for the
killing of a peacekeeper. Since the establishment of the Mission, 144 peacekeepers
have been killed as a result of malicious acts, including 10 since 1 December 2020.
38. Limited progress was made in the fight against impunity during the past year.
Trials for the most serious violations or abuses of international human rights law
committed in central Mali in 2019 and 2020 are yet to be held.
39. In April, construction began of the satellite office of the Specialized Judicial
Unit on Terrorism and Transnational Organized Crime in Mopti.

V. Regional developments
40. The security situation in the Sahel subregion continued to deteriorate. The
presence of terrorist armed groups was reported in the areas between Mali and
Mauritania and between the Niger and Chad and in the tri-border area between
Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger. Coordinated operations of the Joint Force of th e
Group of Five for the Sahel, national and international forces and Task Force Takuba,
were ongoing in the tri-State area.
41. The Heads of State of the Group of Five for the Sahel, the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and the President of France, held an extraordinary summit
in N’Djamena on 23 April, at which they reiterated their common support for the
transition in Chad and towards ensuring stability in the region.
42. MINUSMA continued to provide logistical support to the Group of Five for the
Sahel in compliance with the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations
support to non-United Nations security forces. Since March 2021, the Mission has
provided the Joint Force with 734,500 litres of fuel and 13,160 litres of lubricant.

VI. Major security developments
43. Both Jama'a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin and Islamic State in the Greater
Sahara continued attacks against the local population and international forces in
northern Mali. Demands by extremists for illegal taxes and the imposition of their
own interpretation of sharia law (sometimes achieved through coercive means such
as abductions) are rampant, especially in Douentza, Gao and Ménaka Regions, as well
21-06729

7/20

S/2021/519

as the adjoining southern parts of Timbuktu Region. Extremists also continue to
expand operations into the southern San and Sikasso Regions. In Gao and Ménaka
Regions, presumed extremists killed members of local populations who refused to
pay taxes or were suspected of providing information to armed forces. On 25 March,
combatants presumed to be from Jama'a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin and Islamic
State in the Greater Sahara clashed in Tagagan village, Ansongo Cercle, Gao Region,
which led to the death of two elements of the former and seven of the latter.
44. Terrorist activities in central Mali increased. In Bandiagara Region, presumed
extremists attacked various Dogon villages, killing and wounding members of several
dozo self-defence groups. On 22 March, presumed extremists attacked a convoy of
international forces near Hombori where the assailants detonated an improvised
explosive device, followed by direct fire. The same day, assailants launched an
indirect fire attack against the camp of the Malian Armed Forces in Mondoro. On
24 March, in Mopti Region, presumed Katiba Macina elements attacked a position of
the Sékou Bolly Fulani militia in Ouro-Guembé district of Sévaré town, killing two
and injuring five. In parallel, members of the Dan Na Ambassagou militia also appear
to be preying on local populations. On 27 March, presumed members of the Dan Na
Ambassagou militia abducted and killed two members of the Dogon community in
Piron, as well as the village chief who tried to negotiate their release. On 2 and
6 April, presumed extremists attacked the Malian Armed Forces in Diafarabé and
Konna, respectively, killing 4 soldiers and injuring another 20.
45. On 2 April, the camp for the MINUSMA force component in Aguelhok
withstood a complex attack by terrorist armed elements. Chadian troops launched a
successful close-combat counter-offensive and neutralized several enemy pick-up
trucks. The attack resulted in the death of 4 peacekeepers and in another 17 being
injured. Around 40 suspected terrorist elements were killed. A suspect was also
detained and handed over to the Malian authorities.
46. Some terrorist activity was also observed in San and Sikasso Regions. On
31 March, a Malian armed forces vehicle reportedly hit an improvised explosive
device near Tiéré, Koutiala Cercle in Sikasso Region, injuring two soldiers. On
4 April, presumed extremists attacked a patrol of the Malian Armed Forces, killing
one soldier and injuring three others near Mafoune, in San Region.

A.

Asymmetric attacks and other attacks
47. The number of attacks with improvised explosive device decreased. Since July
2020, a slight reduction in the total number of improvised explosive device attacks
was registered, with 137 incidents compared with 168 incidents in the same period in
2019 and 2020. As a result of these attacks, 7 MINUSMA peacekeepers were killed
and 87 injured, compared with 4 killed and 69 injured during the same period in 2020.
48. A total of 44 asymmetric attacks were carried out against national and
international forces, MINUSMA and signatory armed groups, 23 per cent of which
occurred in the north, including 8 in Timbuktu, 7 in Gao, 5 in Kidal and 3 in Ménaka
Regions. There were 21 attacks in the centre, including 17 in Mopti and 4 in Ségou
Regions. This marked a decrease in attacks in central Mali from the previous reporting
period, in which 57 attacks were recorded against security forces and signatory
groups.
49. There were 14 attacks against MINUSMA during the reporting period, resulting
in 4 peacekeepers killed and 50 injured. This marked a decrease in the number of
attacks compared with the previous period, during which 39 attacks against
MINUSMA were reported and in which 6 peacekeepers and 1 military contractor were
killed and 48 were injured.

8/20

21-06729

S/2021/519

50. The Malian defence and security forces were targeted in 25 attacks, with 49
killed, including 47 members of the Malian Armed Forces and 2 members of the
police and gendarmerie, and 55 injured, including 53 members of the Malian Armed
Forces and 2 members of security forces.

B.

Support for Malian defence and security institutions
51. As a result of restrictions owing to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, United Nations police continued providing online training courses to
Malian security forces on community-oriented policing and crime scene management.
United Nations police also conducted training sessions for the benefit of the
gendarmerie provosts in Gao, in cooperation with Operation Barkhane. United
Nations police provided training to a total of 1,026 members of the Malian security
forces, including 84 women.
52. To strengthen the presence and security of the Malian security forces in the
regions, MINUSMA constructed a police station in Labézanga, Gao Region.

C.

Explosive threat mitigation
53. To enhance national capacity in the mitigation of explosive hazards, the Mine
Action Service provided training to the Malian security and defence forces in
advanced explosive ordnance disposal. Since July 2020, Malian instructors
previously trained and mentored by MINUSMA successfully delivered over 15
courses in basic explosive ordnance disposal and threat mitigation to the Malian
security and defence forces, who are demonstrating increasing levels of ownership
and self-sufficiency.

VII. Rule of law
54. MINUSMA continued efforts to support the return and effectiveness of State
judicial entities in the north and centre. From 19 to 22 April, for the first time since
2012, the Judge of Ansongo, Gao Region, held a hearing in his jurisdiction with
technical and logistical support from MINUSMA. The Mission also assisted in the
organization of mobile hearings in Bourem on 19 March, and in Ansongo from 14 to
16 April, both in Gao Region. In order to improve transparency and integrity of state
institutions and to build public trust, the Mission provided capacity-building for
judicial services on inspections and audits for 50 judicial and correction officials in
Bamako. On 5 May, the transitional Government joined the Global Judicial Integrity
Network to become a pilot site for judicial ethics training.
55. On 1 April, the 2021 criminal trial session of the Court of Assizes of Bamako
ended with 12 terrorism-related trials completed, resulting in 28 defendants found
guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment and 1 acquitted. This brings to 176 the
number of terrorism suspects tried since the Specialized Judicial Unit became
operational in 2017, with MINUSMA support, leading to 143 convictions and 33
acquittals.
56. The Mission continued to provide technical and material assistance to reinforce
prison security, including through the operationalization of a rapid intervention team
and the establishment of an early warning system on 6 and 7 April to identify security
threats, handle security incidents and detect signs of radicalization. MINUSMA
further supported the implementation of the national policy on the prevention of and

21-06729

9/20

S/2021/519

fight against violent extremism and terrorism through capacity-building activities for
the resocialization of detainees.

VIII. Protection of civilians
57. As at 26 May, a total of 307 attacks against civilians had been reported, a small
decrease compared to the previous reporting period, which coincided with the dry
season. As a result of these attacks, 158 civilians were killed (3 women, 4 children),
85 were injured (5 women, 6 children) and 125 were abducted (3 women, 1 child).
The Mission’s early warning tracking system allowed for early and integrated
responses to prevent and mitigate threats or attacks against civilians, including the
deployment of deterrent aerial and overland patrols.
58. In Timbuktu Region, the main threat to civilians remained the activity of violent
extremist armed groups, including abduction and intimidation, illegal taxation and
attempts to impose their own interpretation of sharia law. Some local authorities and
community leaders have negotiated with terrorist groups, specifically to obtain
permission to reopen schools. The use of temporary operating bases including civilian
staff was piloted in Bourem, Timbuktu Region. The aim of using temporary operating
bases is the protection of civilians, including through supporting broader United
Nations conflict resolution and mediation efforts, as well as national authorities’
efforts in securing and improving the protective environment. Civilian staff used
temporary operating bases as staging points, and were able to access remote areas that
would otherwise be out of reach, gathering critical information for follow -up by
MINUSMA and the United Nations country team. Subsequently, civilian integration
in the temporary operating base was replicated in Tessit town, in Gao Region, as well
as Soumpi and Niafunké, in Timbuktu Region, as part of Operation Mongoose.
59. In Gao Region, civilians also continued to live under the constant threat of
violent extremist groups, who are becoming more aggressive about imposing their
religious norms, including in the form of targeted kidnappings and killings. The
number of internally displaced persons increased in the southern Ansongo Cercle,
mostly in Labézanga and Tessit, the risk is that the burden on host communities could
stir intercommunity tensions. The ongoing deployment of formed police units from
Gao to Ansongo remains of paramount importance to establishing a protective
environment. Gold-mining sites in the Gourma area continued to fuel criminal
activities, including illegal taxation by armed and violent extremist groups.
60. While the security situation in Ménaka town remained relatively calm, the
remaining cercles are experiencing a precarious security situation that makes civilians
more vulnerable. Recurrent clashes between Jama'a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin
and Islamic State in the Greater Sahara were observed in Anderamboukane Cercle,
but also between violent extremist groups and members of the Mouvement pour le
salut de l’Azawad of the Daoussak (MSA-D). These resulted in large movements of
internally displaced persons from those areas to Ménaka town.
61. In Kidal Region, in the aftermath of the 2 April attack against the MINUSMA
camp in Aguelhok, the apparent fear that civilians have of further attacks against
international forces and of either becoming collateral damage or of being perceived
as enemies, has caused the temporary displacement of people in the already scarcely
populated area.

10/20

21-06729

S/2021/519

IX. Human rights situation
62. The reporting period was characterized by a significant deterioration in the
human rights situation, mainly owing to an increase in violence against civilians,
including in some areas in the south. Attacks by violent extremist groups continued
to account for numerous abuses, including killings, serious bodily injuries and forced
civilian displacements Violations in the context of security or counter-terrorism
operations also persisted, while a substantial surge in abductions, largely perpetrated
by community-based armed groups and militias in central Mali, severely undermined
the enjoyment of fundamental human rights and freedoms in the affected areas. The
situation of women and girls remained dire in parts of Mali, especially given that they
were the primary target of conflict-related sexual violence and were subjected to
various human rights abuses by armed groups.
63. In this respect, MINUSMA documented 422 human rights violations (181) and
abuses (241), 13 more than the previous period. These included extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions (39), other killings (41), injuries (72), torture or ill treatment (51), enforced disappearances (6), abductions (118), illegal arrests and
detentions, including cases of prolonged detention and violations of due process
guarantees (95), as well as instances of massive and forced displacement of civilians,
death threats and intimidation, looting and the destruction of property.
64. The violations and abuses were mostly documented in central Mali, including
in the Regions of Bandiagara (51), Douentza (82), Mopti (21) and Ségou (34), while
others were documented in the northern Regions of Gao (38), Kidal (34), Ménaka
(42) and Timbuktu (17), as well as in the southern Region of Kayes (16), Sikasso (17)
and Bamako district (70). The violations and abuses were attributed to national forces
(92), judicial authorities (68), armed forces of the Niger (21), signatory and compliant
armed groups (34), community-based armed groups and militias (97) and violent
extremist groups (110).
65. In central Mali, the Dan Na Ambassagou militia was involved in dozens of
abductions of civilians from Dogon villages that refused to or did not contribute the
requested amount for the militia’s “war efforts” in lieu of the forced conscription of
the villagers. Furthermore, the militia, in addition to other community-based groups,
including Guina Dogon, Baguine-Sô and Groupe Fato were responsible for several
inflammatory online messages that incited violence and hatred against members of
the Fulani population.
66. On 18 March, members of the Malian Armed Forces summarily executed 2 men,
injured 4 others, ill-treated at least 30 persons, and looted and destroyed civilian
property in Boni, Douentza Region, following the detonation of an improvised
explosive device that resulted in the injuring of three elements of the Malian defence
and security forces close to the village.
67. On 30 March, MINUSMA released a report on the findings of the human rights
investigation into the air strike carried out by the armed forces of France engaged in
Operation Barkhane in which at least 22 persons were killed, including alleged
members of the Katiba Serma extremist group, with at least 8 other civilians injured.
In a communiqué dated 30 March, the Ministry of Armed Forces of France stated that
on 3 January the French armed forces carried out an air strike “targeting an armed
terrorist group”, expressed reservations about the methodology used by the United
Nations and claimed that the report was based on “unverifiable local testimonies” and
“unsubstantiated hypotheses”.
68. It was reported that on 27 April, armed forces of the Niger summarily executed
at least 19 civilian men and injured 1, and were responsible for the enforced

21-06729

11/20

S/2021/519

disappearance of another man during a cross-border military operation in Bana
village, Ménaka Region. An investigation was launched by the authorities of the
Niger.
69. The United Nations recorded 172 grave violations against 126 children, a
decrease compared with 236 violations against 183 children during the previous
period. Most of the verified violations were attributed to unidentified armed elements
(77), while the remaining violations were attributed to the Haut Conseil pour l’unité
de l’Azawad (19), Mouvement national pour la libération de l’Azawad (35),
Mouvement arabe de l’Azawad-CMA (7), Dan Na Ambassagou (5), Ganda Koy (5),
Coalition du peuple de l’Azawad (5), Jama'a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin (4),
Katiba Macina (2), and Islamic State in the Greater Sahara (1). The violations were
verified in the Regions of Mopti (48), Kidal (45), Timbuktu (35), Gao (27), Ségou (8),
Ménaka (7) and Sikasso (2). A total of 35 children (27 boys and 8 girls) were killed
(19) and maimed (16). In addition, 71 children (60 boys and 11 girls) aged between
10 and 17 years were recruited by armed groups. Of those children, 44 have been
separated from armed groups and handed over to civilian child protection actors. On
18 March, the United Nations held a high-level workshop with CMA on the
implementation of their action plan to address grave violations against children. The
workshop identified priority activities for the next six months, including investigative
visits by the United Nations to selected CMA camps to facilitate efforts to identify
children, separate them from armed groups and arrange for their care.
70. Nine violations reportedly occurred during joint military operations by
international forces and the Malian Armed Forces against armed groups, and three
during clashes between armed groups and dozos.
71. Through the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict related sexual violence, MINUSMA documented two cases of conflict-related sexual
violence, including the gang rape of one Fulani woman by dozos in Niono, Ségou
Region, in mid-March, and the gang rape of another woman by unidentified armed
men in the city of Ménaka, Ménaka Region, on 27 March. Overall, cases of conflict related sexual violence remain underreported owing to lack of medical and
psychosocial services in various conflict-affected areas, sociocultural reasons and
stigmatization, fear of reprisal by the perpetrators and lack of accountability for the
crimes.
72. MINUSMA continued to support the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation
Commission, which held its third public hearing on 3 April, focusing on cases of
enforced disappearance since 1960. Fourteen victims (12 men and 2 women) testified
during the hearing. With the support of MINUSMA and the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the Commission
also conducted a conference on reparations in Bamako on 16 and 17 March in support
of the adoption of the draft national policy on reparations. As of 11 May, a total of
20,451 depositions, half of which were made by women, have been registered by the
Commission.

X. Humanitarian situation
73. The humanitarian situation remains dire, with 5.9 million people in need of
assistance. The persistent security crisis has led to an increase in the number of
internally displaced persons, from 332,000 to 346,864, over the reporting period,
56 per cent of whom are women and 61 per cent children. Conflict spreading into
parts of southern Mali and attacks against civilians have put a severe strain on
communities, resulting in greater population movements and an increased need for

12/20

21-06729

S/2021/519

humanitarian assistance. As at 14 April, only 14.3 per cent of the required
$563 million requested through the humanitarian response plan has been received.
74. Owing to the security situation, COVID-19 and the adverse effects of climate
change, food and nutritional insecurity remained a concern. Approximately 1,307,073
people are expected to face food insecurity in 2021, an increase of 36 per cent
compared with November 2020. Around 30 per cent of the population is facing severe
food insecurity in Bankass and Bandiagara in Mopti Region.
75. To ensure an enabling environment for humanitarian access and assistance, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance and its partners have
launched a programme to build capacity and reinforce civil-military cooperation and
humanitarian principles in central and northern regions of Mali.
76. The challenge posed by of the COVID-19 pandemic persists, with 14,190 cases
officially reported and 511 deaths officially recorded as at 14 May. According to the
transitional Government of Mali, as at 14 May, 71,216 persons (40,167 men and
31,049 women) had received a first dose of the vaccine, while 13,064 persons (7,766
men and 5,298 women) had been fully immunized.

XI. Economic development
77. The COVID-19 pandemic contributed to a significant economic downturn. The
current estimate for the actual growth rate for 2020 is estimated at -2 per cent, with a
6.1 per cent decline in the agricultural sector, attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The transitional Government has revised its budget revenue down to $3.8 billion and
has allocated $936.4 million for the pandemic response. In the 2020 budget, defence
and security spending remained at 12 and 6 per cent, respectively, resulting in
diminished expenditure for health, education, social protection and water services.
78. The trust fund in support of peace and security in Mali approved eight projects
for a total cost of $3million covering such diverse areas as improved access to potable
water, construction and/or rehabilitation of irrigated perimeters, sanitation and flood
prevention, the rehabilitation of Gao airport, improved awareness-raising about
MINUSMA, better preparation of women for the upcoming presidential elections and
support provided for the fourth phase of the activities of the Independent Observer of
the implementation of the Agreement.
79. MINUSMA funded 66 quick-impact projects for a total amount of $2,494,699.
Reprioritization of quick-impact projects in alignment with rapidly changing needs
and the security situation in central Mali in particular, is ongoing.

XII. External communications
80. MINUSMA expanded its field sensitization and external communications
campaigns by producing a new body of key messages and audio recordings in local
languages. The material was disseminated across multiple social media platforms and
traditional outreach sessions and was relayed by community radios.
81. MINUSMA also enhanced its direct outreach to a greater number of journalists
in the regions. The Mission took advantage of the United Nations Peacekeepers Day
2021 campaign, which was focused on leveraging the power of youth for peace and
security to conduct outreach and establish new partnerships with non-traditional
actors, including networks of youth and children peace activists.

21-06729

13/20

S/2021/519

XIII. Capacities of the Mission
Military
82. As at 15 May, 12,968 military personnel had been deployed, corresponding to
97.6 per cent of the authorized strength of 13,289 personnel, including 520 staff
officers and 12,769 contingent personnel. Women accounted for 3.8 per cent of
military personnel.
Police
83. As at 15 May, 1,753 United Nations police personnel had been deployed,
corresponding to 91.3 per cent of the authorized strength of 1,920 personnel,
including 299 individual police officers and 1,454 formed police unit personnel.
Women accounted for 26.4 per cent of individual officers and 13.9 per cent of formed
police unit personnel.
Civilian personnel
84. As at 15 May, 92 per cent of all MINUSMA civilian staff had been deployed,
including 92 per cent of international staff, 91 per cent of United Nations Volunteers
and 92 per cent of national staff. Women held 29 per cent of international posts, 39 per
cent of United Nations Volunteers positions and 18 per cent of national staff posts.
Implementation of the adaptation plan
85. As part of the adaptation plan, the MINUSMA force component accelerated the
implementation of the mobile task force concept. As a result of lessons learned during
Operation Mongoose, adjustments were made to the control and command
responsibilities shared by MINUSMA headquarters and the mobile task force units.
It was decided that the Commander of the mobile task force would exercise command
and control responsibilities over the mobile task force within a designated operationspecific area of responsibility, equivalent to the authorities vested in sector
commanders. Consequently, the forward command post in Gao was reorganized into
a mobile task force command to strengthen unity of effort and command across the
area of operations.
Safety and security of United Nations personnel
86. Efforts continued to improve passive and active security measures. In Ménaka,
the bunkerized operations command centre was completed in early May. Counter
rocket and mortar attack detection systems were successfully deployed in early April
in Ber and Goundam and are now operational. In this context, the increased instances
of unidentified drones overflying MINUSMA camps remain of serious concern.
Passive security measures have also been modified and updated. MINUSMA is
reviewing its counter-improvised explosive device requirements to include additional
personnel and specialized equipment.
87. Procedures to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 were maintained, including
quarantine measures during troop and police unit rotations for incoming contingents,
body temperature checks before gaining access to camps, social distancing and the
wearing of masks.
Conduct and discipline
88. No allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse were recorded during the period
under review. MINUSMA continued to implement its strategy to prevent misconduct,
particularly sexual exploitation and abuse, by delivering online induction and
14/20

21-06729

S/2021/519

refresher trainings to all categories of personnel, and conducting risk assessments and
implementing mitigating measures. MINUSMA also continued to conduct outreach
and awareness-raising activities among the population and to assist the victims of
sexual exploitation and abuse.
Environmental issues
89. No significant negative impact from solid waste or wastewater was reported.
Except in Aguelhok, Ber and Goundam, wastewater treatment plants wer e installed
and fully operational in the MINUSMA area of operations, enabling treated
wastewater recycling. Upgrading works of a local government wastewater treatment
facility in Bamako was 50 per cent completed. Non-hazardous solid and medical
waste management was ongoing.

XIV. Observations
90. I am deeply concerned by the most recent events in Bamako, notably the forced
resignation of the President and the Prime Minister of the civilian transitional
Government. This cycle of unconstitutional changes of government must be broken.
I call on the military leaders in Bamako to prioritize national interest and the needs
of Malian citizens by restoring a civilian-led transitional Government and resuming
the implementation of the transition road map. Only a truly inclusive, civilian-led
Government with the full participation of women will lead to credible elections, foster
social cohesion and restore the faith of the population in State institutions. My Special
Representative will continue to work closely with ECOWAS, the African Union and
all other international actors supporting the ongoing political transition.
91. Outside of Bamako, insecurity and violent extremism are spreading at an
alarming pace, further undermining the limited presence of the State, while more and
more schools are closing. Mali needs now, more than ever, leaders who stand together
in the interest of their country and the future of their children. The political transition
is an important opportunity to lay the groundwork for a peaceful, stable and
prosperous Mali. The steadfast support and goodwill of regional and international
partners will remain vital. This needs to be sustained through concrete and inclusive
action as a result of political compromise. Personal interests, partisan politics and
brinkmanship must give way to resolute efforts to advance political and institutional
reforms. Reforms cannot be subject to veto by individuals; a new political
dispensation, which prioritizes the needs of citizens, has to anchor the restructuring
of the State.
92. The meeting of the Agreement Monitoring Committee held in Kayes, during
which the signatory parties renewed their commitments, is equally encouraging. I
remain concerned, however, about the protracted delays in the implementation of key
provisions of the Agreement and decisions of Committee. Urgent and concrete action
is required to break the deadlock on the deployment and operationalization of the
reconstituted army units. Furthermore, outstanding issues related to redeployment of
State authorities and socioeconomic development in the north have to be advanced
urgently and in a spirit of consensus. I call upon all signatories to redouble their
efforts to jointly find solutions to these issues. I urge the transitional Government and
signatory armed groups to step up confidence-building measures and increase
ownership of the peace process, including by taking further steps to enhance the
participation of women. The support of the international mediation team can only be
effective and produce sustainable results if the signatory parties fully own the process
and work diligently to avoid further setbacks in the implementation of the Agreement.
I condemn in the strongest terms the assassination of the President of CMA and

21-06729

15/20

S/2021/519

Secretary-General of the Mouvement arabe de l’Azawad-CMA, Sidi Brahim Ould
Sidatt. The perpetrators should be identified and swiftly brought to justice through a
transparent investigation.
93. Violence has continued unabated in the centre of Mali for the past year, with
scores of civilians being killed and the majority of schools closed. Deadly
intercommunal violence persists, while violent extremist groups continue to expand
their control over communities and replace the role of the State in the provision of
security, justice and education services. MINUSMA has further stepped up its efforts
to protect civilians. However, absent a strong and coherent vision of the transitional
Government and a stronger presence of the State, the Mission will not be in position
to make a real difference in central Mali. I urge the national authorities to redouble
efforts to step up critical State services, notably police, justice and education services
in the affected areas, which are important investments in rebuilding trust and
confidence in State authorities. I welcome the dialogue efforts that led to local peace
accords and secured humanitarian access to the benefit of some communities. For the
peace accords to hold, the transitional Government needs to step up efforts to address
the root causes of conflict along community lines, including by fighting impunity for
human rights violations and abuses, resolving land conflicts and redeploying State
administrative, security and social services. A comprehensive government-run
strategy, integrating political, security, human rights and humanitarian responses is
urgently needed to help restore stability in the central regions of Mali. Such a strategy
should be impact-oriented and people-centred, with concrete, tangible changes for the
local populations.
94. The continuing human rights violations and abuses in central and northern Mali
are unacceptable. I call upon the transitional Government to swiftly investigate
reports of human rights violations and abuses and hold perpetrators to account. While
I recognize the complexity of investigating these cases, only prompt action will help
to strengthen the rule of law, restore the trust of the population in State authority and
break the cycle of violence and conflict. Human rights and the fight against impunity
must remain a priority during the political transition.
95. The humanitarian situation in several regions of Mali remains dire and requires
the continued support of donors and partners, particularly with the socioeconomic
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The humanitarian response plan for Mali remains
severely underfunded. I reiterate my call to multilateral and bilateral partners to
continue providing the much-needed material and financial support to alleviate the
suffering of vulnerable populations.
96. I remain concerned about continued attacks by violent extremist elements
against peacekeepers and national and international forces. I strongly condemn
attacks on MINUSMA personnel and installations, in particular the 2 April attack on
the Mission’s camp in Aguelhok. I commend the courage and bravery of the
peacekeepers who robustly repelled the attack. I wish to convey my heartfelt
condolences to the families of all the peacekeepers who made the highest sacrifice
and gave their lives while fighting for peace in Mali over the past year. I am
encouraged by the landmark conviction for the killing of a MINUSMA peacekeeper
in 2015, the first conviction since the establishment of MINUSMA. This is an
important first step in bringing perpetrators of such heinous acts to justice and in
providing some resolution for the families of peacekeepers who lost their lives in
support of the Malian people’s quest for peace and reconciliation. MINUSMA
operates in a highly challenging and dangerous security environment and will
continue to take concrete measures to increase its resilience and ensure the safety and
security of its peacekeepers.

16/20

21-06729

S/2021/519

97. As part of its regular consultations with Malian stakeholders, MINUSMA sought
the views on its mandate. Interlocutors, both the authorities and the population,
continue to attach great importance to the deployment and activities of MINUSMA.
The Mission’s efforts to protect civilians attract the most interest, with some
suggesting an even more robust mandate to address increasing threats and attacks
from extremist elements against the civilian populations. Support provided by the
Mission to the Malian Armed Forces, notably with respect to casualty evacuation and
logistical assistance, continue to be highly valued by the Government of Mali.
Furthermore, quick impact projects are highly appreciated by local leaders and
populations. All Malian stakeholders agree that the Agreement requires full and swift
implementation, with renewed commitments from the signatory parties to live up to
expectations. The population continues to yearn for peace dividends. The
Implementation of the Agreement will require active engagement for national
reconciliation, extension of State authority and socioeconomic services and improved
security throughout the territory. Questions related to accountability and the fight
against impunity for serious crimes and violations of human rights remain critical to
sustaining peace and governance in the country. Finally, MINUSMA and international
and regional organizations continue to be perceived as instrumental in helping Malian
stakeholders overcome tensions and challenges linked to the ongoing political
transition process.
98. The continued deployment of MINUSMA remains essential to the peace,
political and electoral processes as well as stability in Mali. The implementation of
outstanding provisions of the Agreement, the inclusion of women in political and
peace processes, protection of civilians and dialogue processes in the centre, support
to the ongoing political transition, the upholding of human rights, and adequate
coordination with national, regional and international forces remain indispensable to
the restoration of peace and security in Mali. The complex, challenging and dangerous
environment in which the Mission is operating requires innovative, tailored, flexible
and people-centred approaches. I therefore recommend the extension of the mandate
of MINUSMA for an additional year, until 30 June 2022, with its current authorized
troop and police ceilings. I count on the Security Council’s steadfast political support
and the commitment of Member States to ensure that the Mission is adequately
configured and resourced.
99. I would like to express my deep appreciation to the personnel of MINUSMA
and the United Nations country team as well as troop- and police-contributing
Member States for their work and sacrifices in the quest for peace in an extremely
challenging security context. I am grateful to regional organizations, donors, partners
and non-governmental organizations for contributing to peace efforts in Mali.
100. Finally, I wish my new Special Representative for Mali and Head of
MINUSMA, El-Ghassim Wane, success in his assignment, working closely with the
transitional Government, national stakeholders, the United Nations country team and
regional and international partners in addressing the multifaceted political, security
and humanitarian challenges facing Mali.

21-06729

17/20

S/2021/519

Annex I
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali: military and police strength as at
15 May 2021
Military

Police

Experts on Mission, staff
officers and Units

Individual police officers

Country

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Armenia

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Australia

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Formed police units

Total police

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Bangladesh

1 292

28

1 320

1

–

1

217

63

280

218

63

281

Belgium

50

3

53

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Benin

236

25

261

19

–

19

132

8

140

151

8

159

Bhutan

5

–

5

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Austria

Bosnia and
Herzegovina

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Burkina Faso

1 064

27

1 091

14

14

28

129

11

140

143

25

168

Burundi

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Cambodia

268

23

291

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Cameroon

1

1

2

13

1

14

–

–

–

13

1

14

4

1

5

9

2

11

–

–

–

9

2

11

Chad

1 408

43

1 451

3

2

5

–

–

–

3

2

5

China

413

13

426

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Côte d’Ivoire

775

31

806

11

10

21

–

–

–

11

10

21

3

1

4

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Canada

Czechia

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

1 079

3

1 082

2

–

2

146

14

160

148

14

162

164

11

175

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Estonia

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Ethiopia

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Finland

3

1

4

5

1

6

–

–

–

5

1

6

France

22

2

24

12

3

15

–

–

–

12

3

15

Gambia

4

1

5

4

2

6

–

–

–

4

2

6

Germany

397

30

427

3

2

5

–

–

–

3

2

5

Ghana

136

19

155

2

–

2

–

–

–

2

–

2

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Guinea

625

42

667

7

2

9

–

–

–

7

2

9

Indonesia

10

–

10

1

1

2

–

–

–

1

1

2

Iran (Islamic
Republic of)

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Ireland

12

–

12

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Italy

2

–

2

4

–

4

–

–

–

4

–

4

Jordan

326

–

326

12

–

12

–

–

–

12

–

12

Denmark
Egypt
El Salvador

Guatemala

18/20

21-06729

S/2021/519
Military

Police

Experts on Mission, staff
officers and Units

Individual police officers

Country

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Kenya

7

3

10

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Latvia

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Liberia

147

16

163

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Lithuania

41

3

44

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Luxembourg

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Mauritania

7

–

7

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Mexico

4

–

4

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Nepal

151

5

156

–

1

1

–

–

–

–

1

1

Formed police units

Total police

6

–

6

4

1

5

–

–

–

4

1

5

Niger

870

5

875

30

10

40

–

–

–

30

10

40

Nigeria

64

13

77

2

4

6

104

36

140

106

40

146

Norway

77

8

85

4

1

5

–

–

–

4

1

5

Pakistan

153

–

153

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Portugal

2

–

2

2

–

2

–

–

–

2

–

2

Romania

4

1

5

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Senegal

971

35

1 006

12

9

21

281

34

315

293

43

336

Sierra Leone

15

3

18

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Spain

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Sri Lanka

243

–

243

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Sweden

169

16

185

3

1

4

–

–

–

3

1

4

5

1

6

5

2

7

–

–

–

5

2

7

Togo

881

52

933

21

4

25

244

36

280

265

40

305

Tunisia

82

4

86

7

2

9

–

–

–

7

2

9

Turkey

–

–

–

3

1

4

–

–

–

3

1

4

Netherlands

Switzerland

Ukraine

11

1

12

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

United Kingdom

238

18

256

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

United States of
America

9

–

9

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Zambia

2

1

3

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

12 478

490

12 968

215

76

291

1 253

202

1 455

1 468

278

1 746

Total

21-06729

19/20

S/2021/519

Map
20/20

Annex II

21-06729
