UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1999/21
8 July 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 4021st meeting of the Security Council, held on 8 July 1999 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "Maintenance of
peace and security and post-conflict peace-building" the President of the
Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council recalls its primary responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace
and security. The Council also recalls the statements made by its
President in relation to activities of the United Nations in preventive
diplomacy, peacemaking, peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building.
"The Security Council has considered the matter of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants in a peacekeeping
environment as part of its overall and continuing effort to contribute to
enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities in conflict situations around the world.
"The Security Council is seriously concerned that in a number of
conflicts, armed fighting among various parties or factions continues
despite the conclusion of peace agreements by the warring parties and the
presence of United Nations peacekeeping missions on the ground. It
recognizes that a major contributory factor to such a situation has been
the continued availability of large amounts of armaments, in particular
small arms and light weapons, to conflicting parties. The Council
emphasizes that in order to achieve settlement, parties to a conflict must
work towards the successful disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants, including child soldiers whose special needs should be
seriously addressed.
"The Security Council recognizes that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration cannot be seen in isolation but rather, as a continuous
process which is rooted in and feeds into a broader search for peace,
stability and development. Effective disarmament of ex-combatants
represents an important indicator of progress towards post-conflict peacebuilding and normalization of the situation. The demobilization effort is
only possible when there is some level of disarmament and its success can
only be achieved when there is effective rehabilitation and reintegration
99-20264 (E)

080799

/...

S/PRST/1999/21
English
Page 2

into society of ex-combatants. Disarmament and demobilization must take
place in a secure and safe environment, which will give ex-combatants the
confidence to lay down their arms. Taking into account that the process is
closely linked to economic and social issues, the question must be
addressed comprehensively so as to facilitate a smooth transition from
peacekeeping to peace-building.
"The Security Council emphasizes that for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration to be successful, there must be political will and a
clear commitment by the parties concerned to achieve peace and stability.
At the same time, it is vital that such commitment by the parties be
reinforced by political will and consistent, effective and determined
support from the international community to guarantee the achievement of
sustainable peace, including through its contributions of long-term
assistance for development and trade.
"The Security Council affirms its commitment to the principles of the
political independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States
in conducting peace-building activities, and the need for States to comply
with their obligations under international law. Bearing this in mind, the
Council stresses the need for the implementation, with the consent of the
parties, of practical measures to promote the success of the process which,
inter alia, may include the following:
"(a) The inclusion, as appropriate, within specific peace agreements
and, on a case-by-case basis, within United Nations peacekeeping mandates,
of clear terms for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants, including the safe and timely disposal of arms and
ammunition;
"(b) The establishment by Governments contributing to peacekeeping
operations of databases of experts on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants. In this context, training in disarmament
and demobilization could be a useful component of national programmes for
the preparation of peacekeeping troops;
"(c) The prevention and reduction of the excessive and destabilizing
flow, accumulation and illegitimate use of small arms and light weapons.
In this context, the relevant Security Council resolutions and existing
United Nations arms embargoes should be strictly implemented.
"The Security Council is of the view that techniques for executing and
coordinating programmes related to the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants and the problems
associated with it should be given in-depth consideration. It takes note
with appreciation of the efforts by the Secretary-General, United Nations
bodies, Member States and international and regional organizations aimed at
developing general principles and practical guidelines for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants in a peacekeeping
environment.

/...

S/PRST/1999/21
English
Page 3

"The Security Council underlines the need to address this issue on a
regular basis, and in this regard, requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the Council, within a period of six months, a report containing his
analysis, observations and recommendations, in particular those relating to
principles and guidelines as well as practices, experiences and lessons
learned to facilitate its further consideration of the matter. The report
should pay special attention to the problems of disarmament and
demobilization of child soldiers and their reintegration into society.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
