S/PV.7933

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7933rd meeting

Friday, 28 April 2017, 6 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Sison. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Kandeel
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Akylbayev
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2017/307)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-11662 (E)
*1711662*

S/PV.7933

The situation concerning Western Sahara

The meeting was called to order at 6.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2017/307)

28/04/2017

I should like to take a moment now to recognize the
Personal Envoy to the Secretary-General for Western
Sahara, Chris Ross, for his eight years of service.
The United States is grateful for his tireless efforts
to support a political process for Western Sahara. We
look forward to the appointment of a new envoy and
his travel to the region as quickly as possible. We also
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Western Sahara, Kim Bolduc, for all her
work managing the peacekeeping mission.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The United States is pleased with the adoption of
today’s mandate renewal for two reasons.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/362, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.

First, resolution 2351 (2017) helps put the Council’s
attention back where it belongs, supporting a political
process to resolve the conflict in Western Sahara. For
years, the United Nations and the Council have been
bogged down. On the ground, peacekeepers have faced
an almost endless series of frustrating obstructions,
which often require months or even years of high-level
engagement to sort out. Here in the Council, we often end
up in debates about hyperspecific operational problems.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/307, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning
Western Sahara.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2351 (2017).
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the United States of America.
Ambassador Haley would have liked to have been
here for this important adoption — an adoption during
our presidency in which we emphasized one of our key
peacekeeping principles, that peacekeeping missions
should support political solutions. Our postponement
of the adoption was key to allowing the United Nations
and the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara (MINURSO) to close out the past
year’s chapter in the Western Sahara, illustrating in real
time the value of the United Nations and of the Mission.
2/9

This situation needs to change. Of course, the
parties need to let the Mission do its job without
interference, and they need to respect all existing
agreements. That is the bare minimum of what we
must expect, but the Council also has to look at the big
picture on Western Sahara. The big picture is that we
have not seen significant political progress for years.
That is the fundamental problem we need to address
in the months to come. The United States therefore
fully supports the Secretary-General’s call to relaunch
negotiations with a new dynamic and a new spirit. The
resolution reinforces the fact that the Security Council
shares the Secretary-General’s goals. It shows that we
expect the parties to work with the United Nations to
come back to the table. As the resolution demands, the
Secretary-General will now be reporting on whether
we have seen progress. The Council will be watching
what the parties do closely.
Secondly, the resolution sets a new standard for the
performance of the Mission. We are asking the United
Nations to set clear and measurable benchmarks for
what the Mission and its staff will achieve. The Mission
needs to be able to hire staff with the right skills to
be as effective as possible and to adjust components
that are not working as well as they could be. That may
sound like common sense, but we do not always see
it happening on the ground. We look forward to the
17-11662

28/04/2017

The situation concerning Western Sahara

United Nations reporting back to the Council on how
the Mission does.
Making sure that peacekeeping missions have an
impact is a top priority for the United States. With
today’s resolution, we take another step towards that
goal. The United States will be watching closely to see
what progress is being made on the ground. MINURSO
must be part of a broader effort to achieve a mutually
acceptable resolution of the conflict in Western Sahara.
Returning to negotiations will, of course, be a difficult
task, but the United States is committed to doing what
we can to facilitate the United Nations work. Let us
not be distracted from our goal of finding a mutually
acceptable political solution to the conflict that will
provide for the self-determination of the people of
Western Sahara.
We continue to view Morocco’s autonomy plan as
serious, credible and realistic, and it represents one
potential approach to satisfying the aspirations of the
people in Western Sahara to run their own affairs in
peace and dignity. Again, we expect the parties to work
with the United Nations to come back to the table and
we call on all members of the Council to focus on fnding
an enduring peace for a conflict that has continued for
far too long.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the other members of the Council
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Groundhog Day. Every year on 2 February, a ritual is
celebrated in Punxsutawney, Pennsylvania, in which
the groundhog Phil makes a brief appearance, playing
an important but limited role in determining whether
spring will come early or winter will last another six
weeks. On that day in Punxsutawney, the local and
international press covers the event widely, but the
following day the issue disappears from the news and
we hear no more about the charming Phil until the
following year. Does anyone here know where Phil
is today?
Similarly, every year at the end of April — and
only once a year — we carry out a ritual in the Council
in which the issue of Western Sahara makes a brief
appearance in an open debate that plays an important
but limited role in considering solely the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the

S/PV.7933

Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO). On this
day in New York, the local and international press
widely covers this event, but as with Punxsutawney
Phil the issue disappears from the news and no one
hears anything about it until the following year. Unlike
many other situations, the issue of Western Sahara and
the Secretary-General’s report are never addressed in
open briefings of the Council.
Since this is a practice that has been going on
for more than two decades, we believe that it is not
contingent on the preferences of the elected members
of the Council, which are in no position to change
this practice during their brief tenures, however much
we may attempt to fight similar practices — as my
delegation does by insisting on taking the floor regularly
before the members in open meetings of the Council.
My delegation therefore decided over the past 12
months that we must not forget the situation to which
MINURSO was subject last year. Through other
bodies, it has regularly sought information on the state
of functionality of the Mission, which was seriously
affected by the expulsion of its entire civilian staff
in March 2016. Finally, three days ago on Tuesday,
25 April, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Western Sahara, Ms Kim Bolduc, orally
reported in consultations to the Council that, with the
return to Western Sahara of the last 17 officials, the
Mission had resumed full functionality.
Let me repeat yet again that peacekeeping missions
are established by the Security Council. The mandates
determined by the Security Council, as well as statusof-forces and status-of-mission agreements, are binding
contracts between the troop-contributing countries and
the United Nations. What is more, they are guarantees
that protect the personnel that countries voluntarily
contribute to peacekeeping missions. It is therefore
obvious that these commitments can be altered only
by those endowed with the corresponding international
legitimacy, which in this case is the Security Council.
No Member of the United Nations can unilaterally
change these commitments and obligations. The
return of the civilian staff to Western Sahara and the
resumption of the full functionality of MINURSO are
proof of that.
Since 1963, 54 years ago, Western Sahara has
been recognized by the United Nations as a non-selfgoverning Territory in the process of decolonization.
We must recall that MINURSO was established with

17-116623/9

S/PV.7933

The situation concerning Western Sahara

a mandate to carry out a referendum to determine
the final status of the non-self-governing Territory
of Western Sahara so that its people can exercise
their right to self-determination and choose between
independence, association with an independent State
or integration into an independent State. We fully
support the commitment of the Secretary-General to
finding a solution to the question of Western Sahara
and his express intention to propose the resumption
of the negotiating process with a new impetus and a
new spirit.
In that regard, we encourage the parties to take
positive steps and to launch a dialogue that will lead
to a just and lasting political solution acceptable to all
parties and guarantee the free self-determination of
the people of Western Sahara. The difficult situation
in which the population of Western Sahara finds itself
deserves the heightened attention of the international
community, and of the Security Council in particular.
Last but not least, my delegation thanks you, Madam
President, for guiding the work that led to the adoption
of resolution 2351 (2017) at all levels, from the experts
in your delegation to the Permanent Representatives.
Throughout a number of days of arduous work, we were
able to participate directly in finding a solution that, as
demonstrated by the unanimous vote, resulted in the
successful drafting of the resolution.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): Sweden voted in favour of
resolution 2351 (2017) because it represents a real
opportunity to resolve one of the most long-standing
disputes on the agenda of the United Nations. More
importantly it represents an opportunity to address the
plight of the people of Western Sahara. With today’s
adoption, after a year that saw many challenges, we can
now turn the page. The resolution contains a number of
elements that we believe lay a path towards resolving
the issue of the status of Western Sahara.
First, today’s resolution sends a strong, clear
and unified signal that the time has come to resume
negotiations that will lead to a just, lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution that will provide for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara. The
resolution provides strong backing to the SecretaryGeneral and his proposal to relaunch the political
process with “a new dynamic and a new spirit”. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s direct engagement.
This is really diplomacy for peace in action with the
Secretary-General using his good offices to engage
4/9

28/04/2017

actively with the parties and with the full support of the
Council. We fully agree with his view that a resumption
of the political process is urgently needed. In 2007 and
2008, four rounds of negotiations took place, but little
progress was made. Since then, the political process
has been at a standstill, despite the efforts of successive
Secretaries-General and Personal Envoys, to whom we
pay tribute.
Secondly, the resolution encourages a new Personal
Envoy of the Secretary-General to reinvigorate efforts
towards a political solution, and also calls upon the
parties and the neighbouring States to fully cooperate
with that envoy. We look forward to working together
with a new envoy once appointed.
Thirdly, the Council is also calling, for the first
time, for the meaningful participation of women in the
political process. The participation of women would
inject new energy into the political process.
Clearly, the resolution that we have just adopted
sends a strong signal to the parties that the time has come
to show renewed determination to engage in the political
process and for neighbouring States to contribute. As
the Secretary-General states in his report (S/2017/307),
difficult decisions will be required from all of us if the
current framework of negotiations is to achieve results.
While we all hope that these will be forthcoming, our
patience cannot last forever, and the Secretary-General
has noted that appropriate conclusions must be drawn
in the case of absence of progress. In that regard, we
note that all possible solutions, including the holding of
a referendum, must be kept on the table.
We also supported the resolution because it sent a
strong call to the parties that respecting the ceasefire
and related agreements is critical, and that violations
cannot be accepted. We welcome the fact that the
parties have now withdrawn from the buffer strip in
Guerguerat, thereby creating an environment conducive
to the relaunch of a political process.
With this resolution, the Council also reiterates
its full support for the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), which
plays a key role in a complex environment. The Mission
has gone through a challenging year, and we welcome
its return to full functionality. Equally important, the
resolution highlights the plight of Sahrawi refugees, the
deteriorating humanitarian situation and the potential
risk of reductions in food assistance given a lack of
funding. The Sahrawi refugees have lived for more
17-11662

28/04/2017

The situation concerning Western Sahara

than 40 years under harsh conditions. This is one of
the Organization’s oldest protracted refugee operations
and the second longest-running refugee situation
in the world. The resolution urges the international
community to provide new and additional voluntary
contributions to the humanitarian response.
We also supported the resolution because it
encourages the parties to respect and promote
human rights in Western Sahara and in the Tindouf
refugee camps. It also strongly encourages enhanced
cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, including further visits to the region.
We had many reasons to support the resolution, but
that was the easy part. Without any doubt, we now have
a lot of work ahead of us. The resolution that we have
just adopted offers the best opportunity in a long time
to relaunch a political process that has been dormant
for almost a decade now. The path towards a mutually
acceptable political solution, which will provide for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara, is
now, with the adoption of this resolution, a little closer
in sight.
Finally — and like Uruguay — I would like to
commend the United States delegation, as penholder,
for their extraordinary leadership on this issue, as well
as their exemplary efforts in facilitating the negotiations
on this resolution.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): In
unanimously adopting resolution 2351 (2017), which
extends for an additional 12 months the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO), which expired on 30 April, the
Security Council continues the constructive role played
by the United Nations in the search for a definitive
solution to the question of Western Sahara.
We would therefore once again like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Western Sahara and Head of MINURSO, as well as the
outgoing Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Western Sahara. My delegation would also like to hail
the leadership demonstrated yet again by the United
States delegation in the conduct of the Council’s work.
We welcome the constructive spirit demonstrated
by members of the Council, which ensured that we
arrived at a text that nurtures hope for the ongoing
political process.

S/PV.7933

The concerns reiterated in the resolution just
adopted are proof of the widely shared determination to
tackle challenges in the region and to assist the parties
to reach a fair, lasting and mutually acceptable political
solution. Furthermore, I would like to highlight and
welcome efforts made by the Kingdom of Morocco and
by the Secretariat in an ongoing and intense dialogue
that facilitated progress on several crucial issues,
creating an appropriate framework for negotiations
between parties. It is our hope therefore that this
cooperation will produce the necessary progress on
other key matters, and that cooperation between the
Secretariat and other parties concerned could be guided
by the same spirit of practicality and reconciliation.
I would also like to welcome the intention
expressed by Secretary-General Guterres to relaunch
the negotiating process, breathing new dynamism into
it. In that context, Senegal would like to reiterate its
belief that the initiative for autonomy proposed by
Morocco in 2007 is a serious, credible and realistic
matter for negotiation. We think that initiative should
be taken into account as negotiations resume between
the parties, with a view to reaching a fair, lasting and
mutually acceptable political solution, as I said earlier,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank our colleagues
from the United States for the serious efforts they
made to ensure consensus was reached on resolution
2351 (2017). We appreciate the readiness they have
demonstrated to accommodate all legitimate concerns.
We have all been following developments that have
unfolded over the past several months surrounding
the issue of Western Sahara, as well as the undeniable
progress — although fledgling — that we had begun
to see. We would have been even more pleased if the
points we had raised, which did not amount to more
than minor tweaking, had been taken on board. They
were not, and we understand why not. Our effort
was designed to ensure alignment with fundamental
principles in the position of the African Union. All the
same, we decided to vote in favour of the resolution
because of our conviction that the Secretary-General
appears to be committed to relaunch the peace process,
and of our hope that there is a new spirit. Of course
we also felt we needed to take into account the effort
that has been made by the presidency to achieve the
progress we saw.

17-116625/9

S/PV.7933

The situation concerning Western Sahara

That said, however, we would like to reiterate the
importance of the restoration of the full functionality
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO), whose role has become
all the more significant in light of developments on the
ground. We welcome the progress made in facilitating
the return of the civilian component of MINURSO.
We are very pleased at the progress made
surrounding the programme created in connection
with the buffer zone. This should create a positive
atmosphere for the relaunching of the peace process
and de-escalate the tension. Both parties, with which
we are equally friendly, should be called upon to honour
their commitments to the agreement reached with
MINURSO in relation to the ceasefire. They should
refrain from taking any action that could undermine
their agreement and further aggravate the situation on
the ground.
The latest developments have underscored the need
to exert renewed efforts for the resumption of talks
between the parties to find a just, lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution to the long-standing issue
on the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
This is something that we have always supported based
on our conviction that it would provide for the selfdetermination of the people of Western Sahara in the
context of arrangements consistent with the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.
In this connection, it is imperative that the Council
understand the context of the problem we have been
facing and fully support the proposal by SecretaryGeneral António Guterres to relaunch the peace
process with a new spirit and dynamism to achieve a
mutually acceptable political solution to the Western
Saharan issue, in accordance with all relevant Security
Council resolutions. Any meaningful progress on
the peace process hinges on the full cooperation of
the two parties with the Secretary-General, and it is
only appropriate that the Council call on the parties
to commit themselves to resuming the fifth round of
negotiations in good faith and without any conditions.
We believe that the appointment of a new Personal
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western Sahara
who commands the trust and confidence of both parties
will be very critical to realizing that objective. It
would be remiss of us to fail to take this opportunity
to thank, following the presidency, Personal Envoy
Mr. Christopher Ross for having been such an upright
6/9

28/04/2017

person in whom we can repose confidence. We wish to
thank him for his service. We feel this is fair and proper.
We hope that the resumption of direct and serious
talks between the parties without preconditions — what
the African Union has been calling for and has fully
supported now that Morocco has returned to the African
Union family, which is a very important development
which we welcome — might facilitate speeding up the
process of finding an amicable solution to this longstanding dispute and that the African Union will have
a supportive role in the United Nations-sponsored
peace talks.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Western Sahara is currently facing a complicated
situation. What is urgent now is to maintain stability
in the region and create a favourable condition for
relaunching the political process.
The Security Council has just adopted resolution
2351 (2017), renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) for one year and calling for the
resumption of talks and the political process. This
shows the determination of the Council to push for a
political solution of the issue and adhere to the Mission’s
mandate.
On the issue of Western Sahara, China has always
held an objective and impartial position. We encourage
both parties, on the basis of relevant Council resolutions,
to seek a negotiated solution that is just, lasting and
mutually acceptable to both parties. We shall continue
to support the United Nations in its effort to find a
political solution of the issue of Western Sahara and we
hope that MINURSO will continue to play an important
role in implementing Security Council resolutions and
stabilizing the situation in Western Sahara.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2351
(2017) and is happy to see that the Council has found
unity on this matter. We thank the United States for its
efforts as penholder, which helped bring the members
of the Security Council together.
The text we have adopted today has extended
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) for one
year. I would like to pay tribute to the excellent work
that MINURSO undertakes in an unstable security
context. As soon as it is fully functional again, which
17-11662

28/04/2017

The situation concerning Western Sahara

we welcome, it is important that it have the necessary
resources to tackle the challenges on the ground.
The negotiations also served to resolve the crisis in
Guerguerat following the withdrawal of the Polisario
Front, which has just been confirmed by MINURSO.
The joint efforts of the Secretary-General, who called
for a withdrawal from the buffer strip on 25 February,
and of the Council have produced desired results. We
pleased about the fact that we can turn the page on this
crisis. It is important that the ceasefire be upheld now
in all circumstances and in a lasting manner.
I take this opportunity to thank the Personal Envoy
Mr. Christopher Ross for his engagement and efforts.
Finally, the resolution clearly demonstrates the
importance of relaunching the political process. The
Council’s support for the resumption of the political
process was unambiguously expressed in terms of a
new positive dynamism, which is already visible thanks
to the Secretary-General, whose personal dedication I
would like to pay tribute to once again. His outstanding
report (S/2017/307) has set the tone. The goal of a fair,
lasting and mutually acceptable political solution — one
which is guided by the United Nations and is in line
with relevant Security Council resolutions — is not
unattainable. The role of neighbouring countries will
be crucial, as emphasized by this resolution.
France continues to see the autonomy initiative
presented by Morocco in 2007 as a credible and serious
basis for a negotiated solution. The resolution of the
conflict will allow for a return of security, stability
and economic prosperity in the region. We reiterate
our full support for the work of the United Nations
and MINURSO. It is France’s hope that the unanimous
adoption of the resolution will allow us to be resolutely
forward looking in order to promote the current political
trends and begin together a new chapter in the history
of the region that would benefit everyone.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2351
(2017), which renews the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) and provides clear direction for the
crucial work of MINURSO over the next 12 months.
I particularly want to thank the United States for its
hard work on the text of the resolution and my fellow
Council members for the positive and constructive
spirit in which negotiations took place this year.

S/PV.7933

Today’s forward-looking resolution marks an
important step in the path towards finding a solution
to this decades-old conflict. Through this unanimous
adoption, we have demonstrated the support within the
Chamber for the vital mission of MINURSO. I especially
welcome the strong commitment and support of the
Secretary-General to relaunch the negotiating process
with the aim of reaching a mutually acceptable political
solution. I hope his personal involvement and the swift
appointment of a new personal envoy will encourage all
parties to cooperate fully with the United Nations over
the next 12 months to achieve real progress. I also want
to take this opportunity to thank Christopher Ross for
his tireless commitment over the past eight years and
for his endless search for a solution to this problem.
In conclusion, it is clear that this issue can be
resolved only if progress is made on the political
track. The Council has an important role to play in
supporting MINURSO, the Secretary-General and his
Personal Envoy. Today’s resolution is an important tool
in support of the negotiation process and the efforts to
achieve a mutually acceptable political solution. The
United Kingdom, as ever, stands ready to support both
parties in their efforts to achieve that goal.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): We are pleased with today’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 2351 (2017), which
ensures that the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara will continue to fulfil
its critical mandate in an increasingly complex and
challenging operational environment. I would also like
to thank the United States for its excellent presidency
of the Security Council this month and its efforts to
facilitate the complex negotiations on the resolution,
and all Security Council members for the constructive
and forward-looking approach that has led to today’s
consensus decision.
The news that the remaining elements of the Frente
Polisario withdrew today from the buffer strip in
Guergerat is important because it fulfils the SecretaryGeneral’s request. The latest developments on the
ground are also proof of the results that can be achieved
with persistent diplomacy on the part of the Council.
We encourage the parties to continue upholding their
commitment to the ceasefire agreement.
Italy is hopeful that the improvements in the situation
on the ground and today’s resolution will help to build
the required momentum towards a rapid resumption of
the political process. We believe this is a critical moment

17-116627/9

S/PV.7933

The situation concerning Western Sahara

for Western Sahara that presents an opportunity to
fulfil the Secretary-General’s objective — indeed, our
objective — of revitalizing the political track with a
new dynamic and a new spirit in order to reach a just,
lasting and mutually acceptable political solution that
can provide for the self-determination of the people of
Western Sahara.
With today’s resolution the Security Council
affirms that it shares that vision and fully supports this
urgent task. We therefore invite the parties to engage as
soon as possible, without preconditions and in a spirit of
compromise, in a new round of talks under the auspices
of the Secretary-General and facilitated by the new
Personal Envoy. At the same time, I would like to salute
the outgoing Personal Envoy, Mr. Christopher Ross,
and to thank him for his tireless efforts and personal
commitment to the issue.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of Bolivia
voted in favour of resolution 2351 (2017) because we
believe that the parties will resume the political process
with the goal of achieving a just, lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution that accords with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council. In that regard, we
would like to express our commitment to ensuring that
the efforts to enable the people of Western Sahara to
achieve self-determination continue. The Plurinational
State of Bolivia also underscores its support to the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his new Personal
Envoy to arrive at a political solution that is mutually
acceptable to the parties. We commend the decisions
of the Kingdom of Morocco and the Frente Polisario to
withdraw from the Guergerat area, representing a clear
expression of good will by both sides. We also reaffirm
our support for the work being done by the United
Nations Mission on the Referendum in Western Sahara.
Bolivia is a member of the Decolonization
Committee and has strong ties of friendship with the
people of Morocco and of the Sahara. We firmly believe
that the only way that the peoples of the world can
resolve any dispute is through dialogue, which is why
we categorically reject any violent approach. We will
continue to focus our efforts so that the Members of
the United Nations ensure respect for the Charter of the
United Nations and for the conduct of relations among
States based on respect for the principles of equal rights
and a people’s right to self-determination.
8/9

28/04/2017

In conclusion, I would like to thank the presidency
for the conduct of the negotiations on today’s resolution,
which in our view were transparent, flexible and adapted
to the situation on the ground. That flexibility enabled
us to adopt the resolution unanimously, and that is due
primarily to the way that the presidency, particularly
as the penholder, moved the process forward. We are
also grateful to your delegation and its experts, Madam
President, for the political coordination, and to your
country’s Permanent Representative for their efforts in
presiding over the Council this month.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to express my
sincere appreciation to the United States delegation for
its effective guidance of the consultations on today’s
important adoption of resolution 2351 (2017). Japan also
appreciates the Secretary-General’s efforts to solve the
Guergerat crisis and create an environment conducive
to a resumption of the political process.
Japan voted in favor of the resolution extending
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) for another
year in recognition of its important role in monitoring
the ceasefire that contributes to the region’s peace and
stability. As we mentioned during the Council’s 6 April
debate on peacekeeping (see S/PV.7918), we are eager
to improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping. We need
to assess whether the continued deployment of a given
peacekeeping operation fits the reality on the ground
and also hold deeper discussions in the Council in order
to link political processes to mandates. MINURSO is an
illustration of both of those points. We must pay more
serious attention to the Mission’s effectiveness and
to reinvigorating the political process. We very much
hope that today’s resolution will play an important role
in relaunching the political process.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine voted in favour
of resolution 2351 (2017), which extends the mandate
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO) for another year. While
we realize that the resolution does not address all
the concerns of some Security Council members, we
would like to thank the United States delegation, as its
penholder, and other colleagues for their dedicated work
on it. We see the document as an effort by the Council
to revive the political process on the issue of Western
Sahara. At the same time, it is also a call to the parties
to rise to their shared responsibility for the future of
the region and its people. From now on, we urge them
17-11662

28/04/2017

The situation concerning Western Sahara

to refrain from any actions that may undermine the
ceasefire agreement.
It is urgent that the political process be relaunched
without preconditions and in good faith. That cannot be
achieved without giving full cooperation and assistance
to the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General and
MINURSO. Since Mr. Ross is with us today, this is
a good moment to pay tribute to his dedicated efforts
over the years. I want to stress that finding a just and
lasting solution to the issue of Western Sahara can be
achieved only through a genuine and comprehensive
dialogue that can pave the way to making a settlement
happen. There can be no more excuses for any delay in
taking that path.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation voted in favour of
resolution 2351 (2017), which extends the mandate
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara. The Security Council’s unified
position should serve to send to the sides in the Western
Sahara conflict a very strong signal with regard to the
need to begin to swiftly move towards resuming direct
talks between Morocco and the Polisario Front.
It is our view that overcoming antagonism and
achieving a fair and lasting solution is possible only
through political means in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.
The final formula must be acceptable to Morocco
as well as to the Polisario, and it must provide for the
self-determination of the peoples of Western Sahara in
the framework of the procedures in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United

S/PV.7933

Nations. In that context, we think it is important that
the new Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Western Sahara do his utmost to resume the
political process.
In conclusion, allow me to underscore that the
persistent conflict in Western Sahara plays into the
hands of various extremist forces, which in turn has an
adverse impact on the military and political situation in
the entire region.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Security Council for the
month of April, I would like to express the sincere
and heartfelt appreciation of a delegation of the United
States to the members of the Council, especially our
colleagues the Permanent Representatives and Deputy
Permanent Representatives and their excellent teams, as
well as to the hard-working secretariat of the Council,
for all the support they have given to us this month. It
has been a busy month, and one in which we rallied
to consensus on several important issues within our
purview. We could not have done it without the hard
work and contributions of Council members and the
representatives of the Secretariat, as well as the support
of Conference Service Officers and, especially, the
support of our interpreters. As we end our presidency,
I know I speak on behalf of the Council in wishing the
delegation of Uruguay the best of luck in the month
of May.
The meeting rose at 7.05 p.m.

17-116629/9
