S/2021/621

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 July 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 1 July 2021 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General and the Permanent
Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, as well as the statements
delivered by Kaja Kallas, Prime Minister of Estonia; Mahamad ou Ouhoumoudou,
Prime Minister of Niger; Simon Coveney, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence
of Ireland; Bui Thanh Son, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam; Joe Mucheru,
Cabinet Secretary for Information Communications and Technology, Innovation, and
Youth Affairs of Kenya; Linda Thomas-Greenfield, Permanent Representative of the
United States and Member of President Biden’s Cabinet; Harsh Vardhan Shringla,
Foreign Secretary of India; Keisal M. Peters, Minister of State with responsibility for
Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; Audun
Halvorsen, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway; Lord Tariq Ahmad of
Wimbledon, Minister of State for the Commonwealth, the United Nations and South
Asia of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; and Franck
Riester, Minister Delegate for Foreign Trade and Economic Attractiveness attached
to the Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France, as well as by the
representatives of China, Mexico, the Russian Federation and Tunisia in connection
with the videoconference on the topic “Maintenance of international peace and
security: cybersecurity” convened on Tuesday, 29 June 2021.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for this
videoconference, the following delegations submitted written statements, copies of
which are also enclosed: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Czechia, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, European Union,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Indonesia, International Committee of the
Red Cross, International Criminal Police Organization, Islamic Republic of Iran,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Malta, Morocco, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Pakistan, Peru, Poland, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Senegal,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine
and United Arab Emirates.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372) from the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent
Representatives of the members of the Security Council, which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, these briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security
Council.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
President of the Security Council

21-09125 (E)

180821

*2109125*

310821

S/2021/621

Annex I
Statement by the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Izumi Nakamitsu
I wish to express my appreciation to Estonia for organizing this meeting and for
inviting me to provide a briefing at this open debate on maintaining international
peace and security in cyberspace.
As of January this year, there are over 4.6 billion active users of the Internet
worldwide. It is estimated that there will be 28.5 billion networked devices connected
to the Internet by 2022, a significant increase from the 18 billion in 2017.
As advances in digital technologies continue to revolutionize human life, we
must remain vigilant in our understanding of the malicious use of such technologies
that could imperil the security of future generations.
Digital technologies are increasingly straining existing legal, humanitarian and
ethical norms, non-proliferation, international stability, and peace and security.
They are also lowering barriers to access and opening new potential domains
for conflict and the ability of both State and non-State actors to carry out attacks,
including across international borders.
Specifically on information and communications technologies (ICT), we have
seen a dramatic increase in the frequency of malicious incidents in recent years. These
incidents have come in many forms, from disinformation to the disruption of
computer networks. Such acts are contributing to a diminishing trust and confidence
among States.
These developments also pose a specific risk to critical infrastructure that are
enabled by ICT, such as the financial sector, electrical power gri ds and nuclear
facilities. The Secretary-General has drawn attention to cyberattacks on health-care
facilities during the pandemic, calling on the international community to do more to
prevent and end these new forms of aggression, which can cause further severe harm
to civilians.1
Such ICT threats also have a gendered impact and must be examined through
this lens. Online violent extremism and trafficking have an often-overlooked
differentiated impact on women, men and children, as do other ICT-related threats
such as cyberstalking, intimate partner violence and the non-consensual
dissemination of intimate information and images. This is also why we need to make
every effort to secure the equal, full and effective participation of both women and
men in decision-making in the digital arena.
ICT threats are increasing, but efforts are also under way to address them. Over
the last one and a half decades at the United Nations, a series of five Groups of
Governmental Experts have studied the existing and emerging threats of ICT to
international security and recommended measures to address them. Two further
United Nations processes, an Open-ended Working Group and a sixth Group of
Governmental Experts, both established in 2018, have recently and successfully
concluded their respective work, taking important steps forward on the topic through
the adoption of concrete, action-oriented recommendations.
These two Groups affirmed a suite of voluntary, non-binding norms of
responsible State behaviour, recognizing that additional norms could be developed
__________________
1

2/128

See www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/statement/2020-05-27/secretary-generals-remarks-the-securitycouncil-open-debate-the-protection-of-civilians-armed-conflict-delivered.
21-09125

S/2021/621

over time. They also reaffirmed that international law, in particular the Charter of the
United Nations, is applicable and essential to maintaining peace, security and stability
in the ICT environment. The Groups recommended confidence-building, capacitybuilding and cooperation measures, building on the work of previous processes. The
Open-ended Working Group additionally, in accordance with its mandate, made
conclusions and recommendations on establishing regular institutional dialogue on
the issue of ICT.
As the most recent Group of Governmental Experts noted in its report, the
measures recommended by the previous Groups of Governmental Experts and the
Open-ended Working Group together represent an initial framework for responsible
State behaviour in the use of ICT. 2
A new, second Open-ended Working Group has also just held its organizational
session and will begin its substantive work later this year.
At the regional level, regional organizations are now undertaking key efforts on
ICT issues. Regional approaches have taken various forms as determined by different
priorities and needs. Some regions have placed greater emphasis on implementing
voluntary, non-binding norms of responsible State behaviour through capacitybuilding efforts, while others have pioneered their own regional confidence -building
measures to reduce the risks of conflict stemming from ICT activities or adopted other
regional tools for addressing ICT threats. Various regional instruments are also i n
place addressing specific aspects of ICT.
While States carry primary responsibility for maintaining international security,
ICT are an integral part of our societies and other stakeholders have a key role and
interest, as well as responsibility, in securing cyberspace.
Many excellent private-sector-led cyberinitiatives have been established, such
as the Cybersecurity Tech Accord led by Microsoft, the Charter of Trust led by
Siemens and the Munich Security Conference, and the Global Transparency Initiati ve
of Kaspersky Lab.
The Paris Call for Trust and Security in Cyberspace of 2018 brought together
industry, States, civil society and academia in a commitment to nine principles for
cybersecurity. These principles cover a range of issues from developing ways to
prevent the proliferation of malicious ICT tools and practices, to the promotion of
widespread acceptance and operationalization of international norms for responsible
behaviour, as well as confidence-building measures for cyberspace.
Perspectives from the private sector, civil society and academia contribute a
unique and important part of the collective solution to cybersecurity that the
international community is seeking.
The United Nations, for its part, stands ready to support States together with
other stakeholders in promoting a peaceful ICT environment. The Secretary-General
convened a high-level panel on digital cooperation, which issued its report in 2019.
Through a subsequent series of roundtable discussions with States and other key
stakeholders, a road map was developed, which recommended further actions to take
forward cooperation in key areas in the digital space.
In the context of peace and security, the Secretary-General also launched an
agenda for disarmament which places emphasis on understanding and addressing new

__________________
2

21-09125

See para. 21 of the report of the Group of Governmental Experts. An advance copy is available at
https://front.un-arm.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/final-report-2019-2021-gge-1-advancecopy.pdf.
3/128

S/2021/621

generation technologies that pose possible challenges to existing legal, humanitarian
and ethical norms; non-proliferation; and peace and security.
In his agenda, the Secretary-General makes the commitment to engage and work
with scientists, engineers and industry to encourage responsible innovation of science
and technology and to ensure its application for peaceful purposes.
He also makes a second commitment to engage with Member States to help
foster a culture of accountability and adherence to emerging norms, rules and
principles on responsible behaviour in cyberspace.
While the digital space has come to underpin almost every aspect of our daily
lives, the scale and pervasiveness of ICT “insecurity” is also now recognized as a
major concern. The political and technical difficulty of attributing and assigning
responsibility for ICT attacks could result in significant consequences, including in
unintended armed responses and escalation.
These dynamics can encourage States to adopt offensive postures for the hostile
use of these technologies. It can also enable non-State armed and criminal groups and
individuals seeking to develop or access potentially destabilizing capabilities with a
high degree of impunity. Given these implications for the maintenance of
international peace and security resulting from ICT threats, engagement by the
Security Council on this issue is paramount.
I therefore welcome this opportunity to brief the Council, and I am looking
forward to the discussion that will follow.

4/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex II
Statement by the Prime Minister of Estonia, Kaja Kallas
The United Nations was created with the future in mind. Even as we face a
number of new challenges, the values and principles agreed upon in the Char ter of
the United Nations 76 years ago remain just as valid today. Upholding them in our
increasingly digital future has become one of the most pressing global tasks. Today, I
want to talk about opportunities, threats and the mechanisms we have in place to
address them.
First, opportunities: the last year and a half of remote working, studying and
living has demonstrated clearly that our dependence on digital and communication
technologies will only grow in time. We are responsible for building a future wh ere
all actors follow certain obligations in their behaviour in cyberspace.
This is why today’s debate is not about technology, but about how cyberspace
can be used. Steve Jobs described it well: “Technology is nothing. What’s important
is that you have a faith in people, that they’re basically good and smart, and if you
give them tools, they’ll do wonderful things with them”.
As a thriving digital society, Estonia has experienced this first-hand. A free,
open, stable and secure cyberspace is part of our lifeblood. We have saved an extra
2–3 per cent of our gross domestic product every year thanks to moving most
government services online. Our routine public administration has been paperless for
more than 15 years now. Estonia has also produced the highest number of technology
unicorns per capita.
Second, threats: we must recognize that there is also a dark side to rapid
digitalization.
Malicious actors can use cyberspace as another domain through which to wreak
havoc. For example, imagine what would happen if in the middle of a drought, a
country’s water supply chain stopped operating or during the cold winter months, a
nation’s power grid was disrupted.
Over the past year, we have seen how harmful cyberactivities targeting the
health-care sector can pose a real and tangible threat. The humanitarian effects of
tampering with critical infrastructure could be devastating.
While we can put up high fences and guards around our power plants and other
critical infrastructure, this can never be part of the solution in cyberspace. Instead,
we must collectively take on the role of guardians.
Finally, how to address these threats: fortunately, as our distinguished briefer
Ms. Nakamitsu also outlined, we have a solid basis from which to work.
During the last decade, Member States have agreed on an effective normative
framework for cyberstability and conflict prevention. This consists of existing
international law, 11 voluntary non-binding norms of responsible State behaviour,
confidence-building measures and capacity-building.
Estonia holds the strong view that existing international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations in its entirety, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, applies in cyberspace.
Let me emphasize that States are accountable for any acts committed contrary
to their obligations under international law.
To ensure the protection of civilians and civilian objects in situations of armed
conflict in particular, which the Security Council also regularly discusses, it is vital
21-09125

5/128

S/2021/621

that any use of cybercapabilities in this context would be subject to obligations
deriving from international humanitarian law.
The 11 norms of responsible State behaviour that we have agreed on reflect the
expectations of the international community and set important additional guidelines
for State activities in cyberspace.
This spring the international community delivered a very powerful reaffirmation
of this normative framework. We are encouraged and guided by the successful
consensus outcomes of both the latest Group of Governmental Experts and the Openended Working Group. Implementing this framework is a major goal for the
international community.
Global efforts also need to be accompanied by regional activities and capacity building. In this respect, we highlight the important work done by regional
organizations to enhance confidence and advance cooperation. Estonia also prioritises
efforts to close the digital divide, which must go hand in hand with capacity-building
in cyberresilience, and with the protection of human rights online.
We must also recognize that we tackle cyberthreats together with the private
sector, civil society and academia. Companies in particular have an important part to
play by investing into cybersecurity and helping to eliminate vulnerabilities.
I am confident that today’s discussion will leave a mark on Security Council
history as we address the issues that will be all the more relevant for maintaining
international peace and stability for years to come.
Our digital future will be secured only if we follow common rules of the road.

6/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex III
Statement by the Prime Minister of the Republic of Niger,
Ouhoumoudou Mahamoudou
[Original: French]
Allow me first of all to commend Estonia for its commitment to placing the
question of security risks related to cyberspace on the agenda of the Council. I would
also like to thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing and her strong commitment
to this issue.
Over the past two decades, the penetration of the Internet and the use of
information and communications technologies (ICT) have grown at lightning speed.
Today, cyberspace has become a geopolitical factor allowing various nations to
expand their sphere of influence at the economic, political and cultural levels.
The digital revolution, which has brought us so close together by eliminating
our borders, has also opened the way to new challenges to sovereignty owing to the
extra-territorial nature of laws relating to it. In the same way that this space can
strengthen our democracies by providing a platform and means for all voices to be
heard, even those of dissidents, it can also prove to be a refuge for criminal actors
and groups whose sole purpose is to destabilize our nations.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has shown us the two facets of
cyberspace: on the one hand, our growing dependence on digital technologies, of
which this virtual meeting is an example, and on the other, the fragility of our systems
when faced with possible cybercrimes and cyber espionage, demonstrated by
ransomware attacks on health systems and disinformation campaigns with the purpose
of undermining the confidence of our countries’ citizens in vaccination efforts.
Furthermore, the flourishing of social networks and other discussion pl atforms
gave rise to the proliferation of certain types of discourse inciting acts of insurrection,
terrorism, attacks on moral values and the foundations of our democracies.
Given all the foregoing, allow me to make some recommendations that I believe
could be likely to strengthen respect for international law, as well as the
implementation of responsible rules for State engagement in cyberspace.
First, the digital divide between nations must be bridged, principally with the
African continent, where three quarters of the populations do not have adequate
access to the Internet, or no access at all.
As the experts have mentioned, this situation is a factor in deepening poverty,
and its impact has repercussions on everyone and on every component of society,
from health care to economic prosperity to education; it makes those areas more
vulnerable to disinformation campaigns and other digital threats. We cannot hope for
cyberspace that is healthy and safe without ensuring digital equity.
On this basis, my second recommendation is the development of a global
architecture through an integrated and coordinated approach that will allow the rules
of international law applicable to cyberspace to be clearly identified, in such vast
fields as health care, international humanitarian law, the electoral process and
economic activity, to name just a few.
But in so doing, we must also be aware that this architecture must be equitable,
both in implementation and in making use of its benefits, in order to avoid creating
new mechanisms applying double standards that will only deepen the inequalities
among nations by forcing them to deal with other negative effects.

21-09125

7/128

S/2021/621

Along this line of thinking, it would be appropriate for any new regulatory
architecture at the global level to be inspired by structures already established at the
regional level, which are required to harmonize applicable regulations at the national
and State level. We should thus mention the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Directive on Fighting Cybercrime, which imposes obligations in
that area on member States, including penalties for certain acts, and which creates a
framework to facilitate regional cooperation on cybersecurity.
My final recommendation would be for the Security Council to work on a more
inclusive and less discriminatory interpretation of the Charter of the United Nations,
but also of its own mandate, so that our deliberations might reflect the realities of
today’s world, and thus address such topics as cybersecurity, climate change and
pandemics, for these are real threats, and just like COVID-19, they do not respect
borders.

8/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex IV
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of
Ireland, Simon Coveney
My congratulations to Estonia on a successful Presidency of the Council.
My thanks also to the High Representative for her valuable insights.
I welcome this timely discussion, the first of its kind at the Security Council.
Speaking last year, the Secretary-General called on States to bring order to what
he called the “Wild West of cyberspace”.
While welcome progress has been made at the United Nations in recent months,
the cybersecurity challenges faced by States continue to grow, endangering
international peace and security.
I would like to focus my remarks today on three areas:
• Challenges and opportunities
• The need for States to implement measures agreed at the United Nations
• The importance of a values-based approach to this issue
Firstly, the challenges and opportunities.
Digital and communications technologies continue to drive economic growth
and transform how we live, communicate and work.
Innovation is key to addressing some of today’s critical global challenges,
including climate change. It also facilitates important advances in medical research,
improves access to education, and enhances the capabilities of our peacekeepers,
helping them to keep safe.
Over the past year, the pandemic has highlighted our increasing reliance on
information and communications technologies, bringing people together at times
when they had to stay apart, while at the same time exposing our vulnerabilities.
I speak from recent experience on this last point. Ireland’s public health -care
systems were subjected to a very damaging ransomware attack last month that
impacted critical medical services.
An attack of this kind during a global pandemic is appalling. Unfortunately,
Ireland’s experience is not isolated internationally.
Malicious cyberactivity, including crippling ransomware attacks, cybercrime,
intellectual property theft and the spread of disinformation and hate, has surged in
recent years.
Critical infrastructure is increasingly being targeted.
Ireland is gravely concerned that this activity poses a threat to international
peace and security.
Existing security challenges are being compounded by cyberthreats, such as the
vulnerability of nuclear-weapon command and control systems to cyberattacks. This
adds fresh urgency to the need to make progress on nuclear disarmament.
We cannot allow cyberspace to be unconstrained by rules or laws, where
malicious actors operate at will.
International disputes in cyberspace must be resolved by peaceful means.

21-09125

9/128

S/2021/621

The Council must send a clear message of support for a peaceful and secure
global cyberspace built on consensus and mutual trust.
Turning to my second point, Ireland welcomes the recent progress at the United
Nations on agreeing the framework for responsible State behaviour in cyberspace.
States have now reaffirmed that existing international law, particularly the
Charter of the United Nations, provides a strong, rules-based foundation for all
approaches to cybersecurity.
Ireland supports efforts aimed at promoting deeper understanding among States
on the application of international law to cyberspace.
We will soon publish our national position, and encourage others to do likewise.
Responsible State behaviour is, of course, also critical.
All Member States have agreed to be guided by the 11 voluntary norms of State
behaviour in cyberspace.
We now need to work on promoting understanding and implementing these
norms, building on the foundation of international law, to strengthen global
cybersecurity. This will reduce the potential for conflict and improve international
relations.
Confidence-building measures, including dialogue, build trust and reduce
tensions between States. I know that is stating the obvious, but it does need to be said.
We welcome the leading role played by regional organizations in this regard,
including the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Ireland and our
European Union partners are committed to supporting capacity-building initiatives.
In a highly interconnected cyberspace, no country is safe until all countries are
safe. Surely, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has taught us that.
We also remain committed to tackling the global digital divide. Online access
for all will be a key element in the delivery of the Sustainable Development Goals in
the next decade.
My third point is that maintaining international peace and security in cyberspace
must be human-centric and values-based.
Ireland supports a safe, secure, and accessible cyberspace where human rights
and fundamental freedoms apply, both on and offline.
We strongly reaffirm the applicability of international human rights law to
States’ actions in cyberspace.
The protection of civilians remains an overarching priority in all aspects of our
work. In this regard, Ireland is committed to ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law in cyberspace.
It is a sad fact that the gendered violence experienced by too many women and
girls is now frequently accompanied and magnified by online violence and
cyberthreats.
This makes it all the more important that we, as leaders, all leaders, consciously
promote the participation of women in United Nations processes, decisions and
policies on cyber.
We need to work harder to overcome the gender digital divide.
Ireland has consistently advocated the inclusion of a broader range of expertise
in United Nations discussions on cybersecurity and capacity-building.
10/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Governments, together with those who drive and lead on technological
innovation, have the responsibility to maintain a safe and free cyberspace.
The contributions of civil society, technical experts, academics and the private
sector have enriched past cyberdiscussions at the United Nations. To date, their
engagement has been far too limited, in our view, on the cybersecurity issue.
We also support initiatives, including the Paris Call for Trust and Stability in
Cyberspace, which bring State and non-State stakeholders together with the shared
objective of promoting peace and security.
We must all work together to reach better shared solutions.
To conclude, Ireland will continue to support constructive, multilateral, and
multi-stakeholder approaches, built on consensus, to strengthen cyberresilience
worldwide.
We call on all States to behave responsibly, in full compliance with international
law, and to implement the normative framework.
We value the role of the Security Council in preventing conflict and promoting
peace and security, including in cyberspace.
And we urge all States to build on the achievements made at the United Nations
in recent months.
In this way we can ensure a more secure and peaceful global cyberspace for
everyone to benefit from.

21-09125

11/128

S/2021/621

Annex V
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam,
Bui Thanh Son
I thank the President and the Estonian presidency for convening this meeting on
a very pertinent topic. I am grateful to Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her
insightful remarks.
The explosive development of information and communications technologies
(ICT) has significantly transformed the way people live, work and interact with each
other. It has facilitated global communication, knowledge sharing and cultural
exchange, helped peoples and countries get closer, and also renewed production
towards more efficient, sustainable and inclusive patterns.
On the other hand, these advanced technologies, if in wrong hands and used
maliciously, can pose grave threats to the sovereignty, security and prosperity of
nations. Deployed by terrorists or transnational criminals, they are capable of
sabotaging economic systems, damaging social stability, eroding cultural and humane
values.
Let us take economic losses caused by cyberattacks for an example. Global
annual expenditure on cybersecurity reached $1 trillion in 2020, an increase of 50 per
cent compared with 2018 and a three-fold increase since 2013. Most of the
expenditure goes to damage repair and recovery.
More worryingly, there have been reports of transnational cyberattacks that
undermined global and national security, even potentially triggering cyberwarfare.
As such, cybersecurity is very urgent and critical to peace, security,
development and prosperity at both the national and global levels. Against such
backdrop, I would like to share the following thoughts.
First, every State has its own sovereignty and interests over cyberspace that need
to be fully respected. Each Member State bears the primary responsibility in creating
the legal framework to regulate behaviour in cyberspace within its territory and
applicable to its citizens. Also, regulating behaviours in compliance with the law,
preventing illegal malicious acts and facilitating positive activities are guiding
principles to create a safe, stable cyberspace for peace, development and humanity.
Viet Nam is a country with high Internet coverage, with nearly 70 per cent of
our population active on the Internet and social networks. Our success lies in the
comprehensive legal framework that facilitates ICT development and prevents ICT
misuse. Viet Nam also prioritizes on improving self-protection, self-reliance and
resilience, combined with effective international cooperation.
Second, the nature of cyberattacks is transnational where global Internet
networks become target for constant exploitation by perpetrators. It correspondingly
requires global and trans-national solutions to cybersecurity. Viet Nam supports an
international framework that sets out rules and norms of responsible behaviour in
cyberspace, on the basis of consensus and with the widest participation of countries,
including ongoing processes at the United Nations. We are concerned and oppose to
the malicious, harmful use of ICT, especially cyberattacks on medical, electricity,
water and food facilities so essential to people. Activities in cyberspace have to
comply with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law,
in particular, respect for sovereignty, non-interference in internal affairs of States, and
non-use of force and the peaceful settlement of disputes.

12/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Third, enhancing international cooperation, confidence-building and
accountability are indispensable to strengthen cybersecurity. All countries,
irrespective of their size and level of development, benefit from a global secured and
safe cyberspace. Therefore, they need to participate actively and make more practical
and responsible contributions to ensuring safety and security in the global cyberspace
for peace, stability and sustainable development of every nations.
The development of ICT is an important launchpad in our common quest for
prosperity. Viet Nam has actively implemented a national digital transformation
strategy. We aim to have the digital economy to account for 30 per cent gross domestic
product by 2030. In South-East Asia, Viet Nam has actively participated in regional
cybersecurity mechanisms, including the cybersecurity cooperation strategy of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. We also hold effective bilateral cooperation
with many countries and international partners on this field. Viet Nam stands ready
to further contribute to enhancing international cooperation towards a peaceful,
stable, secured and safe cyberspace for our shared prosperity and sustainable
development.

21-09125

13/128

S/2021/621

Annex VI
Statement by the Cabinet Secretary for Information and
Communications Technologies, Innovation and Youth Affairs of
Kenya, Joe Mucheru
I congratulate the President for convening, for the first time in the Security
Council, an independent discussion on cybersecurity. I thank the High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Nakamitsu for her informative briefing.
Our increasing dependence on information and communications technology
(ICT) comes with both benefits and vulnerabilities.
The efforts of those who develop and use ICT and emerging technologies for
peaceful purposes are closely matched by their opposites who use them for control,
illicit surveillance, fraud, radicalization and destabilization.
Kenya is committed to the sustenance and protection of a free and open Internet
domain. We regard it as a key driver of national development, and we seek our young
people to be empowered and competitive in its use.
We are a world leader in digital currency having pioneered M-Pesa – the first
widely used mobile money platform. Our Government has also embraced digitized
public service platform delivery through our one-stop service facilities, known as
Huduma Centres, which are spread across the country.
Young Kenyans are innovating and building transformative companies. This has
been recognized by investors globally with our “Silicon Savanna” attracting the most
investment in our region. We believe that many of our decent jobs of the future will
emerge from these companies.
With such extensive exposure to the digital domain, Kenya regards it a critical
national security aim to secure ICT.
To this end, we have a robust regulatory regime. And we also have growing
capabilities to respond to threats. Our Computer Emergency Incident and Response
Team collaborates with other national computer incident response teams, and
internationally through the global Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams.
Our task today is to offer proposals on how the Security Council can better
secure international peace and security from threats delivered through, or that exploit,
cyberspace.
I will highlight three areas that we believe would benefit from better
international cooperation and collaboration.
The first area concerns ICT and emerging economies. Cybercrime is
increasingly focusing on emerging economies. Enhanced cooperation in
strengthening existing regional and international economic conflict settlement
mechanisms is needed including coordinated efforts to identify and mitigate risks
associated with ICT-linked activities such as digitized fraud, the impact of crypto
currencies on national central banking systems, and cyberattacks on critical
infrastructure.
As industrial automation accelerates, the jobs lost must be replaced by other
decent ones otherwise peace and security will suffer. More will need to be done to
invest in the digital skills that allow countries with underdeveloped industry to attract
the investment that offers millions of new jobs.
The second area relates to ICT and violent extremism. The ubiquitous,
programmable and data-driven nature of emerging technologies, although beneficial,
14/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

has also opened a door for misuse by armed groups and terrorists. These groups
capitalize on the opaque control mechanisms, algorithms, 3D printing, the application
of cryptography and simplified user interface to recruit, plan and carry out terrorist
acts. This has enhanced radicalization and militarization.
Kenya calls for enhanced cooperation between the Security Council and the
Office of Counter-Terrorism to build a cyberspace security capability that is robust
and responsive in responding to Member State capacity-building needs.
United Nations peace operation mandates will also need to consider the use of
cyberspace by hostile militarized actors.
My third focus area is ICT and social media. The growing impact of fake news,
deep fakes, misinformation and disinformation on peace and security cannot be
overstated. Recently, we have seen the impact of fake news blunting the responses to
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic threat by promoting vaccine
hesitancy.
The social media companies are going to need to be held to account and made
to ensure that fake news, in particular by sophisticated actors, some supported by
States, is not proliferating on their platforms. Such a regulatory effort will need to be
built on a multilateral platform to ensure uniformity of effect.
I conclude by affirming Kenya’s readiness to contribute to enhanced global
efforts, institutional frameworks and norms that will amplify the potential of a free,
peaceful and stable cyberdomain, and at the same time mitigate the t hreats.

21-09125

15/128

S/2021/621

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
I thank the President and thank Estonia for organizing this important discussion
today. We are very grateful to Estonia for bringing this issue to the Council’s attention.
I also thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her insightful briefing.
This debate comes at an opportune time. Especially with the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, we have never relied on technology more, and we’re seeing
that today. But both State actors and non-State actors alike are taking advantage of
this increased reliance. In the United States, separate high-profile ransomware
incidents disrupted JBS, a major food processing company, and Colonial Pipeline, a
company that provides fuel to much of our East Coast. These incidents demonstrate
the serious and the unacceptable risk that cybercrime poses to critical infrastructure.
The effects of these malicious activities are often not contained within borders, either.
Malicious cyberactivity targeted the software company SolarWinds, for example, and
Microsoft’s Exchange Server software.
The risk is clear. Our infrastructure – online and off – is at stake. Our most basic
and critical services, from the food we eat, to the water we drink, to the health -care
services we all relied on during the pandemic, are targets. So, in today’s world, when
we talk about global security, we have to talk about cybersecurity. Fortunately, despite
our ideological differences, Member States have repeatedly come together over the
past decade to try to prevent conflict stemming from cybercapabilities. Together, we
have articulated a framework of responsible State behaviour in cyberspace through
the Group of Governmental Experts process. The framework makes it clear that
international law applies to cyberspace. It also outlines voluntary norms and the
practical cooperative measures that States should take.
In recent months, the Open-ended Working Group, consisting of all Member
States, reached consensus on a new report that explicitly endorses the framework of
responsible State behaviour in cyberspace. And just last month, the sixth United Nations
Group of Governmental Experts also successfully ended with a robust set of
recommendations and new guidance on the framework. That is progress. These reports
provide real guidance, from State use of cybercapabilities to approaching the
complicated issue of attributing cyberincidents. The framework also considers how
States should cooperate to mitigate the effects of significant malicious cyberactivity
emanating from a particular State’s territory, including those activities undertaken by
criminals.
We all share this responsibility. As President Biden recently noted, and I quote,
“countries need to take action against criminals who conduct ransomware activities
on their territory”. So, let me be clear: when a State is notified of harmful activity
emanating from its own territory, it must take reasonable steps to address it. Given
the transnational nature of cyberspace, this cooperation is essential.
The framework Member States have worked so hard to develop now provide the
rules of the road. We have all committed to this framework. Now, it is time to put it
into practice. We have substantial work to do to ensure that all States that want to act
responsibly in cyberspace have both the policy knowledge and the technical capacity
to do so. As we do this work, we also need to continue to protect Internet freedom.
The same rights that people have offline – including the rights of freedom of
expression, association, and peaceful assembly – must also be protected online.
Member States have demonstrated a remarkable willingness to bridge
differences and reach consensus on these issues. Let us continue to show that good
faith and provide the world a united front on cybersecurity. Together, we will build
an open, secure, and stable cyberspace that benefits everyone.
16/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex VIII
Statement by the Foreign Secretary of India, Harsh Vardhan Shringla
I thank the President and welcome Estonia’s initiative in organizing this open
debate to highlight one of the significant emerging areas of cybersecurity. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Nakamitzu for her briefing.
While the meaning of peace has remained constant since the establishment of
the Security Council, the nature of conflict and its underlying tools have tran sformed
tremendously over the decades. Today, we are witnessing growing security threats to
Member States emanating from cyberspace, which can no longer be ignored. Hence,
the open debate is timely.
The increasing use of cybertechnologies and of information and
communications technologies (ICT) has accelerated economic development,
improved services delivery to citizens, generated greater social awareness, and placed
information and knowledge in the hands of every individual. Most activities in this
cyber-age – political, social, economic, humanitarian and developmental (including
this high-level meeting of the Security Council) – are now conducted in or connected
to cyberspace. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has only accelerated
and expanded the digitalization of these activities.
The dynamic and continuously evolving feature of cyberspace has also brought
cybersecurity into the discourse of peace and security. The borderless nature of
cyberspace and more importantly anonymity of actors involved have challenged the
traditionally accepted concepts of sovereignty, jurisdiction and privacy. These unique
attributes of cyberspace present their own set of numerous challenges for Member
States. I will focus on three key challenges in my intervention:
First, some States are leveraging their expertise in cyberspace to achieve their
political and security-related objectives and indulge in contemporary forms of crossborder terrorism. The world is already witnessing the use of cybertools to compromise
State security through, inter alia, attacking critical national infrastructure, including
health and energy facilities, even disrupting social harmony through radicalization.
Open societies have been particularly vulnerable to cyberattacks and disinformation
campaigns.
Second, we are witnessing the sophisticated use of cyberspace by terrorists
around the world to broaden their appeal, spread virulent propaganda, incite hatred
and violence, recruit youth and raise funds. Terrorists have also used social media for
planning and executing their terror attacks and wreaking havoc. As a victim of
terrorism, India has always underlined the need for Member States to address and
tackle the implications of terrorist exploitation of the cyberdomain more strategically.
Third, the integrity and security of ICT products, which form the building blocks
of cyberspace, are being compromised. There are widespread concerns that State and
non-State actors are introducing vulnerabilities and harmful hidden functions,
including through backdoor channels, into ICT networks and products. Such nefarious
acts undermine trust and confidence in the global ICT supply chain, compromise
security and could become a flashpoint between States. It is in the interest of the
international community to ensure that all actors abide by their international
obligations and commitments and not indulge in practices that could have potentially
disruptive effects on global supply chains and trade in ICT products.
The interconnectedness of the cyberdomain requires that solutions to the
complex problems and threats emanating from cyberspace cannot be resolved in
isolation. As Member States, we need to adopt a collaborative rules-based approach
21-09125

17/128

S/2021/621

in cyberspace and work towards ensuring its openness, stability and security. The
momentum generated by the positive outcomes of the Group of Governmental Experts
on Advancing Responsible State Behaviour in Cyberspace in the Context of
International Security and the Open-ended Working Group on the developments in
ICT should be leveraged to find further common ground and improve upon the
already-agreed cybernorms and rules. These rules must strive to ensure collective
cybersecurity through international cooperation. Multi-stakeholder involvement will
be key in achieving this objective.
Fostering equitable access to cyberspace and its benefits should also form an
important component of this international co-operation. The widening “digital gaps”
and “digital knowledge gaps” among countries create an unsustainable environm ent
in the cyberdomain. Growing digital dependency in the post-coronavirus disease
(COVID) era has exacerbated risks and exposed these fissures of digital inequalities.
These must be bridged through capacity-building. The pervasive and boundary less
nature of cyberspace implies that we are only as strong as the weakest link in the
global network. “Only together” we can achieve the goal of a globally secure resilient
cyberspace and we must ensure that no country is left behind in this collective
endeavour.
India is committed to an open, secure, free, accessible and stable cyberspace
environment, which will become an engine for innovation, economic growth,
sustainable development, ensure free flow of information and respect cultural and
linguistic diversity. With our transformative technology initiatives in recent years
such as IndiaStack, Aadhar and UPI, we have successfully leveraged the tremendous
potential of cybertechnologies in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and improving governance. As part of its COVID vaccination drive, one
of the largest such drives in the world, India has developed Co-WIN – a scalable,
inclusive and open technological platform. The Co-WIN platform can be customized
and scaled up for health interventions across the globe. We are working on sharing
this platform with partner countries.
Our overarching objective is to harness cyberspace for growth and
empowerment of the people, not just of our own country, but for all humanity. India
stands ready to offer its expertise and share its experience in this endeavour.

18/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex IX
Statement by Minister of State with the Responsibility for Foreign
Affairs and Foreign Trade of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Keisal M. Peters
We would like to express our appreciation to the Estonian presidency for its
initiative to hold today’s high-level open debate on a topic that is critically important,
for taking stock of the Security Council’s performance in its task of maintaining
international peace and security. Let me also express my appreciation to all of today’s
briefers for their insightful presentations.
In the contemporary world, cyberspace touches nearly every part of our daily
lives. The role of information and communications technology (ICT) in enabling
economic and social benefits is clear. Yet, despite these benefits, the worl d must
remain cognizant of the serious ICT problems that exists. The global ICT environment
is facing a dramatic increase in the malicious use of ICTs by State and non-State
actors. To be sure, the misuse of ICTs poses a risk for all States and has the pot ential
to negatively impact international peace and security. It is therefore imperative that
we build on an earlier commitment to generate confidence-building measures that
enhance international peace and security and increase cooperation, transparency,
predictability, and stability among Member States in this field.
An open, secure, stable, accessible and peaceful ICT environment is essential
for all and requires effective cooperation among States to reduce risks to international
peace and security. Additionally, other actors with different capacities and capabilities
from across different sectors at all levels of the global ICT chain, have a key role in
ensuring cybersecurity. We must explore possibilities for further capacity-building
and technical assistance resources. The United Nations needs to enhance assistance
to Member States and further help ensure coherence of efforts among the range of
United Nations entities engaging in cyberspace. These efforts should be tied into the
Organization’s broader goals.
Despite our many challenges as a small island developing State, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines has taken concrete steps to improve its ability to tackle the scourge
of cybercrime. Two laws, the Electronic Evidence Act (2004) and the Electronic
Transactions Act (2007), underpin a basic legislative framework for cybersecurity in
the country. In August of 2016, lawmakers passed the Cybercrime Bill 2016 into law,
thus providing the country with substantive and procedural law to be able to deal with
cybercrime more effectively. We are also committed to our regional cybersecurity
agreements within the OAS and CARICOM.
Due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and further disruption
due to our recent volcanic eruption, schools within our country have switched to
remote education, as is the case all over the world. With thousands of children
receiving tablets from the Government to facilitate this transition, there has been
increased volumes of Internet use and screen time. Considering this, the Ministry of
Education and National Reconciliation has embarked on a #GoCyberSmart campaign
to promote cybersafety. The campaign is an awareness-building initiative to empower
students to make the right digital decisions. The three focus areas are informat ion
security, hardware safety and navigating safely online.
The importance of information exchange among Member States and regional
and international organizations are essential for ensuring stability and to prevent
escalations of cybersecurity incidents. Moreover, we call on Member States to remain
committed to international law and the framework for responsible State behaviour in
cyberspace.
21-09125

19/128

S/2021/621

In our effort to advance responsible State behaviour in cyberspace in the context
of international peace and security, we must be guided by the assessments and
recommendations contained in the consensus Group of Governmental Experts (Group
of Governmental Experts) reports in 2010, 2013, 2015 and the most recent in 2021,
as well as the conclusions and recommendations of the final report of the United
Nations Open-ended Working Group.
To conclude, failure to agree on the rules of engagement, policy norms, and
international cooperation mechanisms for a peaceful ICT environment would only
yield new sources of instability and conflict. In cyberspace, we encourage all actors
in the international community to comply with their international legal obligations
including the respect of sovereignty and political independence as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, and the principles for peaceful dispute settlement in
the same manner as in the physical world. The urgent drive to maintain international
peace and security in cyberspace must never stop.

20/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex X
Statement by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway,
Audun Halvorsen
A globally accessible, free, open, and secure cyberspace is essential to maintain
international peace and security. We welcome that Estonia has brought this topic to
the attention of the Security Council – the primary United Nations body responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security, in accordance with the United
Nations charter.
Information and communication technologies (ICT) are a fundamental part of
global infrastructure. They are at the core of the development, stability, and security
of all States. Yet cyberspace is also increasingly becoming an arena for competition,
and potential conflict between States.
We have witnessed over the last decade how malicious cyberoperations, by both
States and non-State actors, have increased in scope, scale, severity, and
sophistication. We find ourselves in the midst of a global pandemic, where even
critical health infrastructure has been among the targets of such malicious activity –
putting at risk the safety of citizens and our global efforts to manage the COVID
crisis.
Yet, there is also cause for optimism. This last year has demonstrated the
readiness of the international community to rise to the occasion and work together to
advance responsible State behaviour in cyberspace. The consensus reports of the
Open-ended working Group and of the Governmental Group of Experts (Group of
Governmental Experts) demonstrate the commitment of all Member States to uphold
the international rules-based order in cyberspace. This is a victory for multilateralism.
The affirmation of the applicability of international law to cyberspace is the
cornerstone of both the Group of Governmental Experts and the Open-ended Working
Group consensus reports. international law is the basis for States’ shared commitment
to preventing conflict and maintaining international peace and security. It is key in
enhancing confidence among States. Both reports reaffirm that international law, and
in particular the Charter of the United Nations, is applicable and essential to
maintaining peace and stability, and promoting an open, secure, stable, accessible,
and peaceful ICT environment.
We consider it a major step forward that the Group of Governmental Experts
report has recognized that international humanitarian law applies in all armed
conflict, also in a cybercontext.
International humanitarian law aims to minimize the human suffering caused by
armed conflict. It regulates and limits cyberoperations during armed conflicts, just as
it regulates and limits any other means and methods of warfare. Consequently, attacks
against civilians or civilian objects are prohibited, and medical services must be
protected and respected. Attacking critical infrastructure, such as power supply, food
production, drinking water installations, or other objects indispensable to the survival
of the population are therefore prohibited.
Recognizing the applicability of international humanitarian law in cyberspace
does not legitimize cyberwarfare. Any use of force by States remains governed by the
Charter of the United Nations and the relevant rules of customary international law.
International disputes must be settled by peaceful means, in cyberspace as in all other
domains.

21-09125

21/128

S/2021/621

President,
All Member States have supported a framework for responsible State behaviour
in cyberspace. A framework based on: the applicability of international law,
adherence to agreed voluntary norms, practical confidence-building measures and
capacity-building efforts to bolster the resilience and security of all. This is a major
achievement; but its value can only be realized through implementation and
compliance by all States.
Today’s meeting is a recognition that malicious activities in cyberspace can
severely impact international peace and security. Today’s meeting is also a clear
signal to all States that we are expected to live up to the framework for responsible
State behaviour in cyberspace that we have agreed to: That we must comply with our
obligations under international law and adhere to the norms to which we have agreed.

22/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XI
Statement by the Minister of State for South Asia and the
Commonwealth of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Lord Ahmad of Wimbledon
Today, almost everything has a digital dimension.
The international community needs to grasp the tremendous opportunities that
the Internet offers, for learning, for business, for communication and, indeed, for
entertainment.
But we also need to treat the threats that go with that, with the seriousness they
deserve.
The threats posed by malicious and dangerous activity in cyberspace are now
clearer than ever.
Indeed, only last month, a criminal gang targeted Colonial Pipeline, holding to
ransom America’s largest fuel pipeline and threatening serious economic disruption.
Some of this activity aims for theft or extortion. Often, it is simply sabotage and
disruption.
But we have a collective responsibility, as an international community, to create
a cyberspace that benefits all countries and, indeed, all people. Together, we should
be shaping the rules that serve the common good.
We are of course not starting from scratch in this regard.
It was ten years ago that the UK brought together more than 60 countries in
London, to establish basic principles like universal access to the Internet, and
protecting individuals’ rights online.
Ten years later, we have come a long way since then.
Just this year, the General Assembly unanimously reaffirmed the application of
international law in cyberspace and agreed a set of voluntary principles, including the
importance of protecting health infrastructure.
A Group of Governmental Experts moved forward our understanding of the
norms, rules and principles of cyberspace, and set out clear interpretatio ns of how
international law applies.
But we want to go further. It is no secret that States are developing
cyberoperations to support their military and national security capabilities. Indeed,
the United Kingdom is one of them.
Let me be clear: we will use these capabilities to defend ourselves against those
who seek to harm us. We are committed to use these capabilities where necessary, in
a proportionate way, and in line with international law.
Our collective challenge here is to clarify how the rules of international law
apply to State activities in cyberspace, guard against malicious actors bending the
rules, and enforce the consequences for those who commit malicious cyberactivity.
The United Kingdom is committed to working with all countries, and with its
many stakeholders, to make sure cyberspace is governed by rules and norms that
enhance our collective security.
Rules and norms that promote democratic values, rules and norms that support
global economic growth, and counter the spread of digital authoritarianism.

21-09125

23/128

S/2021/621

We must uphold the rule of law in cyberspace: embodying responsible State
behaviour, incentivising compliance, deterring attacks and, indeed, holding others to
account for irresponsible State behaviour.
We must also absolutely prioritise and ensure human rights are protected online,
as they are offline, to ensure we build a free, open, peaceful and secure cyberspace,
accessible to everyone.
The United Nations framework for responsible State behaviour in cyberspace is
our starting point. We must support all States to now implement it.
The United Kingdom was pleased to announce last month that we will invest
over $30m to support cyberrelated capacity-building in vulnerable countries – in
particular across Africa and the Indo-Pacific.
Our work with Interpol will help countries, including Ethiopia, Ghana, Nigeria,
Rwanda, and Kenya, support joint operations against cybercriminals.
Elsewhere, UK funding will help build national emergency response teams to
protect countries against these threats.
We could of course do none of this without our partners in the private sector,
and, of course, in academic and civil society.
But, in all of this, as we join here together today, the Security Council also has
a pivotal and an important role to play.
Where malicious activity poses risks to international peace and security – by
exacerbating conflict or causing humanitarian suffering – the Security Council must
be ready to respond.
The Council should respond just as it would to threats posed by conventional
means.
We have the chance to grasp the opportunities of cyberspace and ensure it
remains a force for prosperity and progress for all.
To do that, it is vital that we work together to counter those who would risk our
collective security.
And let me assure you of this: the United Kingdom is fully committed to
protecting a free, open, peaceful and secure cyberspace for generations to come.

24/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XII
Statement by the Minister-Delegate to the Minister for Europe and
Foreign Affairs of France, Franck Riester
[Original: French]
I wish to thank the Prime Minister of Estonia for this event. The Security
Council oversees the maintenance of international peace and security and should be
able to do so in cyberspace.
Cyberspace is a place of opportunity but also of new threats. It has become a
territory for strategic competition among powers. Malicious uses of information and
communications technologies (ICT) are proliferating, by State and non-State actors
alike.
Over the past several months, in particular in the context of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we have noted our increased dependence on these
technologies. I have in mind first of all of the heinous cyberattacks using ransomware
launched against hospitals and other critical infrastructure. I would like to express the
full solidarity of France with the victims of those attacks. I am also thinking of the
campaigns to manipulate information through the spread of “infodemics” or the
increasing fragmentation of the Internet, practices contrary to democratic values.
Actions in cyberspace have very real consequences that can prove to be severe in our
lives and societies.
The challenge for the coming century will be to build collective governance and
regulation of cyberspace. We want neither a “digital Wild West”, nor a cloistered
cyberspace. We have affirmed this in the Paris Call for Trust and Security in
Cyberspace, as well as in the framework of the Group of Seven (G7) in the Dinard
Declaration on the Cyber Norm Initiative. France is determined to build with its
partners a cyberspace that is open, secure, stable, not fragmented, accessible and
peaceful.
International law, including the Charter of the United Nations, applies in full to
cyberspace. This also implies respect for international humanitarian law by cyber
operations conducted during armed conflict.
Faced with the increasing number of threats in cyberspace and cyberattacks,
Governments should respond by cooperation and law. For over a decade, France has
played a pioneering role in various multilateral efforts. These efforts have led to the
emergence of a framework for responsible behaviour by States in their use of ICT.
This framework is based on international law, on a coherent set of non-binding norms
of behaviour and on measures for transparency and trust. It has allowed progress to
be made in mutual cooperation and understanding among States in cyberspace. I
would like to commend the recent success of the Open-ended Working Group on
Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Context of
International Security and the sixth Group of Governmental Experts on Advancing
Responsible State Behaviour in Cyberspace in the Context of International Security,
which have adopted two balanced and useful consensus reports. France is ready to
continue to participate constructively in multilateral discussions within the United
Nations, including in the context of the new Open-ended Working Group on security
of and in the use of information and communications technologies, established by
General Assembly resolution 75/240.
Going forward, agreed norms and principles must above all be put into practice
effectively. France, with 52 partners, proposes the establishment of a Programme of
Action on cybersecurity by the United Nations. This new tool, which complements
21-09125

25/128

S/2021/621

the new Open-ended Working Group, will allow a durable structure to be established.
Its purpose will be to support capacity building and creat ing spaces for dialogue with
civil society, researchers and private actors. France is open to dialogue with all States
and stakeholders interested in refining and building on this action-oriented proposal.
This collective commitment by multiple actors is essential. In cyberspace, States
certainly have responsibilities that no other actor can presume to take on, but they
cannot act alone. We must enter fully into this new form of diplomacy.

26/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China, Zhang Jun
[Original: Chinese]
In today’s world, a new round of technological revolution and industrial
transformation is just unfolding and digital and cyber technologies are developing
rapidly, greatly changing humanity’s modes of production and ways of life and
spurring the economic and social development of all countries. At the same time,
cyber surveillance, cyberattacks, cybercrimes and cyberterrorism have become global
public hazards, and cyberspace is becoming increasingly militarized, politi cized,
insecure and ideologized. In the cyber world, countries not only enjoy shared
opportunities and common interests, but also face common challenges and assume
shared responsibilities. They are increasingly becoming a community with a shared
future through weal and woe.
Chinese President Xi Jinping has stated that although countries are different in
national conditions and stages of Internet development, and face different challenges
on the ground, they share the same desire to advance the digital economy, the same
interest in tackling cybersecurity challenges, and the same need to strengthen the
governance of cyberspace. China has always called for the international community
to work together in a joint effort to protect cybersecurity and maintain int ernational
peace.
• We should promote security by maintaining peace and preventing cyberspace
from becoming a new battlefield. The international community should abide by
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in particular the
principles of sovereign equality, prohibition of the use of force, non-interference
in internal affairs, and peaceful settlement of disputes. It is essential to respect
the right of each country to independently choose the path of its network
development and the model of its network management, and to participate in the
governance of cyberspace on an equal footing. Countries should refrain from
undertaking cyber activities that endanger the security of other countries.
Caution should be exercised in applying the law of armed conflict to cyberspace,
and arms races in cyberspace should be prevented.
• We should promote security through exchanges and cooperation and create a
favourable cyberspace environment. Protecting cybersecurity is a global issue,
and no country can stay aloof from it or deal with it single-handedly.
Hegemonism, unilateralism and protectionism in cyberspace will only intensify
confrontations and poison the atmosphere for cooperation, and should be
rejected and opposed jointly by the international community. Countries should
work together to deepen exchanges and cooperation in technology research and
development, rule-making and information sharing, and should jointly curb the
abuse of information technology. We should jointly oppose cyber surveillance
and cyberattacks, combat cyberterrorism and cybercrimes, and enhance
cybersecurity protection capabilities. It is essential to provide companies with
an open, fair, and non-discriminatory business environment, ensure the
openness, stability and security of global information-technology industry
supply chains, promote the healthy development of the global economy, and
oppose human interference with companies’ normal business operations,
whatever the pretext.
• We should promote security through improved governance and advance fairness
and justice in cyberspace. All countries should uphold effective multilateralism,
establish an open, inclusive and sustainable cybersecurity governance process
21-09125

27/128

S/2021/621

within the United Nations framework and with the equal participation of all,
formulate international rules for cyberspace that are generally accepted by all
countries, and oppose cliques and group politics. China highly commends the
successful completion of the reports on cybersecurity by the United Nations
Open-ended Working Group and the Group of Governmental Experts, and looks
forward to the new Open-ended Working Group’s contributions to maintaining
cybersecurity. We stand ready to work with all parties in promoting, within the
United Nations framework, the development of an international convention
against cybercrime. Full play should be given to the roles of such multi stakeholders as Governments, internet companies, technology communities,
civil society, and individual citizens, in the spirit of extensive consultation, joint
contribution and shared benefits.
• We should promote security through inclusive development and achieve shared
prosperity in cyberspace. Current world economic development is sluggish.
Digital and cyber technology can become important engines for countries to
recover and resume economic and social development after the pandemic.
Countries should adopt more proactive, comprehensive, coordinated and
inclusive policies to promote the balanced development of information and
communications technologies on the global scale, vigorously develop new
models and new formats such as the digital economy, and oppose attempts to
seek scientific and technological hegemony. We should advance the
development of digital infrastructure and connectivity, break down information
barriers, bridge digital divides, and help developing countries raise their levels
of digitization, connectivity and knowledge development, with a view to
implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We should step
up cooperation with and assistance to developing countries in the cybersecurity
field, and improve their early-warning, prevention and emergency-response
capabilities for cybersecurity incidents.
China attaches great importance to cybersecurity and informatization and is
committed to building a digital economy, digital society and digital government,
using the overall digital transformation to drive changes in modes of production,
lifestyles and models of governance. China will continue to improve its national
cybersecurity laws, regulations and institutional standards on the basis of the
Cybersecurity Law and the Data Security Law.
Last year, China put forward the Global Initiative on Data Security, focusing on
such issues as critical infrastructure and the protection of personal information, data
storage and retrieval for overseas enterprises, and supply chain security, providing
constructive solutions for maintaining global data and cybersecurity. Recently, China,
with the League of Arab States (LAS), issued the China–LAS Cooperation Initiative
on Data Security, which embodied the two parties’ joint appeal for the maintenance
of cyber and data security. We welcome all parties’ active responses to and
participation in the initiative, so as to jointly formulate global rules for digital
governance. China is also actively pursuing the construction of the Digital Silk Road,
working with other countries to build a new, future-oriented pattern of intelligent
interconnection.
Cyberspace embodies the dream of humanity, involving people’s well-being,
peace and security. China stands ready to work with all countries to seize the
opportunity presented by the information revolution to foster a new momentum of
innovation and development, open up a new landscape of digital cooperation, forge a
new pattern of cybersecurity, build a community with a shared future in cyberspace,
and jointly create a better future for humanity.

28/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Mexico to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Mexico welcomes the convening of this open debate and the briefing by the
Undersecretary-General and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Izumi
Nakamitsu.
As we have heard here as well as in many other forums, the growing importance
of cyberspace is undeniable. The world has become increasingly dependent on
information and telecommunications technologies, all the more so in the context of
the pandemic. International relations have also quickly entered the virtual realm, and
the Security Council cannot and should not be unaware of its implications for
international peace and security.
Although almost half the global population does not have internet access, that
does not exempt them from becoming victims of some of the thousands of
cyberattacks that occur daily against government networks, banking and financial
institutions and research and health institutions.
These potential risks have led various bodies of the United Nations system to
respond to threats and seek agreements among States to ensure that cyberspace is not
used for criminal, hostile and even terrorist purposes, without losing sight of the
balance with its peaceful uses and the enormous opportunities it offers for sustainable
development.
Mexico considers it essential to prevent any escalation of risk in cyberspace.
The use of cyberspace, like any other physical environment, should be regulated
according to very clear guidelines and parameters, while it is necessary to help to
promote an open, free, secure, stable, accessible and resilient cyberspace.
Mexico therefore applauds the successful conclusion of the work of the Group
of Governmental Experts and the Open-ended Working Group that led to the adoption
of substantive reports by consensus, which represent fundamental precedents for
multilateral efforts. In the view of my country, this fact reaffirms the prevailing
confidence in multilateralism, and the constructive role the United Nations can play
in achieving integrated, legitimate and long-term responses to the challenges of
cyberspace and information and communications technologies.
That is not enough, however. Progress must be made towards the full application
of international law in cyberspace, including the Charter of the United Nations,
international human rights law, international humanitarian law and the development
of jurisprudence in those areas.
We firmly believe in greater transparency in cyberspace activities,
accountability, and a call for the development of norms for responsible State
behaviour adopted by the General Assembly itself, and supplemented by measures to
promote international cooperation to build and strengthen the cyber capacity of
States.
Mexico hopes that, in the future deliberations and work of the Security Council,
the growing voices of civil society, academia and the private sector will be heard.
They rightfully hold a common objective: to ensure the peaceful use of cyberspace
for the development and use of digital technologies.

21-09125

29/128

S/2021/621

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, V. A. Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
The year following the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic was a major ordeal for the whole world, remembered above all as a year of
challenges and losses. Many diplomatic efforts have suffered, and negotiations have
stalled on many fronts.
The multilateral discussions on international information security at the United
Nations stand out in this regard, as they not only maintained momentum, but also
brought about, dare I say, historic results. Both of the designated United Nations
General Assembly expert forums – the Group of Governmental Experts and the Openended Working Group – were able to adopt their final reports by consensus.
The negotiations in these groups were not easy, which made the hard-won
outcomes all the more precious. These outcomes clearly showed that the international
community is able to agree on key issues when dialogue is pragmatic, depoliticized
and constructive. Thanks to these efforts, we are now entering an important new
phase, which began in June 2021 with the organizational session of the new Open ended Working Group for 2021–2025.
This outcome is a shared achievement of the international community. For our
part, we have been striving for decades to contribute to the establishment of a global
system for ensuring international information security. In 1998, Russia raised, for the
first time at the United Nations, the need to address threats to interna tional
information security and proposed a General Assembly resolution to that effect. In
the early 2000s, we proposed the establishment of the Group of Governmental Experts
to serve as an expert forum for the discussion of international information securi ty.
In 2019, when it became clear that this topic had outgrown the narrow focus of the
Group, we, together with like-minded delegations, responded to the needs of the
international community by launching the open and democratic negotiation process
on international information security with the participation of all Member States in
the format of the Open-ended Working Group.
This was a very important milestone. For the first time, discussions relating to
digital security were open to the majority of States Members of the United Nations.
Our rationale is very straightforward: we believe in equitable and mutually respectful
dialogue. If we are all equal in the face of threats to international information security,
such threats should be discussed not by a narrow circle of technologically advanced
States, but by all States Members of the United Nations. States that consider
themselves to be more “advanced” should not impose their will.
Our proposals for the establishment of the Group of Governmental Experts an d,
later, the Open-ended Working Group were not to everyone’s liking at first. Several
States, including States participating in today’s meeting, voted against their
establishment. However, gradually they began to join the conversation, eventually
becoming active and constructive participants.
Effective multilateral diplomacy in the area of international information security
at the United Nations, complementing bilateral cooperation between States on this
topic, is an excellent example of how these issues should be addressed with a view to
overcoming mutual mistrust and allaying concerns. This stands in contrast to the
notorious “megaphone diplomacy” to which, unfortunately, some of our partners
sometimes resort.
30/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

At the same time, we are unfortunately witnessing a dangerous trend of the
United Nations Security Council attempting to impose unilateral interpretations of
agreements reached within the Group of Governmental Experts and the Open-ended
Working Group, effectively calling for the outcomes of the discussions in those
designated General Assembly forums to be supported or, worse, revised. We consider
such attempts to be destructive. They are driving the international community towards
unpredictable and undesirable confrontations.
Specifically, some countries are seeking, by distorting agreements, including on
the international legal aspects of the use of information and communications
technology (ICT), to justify unilateral pressure and sanctions against other Member
States and the possible use of force against them. It is of grave concern that several
technologically advanced States are actively pursuing the militarization of the
information space by promoting the concept of “preventive military cyberstrikes”,
including against critical infrastructure. These confrontational doctrines contradict
the commitment declared by them, including today, to preventing conflict arising
from the use of ICT. This as an attempt to use their position of strength to impose
their own “rules of play” in the information sphere.
I wish to emphasize that, while the digital sphere is not unregulated, the debate
as to how exactly international law can be applied to it is far from over. These issues
will be discussed for at least another five years within the designated General
Assembly forum – the new Open-ended Working Group.
In this regard, the final reports of the Group of Governmental Experts and the
Open-ended Working Group represent a fine-tuned, balanced set of agreements,
including on the need to develop new norms for the responsible conduct of States in
the information space, taking into account its particularities. The initial list of such
rules was enshrined in the resolution concerning international information security
adopted by the General Assembly in 2018 at the initiative of the Russian Federation.
It is unfortunate that our Western colleagues are now attempting to pick out from this
list the provisions that are of the greatest benefit to them, while incorrectly
interpreting the applicability of international law in the digital sphere as being
“automatic”, which would permit the use of force therein, and to present their national
views as though they were the product of global consensus. We will therefore oppose
any attempts to revise, through the United Nations Security Council, the balanced
agreements reached within the designated General Assembly forums.
As stated by the President of the Russian Federation, V. V. Putin, at the meeting
of the Security Council of the Russian Federation on 26 March 2021, Russian
doctrinal approaches to the development of a global system for ensuring international
information security remain open, transparent and unchanged. They are enshrined in
the Basic Principles of State Policy on International Information Security, approved
by the President in April 2021. This is a public document, and I encourage everyone
to read it.
Our doctrine is based on the premise of using ICT only for peaceful purposes,
the need to prevent conflicts in the information space and the importance of
strengthening multilateral and bilateral cooperation to that end. We believe that
universal international legal agreements should be concluded in order to address those
tasks effectively. To achieve this goal, joint efforts must be made to develop and agree
upon universal, fair and comprehensive rules for the conduct of States in the
information space that take into account current realities; to clearly differentiate
between permissible and impermissible activities in the information space; and to
make these rules legally binding to ensure that all States strictly observe them.

21-09125

31/128

S/2021/621

At the same time, we uphold the inviolability of the sovereignty of States in the
digital sphere. It is up to each country to determine the parameters for regulating its
own information space and related infrastructure.
An equally important task is to build a peaceful, equitable and fair system for
ensuring international information security that takes into account the interests of all
countries, regardless of their digital potential. United Nations-led efforts to build such
capacity with the aim of bridging the digital divide should be strongly supported. We
trust that the new Open-ended Working Group, in accordance with its mandate, will
be able to continue to examine this issue in detail and make relevant
recommendations.
In addition, we must collectively counter the use of ICT for criminal purposes.
We call upon Member States to contribute constructively to the work of the designated
special committee tasked with elaborating a draft convention on the issue by 2023.
The General Assembly remains the key forum for discussing international
information security. It is in this forum that expert discussions on all aspects of this
topic will take place over the next five years. Let us focus on supporting this unique
process. We must maintain the constructive atmosphere of multilateral cooperation in
international information security under the auspices of the United Nations in the
format of the Open-ended Working Group, which has really proved its effectiveness
and relevance. This will give the new Open-ended Working Group a real chance of
achieving tangible, practical results. It is our common duty as members of the United
Nations Security Council to contribute fully to this effort.

32/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
At the outset, I would like to express our appreciation to the Estonian presidency
for organizing this meeting on cybersecurity and the maintenance of international
peace and security in cyberspace.
I thank Ms. Nakamitsu, Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, for her informative briefing.
Tunisia is deeply concerned by the significant increase in recent years of
malicious activities in cyberspace that can pose a serious threat to international peace
and security, especially when critical infrastructures are targeted.
Many States have also been openly developing cybercapabilities for military
purposes, a trend that can unleash a cyberarms race and further increase the number
of cyberattacks and counter attacks as well as the risks of miscalculations that could
lead to armed conflict.
Tunisia is equally worried by the fact that cybercapabilities, which were
previously available only to States, have become accessible to and are being used
maliciously by non-State actors, including terrorist organizations. These capabilities
have reportedly often been acquired through leakage or theft from government
entities, which further raises the question of States’ responsibility.
The possibility of terrorist groups launching devastating cyberattacks against
critical infrastructures such as nuclear power plants can no longer be excluded and
should be seriously addressed.
Tunisia reaffirms the applicability of international law in addressing States’ use
of information and communications technologies, and stresses in this regard the
importance of respecting the principle enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
including the settlement of international disputes by peaceful means, the refraining
from threat or use of force and the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
We would also like to underscore again the applicability of international
humanitarian law to cyberoperations conducted during armed conflicts.
My delegation welcomes the consensual adoption earlier this year of the reports of
the Open Ended Working Group on developments in the field of information and
telecommunications in the context of international security and of the Group of
Governmental Experts on Advancing Responsible State Behaviour in Cyberspace in the
Context of International Security which both contributed to deepening the understanding
of members States on how international law applies and offered additional guidance on
how voluntary, non-binding norms can also play an important role in preventing conflicts
and promoting an open, secure, stable, accessible and peaceful cyberspace.
We look forward to the continuation of an open and inclusive dialogue on
cybersecurity during the sessions of the new Open Ended Working Group (on security
of and in the use of information and communications technologies 2021–2025) to
reinforce the ability of all State and to prevent or mitigate the impacts of malicious
cyberactivities, cyberthreats and cyberattacks.
For its part, and under the supervision of its National Security Council and with
the participation of the private sector and civil society, Tunisia has adopted in October
2019 a national cybersecurity strategy which aims at improving Tunisia’s resilience
to cyberthreats by developing its national capacities and legal system, in full respect

21-09125

33/128

S/2021/621

of fundamental rights and freedoms, and through the reinforcement of international
cooperation.
Finally, given the interlinked nature of cyberspace, we believe that the sharing
of information on known vulnerabilities and capacity-building for those who request
it are of crucial importance to reduce the risks to international peace and security
posed by cyberthreats.

34/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Argentina to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Argentina wishes to thank Estonia for the initiative to hold an open debate to
add to greater understanding of the growing risks coming from malicious acts in
cyberspace and their impact on international peace and security. The Security
Council, by its mandate and nature, is able to address the topic and give it due
relevance and significance.
The regular and growing number of reports of serious cyber incidents in various
parts of the world calls the attention of all to the need to continue to build greater
understanding of how to manage such incidents, some of which might put at risk
international peace and security, and the need to create cooperation frameworks and
promote national capacity-building to face the challenges affecting the international
community as a whole. Actions are therefore required at the national, regional and
international level.
At the international level, with the objective of addressing one of the most
critical aspects of the question, Argentina considers that it is of the highest importance
to maintain broad and inclusive spaces where countries from all regions and with a
diversity of views can become actively involved in building consensus on the rules,
norms and principles of responsible State behaviour and how international law is
applied in cyberspace, among other things. Argentina understands that there is a
significant body of voluntary norms, rules and principles that have been accepted by
consensus by all the members of the United Nations General Assembly to guide the
use of information and communications technology by States and responsible State
behaviour in cyberspace, which are essential in maintaining the peaceful use of and
stability in cyberspace. This is a starting point and a foundation that should be
preserved and developed.
We especially value the consensus obtained by the first Open-ended Working
Group on developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the
context of international security, which is based on these characteristics of openness.
We also give special recognition to the report of the latest Group of Governmental
Experts on the promotion of responsible State behaviour in cyberspace in the context
of international security. It should be noted that both groups issued consensus reports
this year, with important recommendations and contributions to continue to build on
consensus already obtained in the past.
The continuation of an open and inclusive forum for discussion with broader
horizons is essential in order to continue consolidating the agreements reached and
obtaining new ones. We therefore welcome the establishment of a new Open -ended
Working Group on security of and in the use of information and communications
technologies, whose mandate will extend until 2025, in which our country will
continue to participate actively and constructively.
On that subject, and towards a more effective approach, Argentina, along with
a number of other countries from all regions, supports the international initiative for
a Programme of Action on the development of information and communications
technology in the context of international security. That Programme of Action, which
is undergoing full conceptual development, proposes an open, inclusive, flexible and
continuous framework for discussion under United Nations auspices, conducted by
the States and with appropriate participation by the multiple actors involved in
cyberspace. We invite all countries to take an interest in this initiative.
21-09125

35/128

S/2021/621

Argentina believes that the foundation and principle of our understandings
should be the protection and guarantee of human rights and fundamental freedoms
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and international treaties. The question
of gender and special guarantees for vulnerable groups must be a cross-cutting
element in all actions we undertake.
In the context of continuing innovation in the field, we must work actively to
ensure that the benefits of those technologies can be enjoyed equitably by all nations.
We therefore believe that reducing the digital gap among and within States should be
an ongoing concern in the debate.
That concern goes hand in hand with the development of national capacity.
There is enormous scope for action in this area and it is one of the principles for
developing synergies with other actors that participate in cyberspace, such as the
private sector, civil society, academia and the technical sector.
Regional and subregional organizations have proven to be important and
decisive actors as catalysts of development of national capacity, promotion of
common understandings and facilitation of international cooperation.
Without doubt, States must make major efforts at the national level to develop
effective capacities, norms and structures to give the matter the importance and
priority that it deserves.
We trust that this event will allow us to identify new avenues of understanding
that will help us achieve cyberspace that is free, open, secure, interoperable and
stable.

36/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Australia to the
United Nations, Mitchell Fifield
Australia thanks Estonia for the opportunity to provide a statement to the
Security Council addressing international peace and security in cyberspace. As the
strategic significance of cyberspace increases, more groups will try to exert power
through it. Cyber issues have become strategic foreign policy issues of urgent concer n
to all countries – and it is vital that they are treated as such by the international
community.
While the frequency, scale, sophistication and severity of malicious
cyberincidents is increasing, the United Nations has a strong history of fostering
international cooperation to understand these threats and promote an open, free,
secure, interoperable and peaceful cyberspace.
All members of the United Nations have agreed, by consensus, that existing
international law – in particular, the Charter of the United Nations in its entirety – is
applicable in cyberspace and essential to maintaining peace and stability and
promoting an open, secure, stable, accessible and peaceful information and
communications technology environment. 3
Australia has articulated its views on how particular principles of international
law apply to State conduct in cyberspace (2017; 2019; 2021) and published
hypothetical legal case studies (2020). 4
International humanitarian law (including the principles of humanity, necessity,
proportionality and distinction) applies to cyberactivities within an armed conflict.
International humanitarian law provides rules that apply to cyberactivities in an armed
conflict that do not constitute or rise to the level of an “attack”, including the general
protections afforded to the civilian population and individual civilians against dangers
arising from military operations.
International human rights law also applies to State conduct in cyberspace.
Under international human rights law, States have obligations to protect relevant
human rights of individuals under their jurisdiction, including the right to privacy,
where those rights are exercised or realized through or in cyberspace.
Recognizing the unique attributes of cyberspace, in 2015 all Member States
agreed to be guided in their use of ICT by 11 voluntary and non-binding norms of
responsible State behaviour in cyberspace. 5 These norms complement, but do not
replace, States’ existing legal obligations. Combined, international law and norms
establish clear expectations of responsible behaviour by States, and thereby promote
predictability, stability and security.
All States have also recognized the need for confidence-building measures and
coordinated capacity-building. 6 CMBs, designed to prevent misunderstandings that
lead to conflict, are more important now than ever before, and targeted capacity building is needed to ensure that all countries are able to respond to the challenges
and embrace the opportunities of increased connectivity.
Combined, these measures (international law, norms, confidence-building
measures and capacity-building) provide the basis for a secure, stable and prosperous
__________________

See General Assembly resolutions 68/243 and 70/237 and decision A/DEC/75/564.
See www.internationalcybertech.gov.au/international-security-at-the-un.
5
A/RES/70/237.
6
Ibid.
3
4

21-09125

37/128

S/2021/621

cyberspace, and are often referred to as the United Nations Framework for Responsible
State Behaviour in Cyberspace (the Framework). Each element of the Framework is
mutually reinforcing and no one element should be considered in isolation.
Universal endorsement of the Framework 7 by all Member States represents
significant progress towards promoting international peace and stability in
cyberspace. If adhered to, the Framework provides a robust basis to address the
threats posed by State-generated and State-sponsored malicious cyberactivity.
Australia reaffirms its commitment to act in accordance with the Framework for
Responsible State Behaviour in Cyberspace, as elaborated in the cumulative reports
of the Groups of Governmental Experts in 2010, 2013, 2015 and 2021 8 and the 2021
report of the Open-ended Working Group, 9 and calls on all countries to do the same.
However, a small number of State and State-sponsored actors increasingly flout
international law and norms, despite the clear expectations set by the international
community. In doing so, they threaten international peace and stability.
What we need is not more – or new – rules, but adherence to the rules we have
already agreed, and greater accountability when they are broken. To deter malicious
activity, there must be effective consequences for those who act contrary to exist ing
international law and agreed norms of responsible State behaviour.
Australia is committed to countering, deterring and discouraging malicious
cyberactivity, especially by States and their proxies. Australia will work with partners
to strengthen coordinated responses to unacceptable behaviour in cyberspace.
Deterring malicious activity protects international stability. The objective of
Australia’s cyberdeterrence policy is to prevent significant cyberincidents that
damage the interests of Australia and our international partners.
Effective cooperation between States and the multi-stakeholder community
(including civil society, the private sector, academia and the technical community)
practically impacts security, lifts capacity, and creates a reinforcing cycle of
development, openness and stability in cyberspace. Often the first affected by
cyberincidents, protectors of critical infrastructure, benefactor and beneficiary of
technical expertise, the evolving equities of non-government stakeholders in cyberspace
provide complimentary interests in maintaining a peaceful online environment.
Gender inequality undermines global peace, stability and security in cyberspace.
It contributes to, and often exacerbates, a range of challenges, including poverty,
weak governance, conflict and violent extremism. The value of gender equality and
women’s participation in decision-making, leadership and peace-building associated
with international peace and security in cyberspace is indisputable. Australia will
continue to take tangible steps to support the active and effective participation of
women in all forums discussing international peace and security in cyberspace.
The potential damage or disruption caused by malicious cyberactivities is significant
and growing. The increasing attention and awareness of the international community on
these issues should not be squandered. This opportunity should be seized – to deepen
understandings of how international law applies in cyberspace, promote practical
implementation of the norms of responsible State behaviour and confidence-building
measures, coordinate capacity-building to so all countries understand and can implement
the Framework, and ensure a diversity of voices are heard.

__________________

A/DEC/75/564; A/75/816.
A/65/201; A/68/98; A/70/174.
9
A/75/816.
7
8

38/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XIX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Austria
Austria wishes to thank Estonia in its capacity as presidency of the Security
Council for the month of June 2021 for convening this open debate on International
Peace and Security in Cyberspace. Austria aligns herself with the Statement by the
European Union. In our national capacity, we wish to add the following remarks:
Today marks the first time that the Security Council addresses cybersecurity as
a separate issue – this is a welcome development. In order to stay relevant and to
discharge of its mandate, it is essential that the Security Council continues to respond
to contemporary threats to international peace and security.
A growing number of malicious cyberactivities have increased the threats in
cyberspace over the past years. In today’s connected world, when infrastructure
depends increasingly on digital control systems, the effects of cyberattacks can have
similar or sometimes worse effects than conventional attacks. These developments,
coupled with challenges in attributing cyberattacks, increase insecurity, the risk of
miscalculations and the potential for human error when deciding how to respond to
an incoming attack.
While cyberspace differs from the physical world in its functioning, there cannot
be any mistake about one simple fact: international law in its entirety fully applies
also in cyberspace. This has been reaffirmed, most recently by the outcomes of the
Open-ended Working Group on information and communications technology (ICT)
as well as the Group of Governmental Experts on Cybersecurity which both agreed
by consensus on substantial outcome documents furthering our understanding on the
challenges we face in cyberspace. As more and more States develop not only
defensive, but also offensive cybercapabilities, it is key that all States in their use of
ICT adhere to existing international law as well as to the norms on responsible
behaviour in cyberspace. We hope that these documents remind States of their
obligations and will, therefore, contribute to more stability in cyberspace.
It goes without saying that the fundamental provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations should guide all States in their conduct in cyberspace. In particular,
States are obliged to adhere to the prohibition of the use of force as the co re pillar of
the international security regime. Additionally, past Groups of Governmental Experts
have agreed on norms for responsible State behaviour in cyberspace that have been
endorsed by all Member States. It is thus clear that it is not a lack of rul es and norms
but a lack of their implementation that contributes to instability and insecurity. We
thus call on all States to fully comply with international law and to follow the norms
for responsible State behaviour in their entirety.
In the event that an armed conflict or elements thereof are fought in cyberspace, it
is imperative that international humanitarian law is respected and complied with – the
principles of humanity, necessity, proportion, distinction fully apply in cyberspace.
In the context of the COVID-pandemic, we note with concern the recent increase
in cyberattacks on medical and health facilities which blatantly violate the norms that
critical infrastructure, including medical infrastructure, should be off -limits for
malicious cyberactivities at all times.
In order to avoid conflict scenarios, confidence-building is key – States should
constructively engage in sharing their understanding of cyberspace and the ways in
which they engage militarily in order to avoid miscalculations. In this regard, the role
of regional organizations cannot be underestimated – many have conducted
confidence-building activities. We particularly welcome the ’engagement of the
21-09125

39/128

S/2021/621

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe on this matter, and we trust tha t
building on their experience of a network of points of contact for cybersecurity
affairs, we can also roll out a global network at United Nations level.
While States, international and regional organizations have been at the forefront
of developing international law and norms of responsible State behaviour, they cannot
tackle the challenges before us by themselves. Commercial actors have a significant
role and responsibility in cyberspace, and civil society and academia help us in
bringing different perspectives into our discussions. This is why future discussions
on cyberspace should be guided by a holistic, multi-stakeholder approach to ensure
that those who have a role in maintaining a free, secure, open and stable cyberspace
are heard and contribute to the common goals that we seek.
Despite all the progress made in the area of cybersecurity, many open questions
still loom – it will be up to the international community to find common answers to
these questions. Cooperation will remain key and Austria will stand ready to
contribute constructively in relevant processes. In that vein, we hope that future open
debates in The Council will revert to the previous practice of allowing non-members
to hold oral Statements in order to give visibility to all interested States.

40/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bahrain to the
United Nations, Jamal Fares Alrowaiei
[Original: Arabic]
Technological and digital transformation and the emergence of modern
technologies are helping to achieve progress, prosperity and development for all
humanity. Their importance has been amplified by reliance on remote work, education
and service delivery across all sectors during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. Notwithstanding the many benefits of technological development, it also
carries numerous risks. That is especially the case in the absence of an articulated
system for protecting information security and cyberspace, as we are seeing with
various cyberattacks that target States’ basic infrastructures and threaten vital sectors,
institutions or individuals.
The United Nations has devoted great attention to this issue. The Security
Council has addressed it indirectly at several meetings on the maintenance of
international peace and security, as well as in Arria formula meetings. The General
Assembly also has established a number of mechanisms, including the open-ended
working group on security of and in the use of information and communications
technologies (ICT) (2021–2025). That Group was established in 2020 to consider
threats posed by the use of ICT in the context of international security, the formulation
of a cyberspace code of conduct for States, the application of international law to the
use of ICT, confidence-building measures and capacity-building.
In keep with its belief in the importance of protecting cyberspace from attacks
and ensuring the interests of States and peoples, Bahrain has supported the
establishment of such mechanisms. It took part in the work of the open-ended working
group on developments in the field of ICT in the context of international security,
which completed its work in 2021. Bahrain looks forward to active participation in
the newly established working group.
As part of the great attention it devotes to cybersecurity in the light of the digital
transformation and quantum leap in ICT, Bahrain has worked to build a clear and
comprehensive governance system to protect cyberspace through the National
Cybersecurity Centre of the Ministry of Interior, which deals with cybersecurity in
various sectors in the Kingdom, and also through the Information and e -Government
Authority, which protects information security in the Government data network of the
Kingdom of Bahrain. The Telecommunications Regulatory Authority tries to strengthen
public-private sector cooperation to ensure readiness to face cybersecurity threats.
Bahrain has also taken care to develop legislation and legal frameworks for
information security to protect individuals and institutions. Such legislation includes
Act No. 30 (2018) concerning the protection of personal data and Act No. 16 (2014)
concerning the protection of information and State documents and Act No. 60 (2014)
concerning information technology crimes.
At the regional level, Bahrain is actively involved in the work of the Standing
Committee on Cybersecurity of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the
Gulf (GCC). It proposed the creation of an electronic platform for the exchange of
information and data on cybersecurity among member States. Each member State has
appointed a liaison officer to exchange cybersecurity information, including
information on threats and best practices.
The Kingdom of Bahrain ratified the Arab Convention on Combating
Information Technology Offences in 2017.
21-09125

41/128

S/2021/621

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain affirms its support for international
cybersecurity cooperation, with a view to meeting the aspirations of the world’s
peoples and achieving progress, prosperity and growth in implementation of the 2030
Sustainable Development Goals.

42/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XXI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Philippe Kridelka
Let me first express my gratitude to the Estonian presidency for hosting this first
open debate of the Security Council on peace and security in cyberspace. This timely
debate demonstrates the urgency of addressing this topic and the relevance of the
Security Council for doing so. Risks stemming from malicious activities in
cyberspace are indeed growing and their impact on international peace and security
is more detrimental than ever. It is therefore paramount to reaffirm Member States’
commitment to international law and to the framework of responsible State behaviour
as key elements of conflict prevention and maintenance of peace and security in
cyberspace.
Achieving this objective requires both a shared international understanding on
the governance of cyberspace and real actions to implement this vision on the ground.
The international debate on the governance of cyberspace is in a crucial phase.
Belgium strongly supports the ongoing debates within the United Nations framework,
among which the First Committee, the various OEWGs and GEEs. The following
elements are key:
First, Belgium advocates a shared vision of a global, free, open, stable, peaceful
and secure cyberspace, where human rights and fundamental freedoms and the rule
of law apply. This shared understanding is built upon an inclusive approach in which
all stakeholders – including civil society, the private sector and the academic world –
are heard.
Second, the international community must continue to strive for a truly universal
cybersecurity framework for responsible State behaviour. This has to be based on the
full application of existing international law – including the Charter of the United
Nations in its entirety – international humanitarian law, and international human
rights law. Last year, Belgium, as a non-permanent Member of the Security Council,
took part in an Arria-formula meeting of the Security Council, on cyberattacks on
critical infrastructure. Cyberattacks targeting critical infrastructures are putting
human lives at risk and have to be condemned by the international community.
Cyberattacks against medical facilities such as hospitals are unacceptable.
With regard to the United Nations framework for responsible State behaviour in
cyberspace, it must be underlined that Member States of the United Nations have
endorsed – through the adoption of United Nations resolution 70/237 – the
conclusions of the Group of Governmental Experts reports of 2010, 2013 and 2015,
which constitute a solid, consensual basis for further work. The United Nations and
its Member States have undertaken substantial efforts to both build a shared
international understanding on the governance of cyberspace and develop real actions
to implement this common vision on the ground. In an efficient and effective
multilateral system, it is imperative that we take forward any further discussio n
starting from this consensual basis, in order to avoid revisiting laborious compromises
of the past while stalling future efforts.
Third, we believe that we should better align international criminal justice with
the challenges of the twenty-first century. This is why Belgium has joined Liechtenstein
in its initiative to create a Council of Advisers on the Application of the Rome Statute
to Cyberwarfare in order to explore the role the International Criminal Court could play
in this new regulatory framework. We are looking forward to receiving the Council of
Advisers’ final report which is scheduled to be presented this year.

21-09125

43/128

S/2021/621

Guiding principles are to be followed by actions in order to make a difference.
In that regard, Belgium is convinced that the proposal by Egypt and France to
establish a programme of action constitutes the right structure to implement our
vision. Belgium is proud to support this initiative together with more than 50 other
countries, and we hope that many other States will join.
At the national level, Belgium has recently adopted, in May 2021, a new
National Cybersecurity Strategy 2.0 for 2021–2025 that sets out our country’s crosscutting approach in terms of increasing our cyberresilience and combatting
cyberthreats. The primary objective of this national strategy is to “propel Belgium
into the rank of the least vulnerable countries in Europe”.
Belgium’s cybersecurity policy also provides for a new attribution mechanism
which is conceived as a deterrent tool. If we want to effectively prevent and deter
malicious cyberactivities in an environment where cyberattacks are growing in
number and in complexity, formal attribution of malicious cyberactivity targeting a
vital organization in Belgium is an important instrument. The national attribution
procedure can also be activated with a view to supporting an allied country victim of
similar attacks.
Moreover, the national strategy prescribes a clear international commitment.
And this is because, Belgium is walking the talk, convinced that increased
international cooperation is needed to promote security and stability in cyberspace.
Increased international cooperation also means more capacity-building and
more support for confidence-building measures, including through efforts of regional
organizations such as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). Belgium takes an active part in the work of OSCE to render those
confidence-building measures concrete and operational. In terms of capacitybuilding, the needs are important and urgent globally. Existing cooperation or
capacity-building programs such as those offered by the European Union or by the
Global Forum on Cyber Expertise need to be reinforced and extended. It is in the
interest of us all to enhance global resilience to cyberthreats.

44/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XXII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the
United Nations
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Estonia on the great initiative of
promoting, for the first time, an official Security Council open debate on
cybersecurity in the broader context of maintenance of international peace and
security. The rapid evolution of information and communications technologies (ICT),
which have come to permeate all domains of human existence, impels us to update
the concept of threats, adapt the existing normative framework to this new reality, and
develop new patterns of responsible State behaviour in order to overcome modern
challenges and curb the emergence of conflicts.
Although the topic of cybersecurity has only just been raised in the body that
bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, Member States have been debating it for more than two decades – at least
since 1998, when the topic was first introduced on the agenda of the General
Assembly. During this period, we have witnessed the adoption of four consensual
reports from Groups of Governmental Experts (Groups of Governmental Experts) –
two of them chaired by Brazilian experts – and one equally consensual report from
an Open-ended Working Group. Together, these documents form an acquis, a common
body of understandings and non-binding, voluntary norms, rules and principles that
help guide the use of ICT by States.
One of the greatest contributions of this acquis to the maintenance of
international peace and security is the assertion that international law, including
international humanitarian law (IHL), is applicable to cyberspace. In our voluntary
national contribution to the official compendium of the last Group of Governmental
Experts, we reaffirmed Brazil’s firm belief that, in their use of information and
communications technologies, States must comply with international law, including
the Charter of the United Nations, international human rights law and inter national
humanitarian law. The United Nations and other regional organizations have
recognized that international law, and in particular the Charter of the United Nations,
is applicable to cyberspace, and is essential to maintaining peace and stability and
promoting an open, secure, peaceful and accessible information and communications
technology environment. Hence, in current discussions, the question is no longer
whether, but how international law applies to the use of ICT by States.
While analogies in relation to the physical world might work most of the time
to determine such application, the unique characteristics of cyberspace create new
situations that international law was not originally designed to regulate. The
interconnectivity of information systems, the intangible nature of the ICT
environment and the complexities of the problem of attribution of responsibility for
malicious and offensive acts in cyberspace, among other factors, pose new challenges
to international law, whose development has been based on a physical and territorial
international order.
Differences in interpretations by States of how international law applies to the
use of ICT increase the risk of unpredictable behaviour, misunderstandings and
escalation of tensions. Therefore, it is important to progressively identify areas of
convergence among States on this matter and, where divergences are identified, to
jointly work towards increased coherence in the interpretation of existing rules. If
necessary, development of additional norms should also be considered as a means to
fill potential legal gaps and resolve remaining uncertainties.

21-09125

45/128

S/2021/621

The maintenance of international peace and security depends heavily on the
level of trust that prevails between States. Therefore, in addition to t he recognition of
the applicability of international law and to the establishment and implementation of
norms, rules and principles of responsible State behaviour, it is of paramount
importance that governments implement confidence-building measures. The
establishment of a network of points of contact at technical and political levels, as
well as the exchange of national views on threats and on ICT incident management
are important cooperative and transparency measures. These initiatives not only help
to prevent misunderstandings and misperceptions, but are also useful to address
serious ICT incidents and to de-escalate tensions in a scenario of crisis.
Capacity-building is also an essential tool in the promotion of a peaceful ICT
environment. As in other domains, inequality among nations can generate insecurity
also in cyberspace, with direct impact in the kinetic world. International cooperation
for the development of national institutions, human resources and public policies
contributes to reducing States’ vulnerabilities and are fundamental for the
universalization of the implementation of international law and of norms, rules and
principles of responsible State behaviour in cyberspace. If there is one thing the
pandemic has taught us it is that no one is safe until everyone is safe – the same
reasoning can be applied to the highly interconnected and interdependent cyberspace.
Given the multi-stakeholder nature of the cyberspace, Brazil is of the view that
no effective discussions on cybersecurity can succeed without the contributions of
civil society, academia and the private sector. A multi-stakeholder approach is
essential to identifying and combating threats, preventing conflict, promoting
common understandings, increasing cyberresilience and fostering cooperation.
Broader interaction between public and private actors from different countries,
exchanging experiences and sharing best practices, is essential for achieving a more
open, secure, peaceful and accessible ICT environment.
Brazil has been actively engaging in discussions on cybersecurity within the
United Nations. We have always sought to be proactive in both the Groups of
Governmental Experts and the last Open-ended Working Group. Brazil will maintain
its constructive approach in the debates of the new Open-ended Working Group,
which will hold its first substantive session in December, as well as in other
mechanisms of regular institutional dialogue that may be established, such as the
programme of action on cybersecurity. At the same time, as a newly elected
non-permanent member of the Security Council, we intend to contribute to the
development of the discussions on the impact of the use of ICT in the context of
international security also in this body. In Brazil’s view, the Council should be guided
first and foremost by the objective of promoting adherence to past and future
recommendations adopted by the General Assembly on the issue of cybersecurity.
I thank you!

46/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XXIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Canada to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
We thank Estonia for organizing this Security Council session on such a timely
and relevant topic. Canada is pleased to have the opportunity to contribute to this
discussion.
The world is increasingly reliant on digital technologies and the Internet.
Threats to international peace and security emanating from cyberspace are numerous.
Interference in democratic processes is one area of particular concern. Another is the
recent increase in ransomware incidents. We must therefore continue to take steps to
maintain a free, open and secure cyberspace.
The agreed framework for responsible State behaviour in cyberspace is the
foundation of peace and stability in this space. The framework consists of recognition
of the applicability of international law to cyberspace, adherence to the internationally
agreed norms, capacity building, and the use of confidence building measures.
Together, these elements reduce the risks of escalation and conflict.
This framework was reaffirmed in the recent consensus reports adopted by the
United Nations Open-ended Working Group and Group of Governmental Experts. All
United Nations Member States have now committed to be guided by the framework.
International law is vital to ensuring that the rules-based international order
extends to cyberspace. The recent Open-ended Working Group and Group of
Governmental Experts reports reaffirmed the applicability of international law in
cyberspace, and made important advances in this regard. The Working Group repor t
recommended greater cooperation on capacity building in international law, in order
to enable more States to develop their national views and build common
understandings. In the Group of Governmental Experts report, the applicability of
international law was reaffirmed, and international humanitarian law was specifically
mentioned.
The May 2021 report produced by the Group of Governmental Experts provides
guidance on the implementation of the 11 voluntary norms of responsible State
behaviour adopted in 2015 and endorsed by all Member States through General
Assembly resolution 70/237. Canada believes that these agreed norms and
international law are largely sufficient to guide State behaviour in cyberspace .
However, work remains to be done on their dissemination and implementation. The
recent high-profile ransomware incidents perpetrated by criminal groups resulted in
widespread disruptions of key industries such as energy and food supply. They also
affected financial markets.
Although criminal groups were responsible for these acts, these examples
highlight the importance of international law, and of the 11 Group of Governmental
Experts norms, several of which address threats to critical information and
communications technology infrastructure directly or indirectly. One norm stipulates
that States should respond to appropriate requests for assistance by another State
whose critical infrastructure is subject to malicious ICT acts. Another says that States
should not knowingly allow their territory to be used for internationally wrongful acts
using ICTs.
Criminal actors who engage in ransomware and other criminal activities live in
and work from States. They use States’ digital infrastructure to undertake t heir
malicious activity. They are subject to those States’ laws. When informed of potential
21-09125

47/128

S/2021/621

malicious activity emanating from their territory, States have a responsibility to
respond, enforcing their laws and cooperating with other States. By agreeing to b e
guided by the Group of Governmental Experts norms, we have all undertaken to do
this. This is also why a growing number of States have adopted strong laws to combat
cybercrime. In many cases, States have based their laws on the Council of Europe
Convention on Cybercrime, also known as the Budapest Convention, which now has
parties from all regions of the world.
As we have seen in recent situations, all States do not always respect the
framework of responsible State behaviour, unfortunately. Some are allowing
cybercriminals to operate with impunity from their territory. Others are using proxies
or purposely engaging in malicious cyber activity that goes against the framework.
On several occasions, Canada has joined international partners in calling out and
responding to such behaviour and the threat it poses to international peace and
security.
Canada was one of the 27 signatories of the September 2019 Joint Statement on
Advancing Responsible State Behaviour in Cyberspace. In addition to reaffirming the
framework of responsible State behaviour, we committed to work together on a
voluntary basis to hold states accountable when they act contrary to this framework,
including by taking measures that are transparent and consistent with international
law.
That is what we have been doing, and we will continue to do so. It is important
to highlight counter-normative behaviour, in order to uphold the framework of
responsible State behaviour. We encourage others to do the same.
Shifting to the way ahead at the United Nations, Canada looks forward to
engaging constructively at the Open-ended Working Group on security of and in the
use of information and communications technologies (2021–2025). We will also
actively contribute to the development of a programme of action on cybersecurity.
Canada is a co-sponsor, as we believe that the Programme of Action could serve as a
useful, action-oriented forum to promote the implementation of the framework for
responsible State behaviour.
The success of these two processes will depend on their ability to integrate
diverse voices and perspectives in their working methods and outputs. At the Open ended Working Group, Canada has argued for meaningful participation of
non-governmental stakeholders. Civil society, academia, the technical community
and the private sector have much to contribute to these discussions, as they play an
important role in implementing their recommendations of the Group of Governmental
Experts and the Working Group. We will advocate for strong stakeholder enga gement
in the Programme of Action as well, as it is being developed.
It will also be important to ensure that the voices of women are meaningfully
heard, whether at the Open-ended Working Group or in the Programme of Action.
Gender should be mainstreamed in both processes from the outset, to ensure that the
work of both groups addresses the gender aspects of cybersecurity. It has been well
documented that conflict mediation processes that included meaningful participation
of women led to much stronger outcomes and less chance of hostilities resuming after
peace processes concluded. United Nations cyber processes can be similarly
strengthened by including the meaningful participation of women. Inclusion is
important for the success of both processes.
In short, Canada remains a steadfast supporter of the framework for responsible
State behaviour in cyberspace. We will continue to promote the implementation of
the recommendations of past Groups of Governmental Experts and of the recent
Open-ended Working Group. We will also persist in calling out and responding
48/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

lawfully to malicious cyber activity that goes against the framework. We look forward
to continuing to work with the international community to promote international
peace and security by enhancing stability and security in cyberspace.

21-09125

49/128

S/2021/621

Annex XXIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Chile to the
United Nations
Chile reaffirms its position that international law, and in particular the Charter
of the United Nations, is applicable and essential to maintain peace and stability and
to promote an open, secure, stable, accessible, and peaceful information and
communications technology (ICT) environment. This, alongside with specific
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in particular the peaceful settlement
of disputes, the prohibition of resorting to the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any State, non-intervention in internal
affairs of other States, and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, are
indivisible in the physical as in the digital domains, and as such Chile will continue
promoting its application.
Malicious ICT activities by persistent threat actors, including States and other
actors, can pose a significant risk to international security and stability, economic and
social development, as well as the safety and well-being of individuals. Malicious
activity against critical infrastructure that provides services domestically, regionally
or globally, has become increasingly serious, including malicious ICT activity
affecting critical information infrastructure, infrastructure providing essential
services to the public, the technical infrastructure essential to the general availability
or integrity of the Internet and health sector entities. In future conflicts these
malicious activities can be more destructive and seriously affect people’s well -being
and lives. In this sense, countries could be seriously affected by cyberattacks
generated in the context of armed conflicts.
During armed conflicts, States should plan, lead, and execute their operations
in cyberspace will strictly abide by the rules of the international law, with special
consideration to the international law in Human Rights and the international
humanitarian law.
Chile strongly supports the work of the Group of Governmental Experts (Group
of Governmental Experts), and its reports and recommendations adopted in 2010,
2013, 2015 and 2021, because they represented an enormous advance with respect to
international law, norms, and confidence-building measures in the field of ICT. Chile
also supports the work of the Open-ended Working Group and its recommendations.
To reduce the malicious use of cybercapabilities and to build a more stable
cyberspace, it is important to follow and to implement these recommendations, in all
levels.
The programme of action for advancing responsible State behaviour in
cyberspace is a positive, constructive, and realistic initiative that could help us to
move forward and achieve concrete results in the framework of the ICT environment.
The programme of action could be a permanent, inclusive, consensus-based and
action-oriented international instrument to advance responsible behaviour in the use
of ICT in the context of international security. As a co-sponsor of this initiative, Chile
believes that the programme of action would offer a platform to adopt operational
recommendations, to promote international cooperation and foster assistance
programs tailored to the needs of beneficiary States, notably in capacity-building.
Regarding compliance with existing international law and the implementation
of norms of responsible State behaviour in cyberspace, it is important that States can
develop and share their views with other States regarding how international law
applies in cyberspace. Capacity-building in this area is also crucial. The existence of
guidelines for the implementation of norms is an important step that should help
50/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

States to advance in this matter. Regional organizations can play a key role in assisting
States in their implementation of norms and compliance with international law,
developing regional strategies in this regard, as well as training and capacity-building.
Chile believes that is fundamental to strengthen confidence-building measures
in cyberspace and capacity-building for which regional organizations must have a
paramount role. In this regard, we highlight the work being carried out by the
Organization of American States through its Working Group on Cooperation and
Confidence-Building Measures in Cyberspace, as well as the work and progress made
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations.
It is important to promote dialogue across regions regarding this matter, but also
in capacity-building and implementation or norms. This dialogue should consider the
exchange of experiences, information, guidelines, best practices, lessons learned, and
inviting members of organizations to participate in these regional processes. States
should strengthen their national points of contact, as well as the role of their
Ministries of Foreign Affairs regarding cyberspace and ICT policies. Cyberdiplomacy
is an important tool that can help States to improve cooperation between them,
building confidence. States should also consider to established bilateral mechanisms
for dialogues and cooperation on cybersecurity and cyberspace.
Chile believes that multilateral processes must be as inclusive and transparent
as possible. The discussion on ICT should include the private sector, academia, civil
society, industry, and the technical community, among others. It is not possible to
build a stable and secure environment in cyberspace if we do not guarantee the
participation and work of all stakeholders. The more actors are part of the discussion,
the more likely we must achieve results that are beneficial to all. In this sense, we
believe that it is necessary that we can listen to all interested parties and that they can
also present their views and contributions in official sessions. In that sense, States
should include all stakeholders when it comes to generating policies, strategies, and
other initiatives that aim to prevent conflict, build common understandings, and
increase cyberresilience.

21-09125

51/128

S/2021/621

Annex XXV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Czech Republic to the
United Nations
The Czech Republic wishes to express its appreciation to the Republic of
Estonia for organizing the historically first open debate of the Securi ty Council on
the topic of cybersecurity in the context of international peace and security. States’
adherence to international law and responsible State behaviour in cyberspace are key
elements of conflict prevention and maintenance of international peace and security.
The Czech Republic aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European
Union, and wishes to emphasise two additional points as follows.
Present and emerging cyberthreats to international peace and security
Cyberspace offers tremendous benefits for human and economic development
however it is also becoming a domain of growing dependencies and security
challenges. Our increased reliance on ICT during the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, which is being continuously exploited by malicious actors
for their own benefit, is a clear reminder of the growing challenges in cyberspace.
Notably, we have seen an alarming increase of malicious information and
communications technology (ICT) activities directed against critical infrastructure
delivering essential services to the public, including those targeting medical facilities,
water, energy, sanitation, electoral infrastructure and the general availability of the
Internet. In particular, the growing number of cyberattacks disrupting provision of
health-care results in further loss of life, undermines our collective ability to respond
to COVID-19, and ultimately threatens international peace and stability.
Such reckless ICT activities aimed at intentionally damaging critical
infrastructure also risk potentially devastating humanitarian consequences, and if
attributable to a State, would violate States’ obligations under international law. The
Czech Republic therefore welcomes that all Member States have recently affirmed
through the Group of Governmental Experts and the Open-ended Working Group final
reports that ICT activities directed against critical infrastructure are unacceptable.
While a political commitment is the first necessary step, protecting critical
infrastructure from ICT threats will also require sustained practical efforts by the
international community, including through intensified technical cooperation and
concrete cyberrelated capacity-building programmes. The Security Council can also
play a decisive role by ensuring that State-sponsored ICT activities directed against
critical infrastructure will have consequences.
New and emerging cyberthreats affect not only national security of States, but
also increasingly threaten the well-being and safety of individuals. The Czech
Republic is particularly concerned by the growing political divide between States who
advocate the protection of personal freedoms in cyberspace and those who call for
increased technological surveillance. In our view, the expansion of State -sponsored
mass surveillance techniques through ICT, partial or complete Internet shutdowns and
extensive content censorship raise serious human rights concerns. A determined
action to protect citizens from arbitrary and unlawful exercise of State power in
cyberspace is essential. These trends, coupled with potential risks associated with the
introduction of artificial intelligence into various facets of our lives, raise new
security challenges, threaten to undermine trust and confidence in cyberspace, and
may ultimately degrade our ability to maintain international peace and security.

52/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Strengthening compliance with international law and norms of responsible
State behaviour
The Czech Republic would like to reiterate that States’ compliance with their
obligations under international law is an essential ingredient to maintain a free,
peaceful, stable, secure, interoperable and accessible cyberspace. The applicability of
existing international law to State use of ICT was affirmed by all States, specifically
through the universal endorsement of the 2013 and the 2015 Group of Governmental
Experts reports in General Assembly resolutions 68/243 and 70/237.
In this regard, the Czech Republic also recalls that the rights of States to exercise
exclusive jurisdiction over the ICT located on their territory give rise not only to
rights but also to specific obligations under international law. In particular, the Czech
Republic wishes to reiterate that existing bodies of law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights law apply to State conduct in
cyberspace without exception.
Regrettably, a small minority of States continues to question the applicability of
existing international law to cyberspace, including the applicability of the
international humanitarian law to the use of ICT in the context of armed conflict. The
Czech Republic wishes to underline that in its view, the applicability of international
humanitarian law to ICT operations does not promote the militarization of
cyberspace, nor does it promote militarization of any other domain. On the contrary,
international humanitarian law places limits on the use of force by requiring all u sed
means and methods of warfare in the context of armed conflict to be employed in
accordance with its rules; including the principles of humanity, distinction and the
rule of proportionality.
Additionally, the Czech Republic recalls that according to the law of
responsibility for international wrongful acts, all States have an obligation to exercise
due diligence and take concrete measures within their capacity to ensure their territory
is not being used to conduct malicious cyberactivities against other States.
The Czech Republic equally recognizes that State’s capacity to implement the
existing framework of responsible State behaviour in cyberspace, including its ability
to adequately exercise due diligence, is intrinsically linked to that State’s capa cities.
In this regard, the Czech Republic stresses the need to step up international efforts to
build cybercapacity and increase cyberresilience globally, including through the early
establishment of the United Nations programme of action for responsible State
behaviour in cyberspace, which would allow the Member States to advance the
implementation of existing commitments through practical and results-oriented
action.
In conclusion, the Czech Republic is fully committed to a human-centric
approach to cybersecurity that emphasises the need to protect the safety and security
of individuals in the ICT-environment, be it through protecting critical infrastructure
from ICT threats, or through ensuring that cybersecurity measures are not being used
as a pretext for constricting the full enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in cyberspace.

21-09125

53/128

S/2021/621

Annex XXVI
Joint statement by the Permanent Missions of Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and Sweden to the United Nations
I have the pleasure to speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Finland, Iceland,
Norway, Sweden and my own country, Denmark. We are grateful to the Estonian
presidency for placing this very pertinent topic on the Council’s agenda. It is a great
opportunity for all Member States to build on our commitment to the application of
international law in cyberspace and the framework of responsible State behaviour in
cyberspace with the aim of promoting peace and stability.
The world benefits in countless ways from the development of information and
telecommunication technology. It has brought tremendous economic progress and
societal development. In the current pandemic, cyberspace has allowed many of us to
stay in touch with family, friends and colleagues and sustain important function s of
society, including the operation of critical infrastructure vital to manage the health
crisis. Yet, cyberspace has also been used to spread disinformation about the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) virus, exposing our collective vulnerability to
disruption and abuse of the information space. Moreover, the pandemic has exposed
deep digital divides, not least the gender digital divide. As Nordics, we strongly
believe that a globally accessible, free, open and secure cyberspace is fundamental
not just to how the world operates today, but for our shared ambitions to build a better,
greener and safer future.
Unfortunately, malicious cyberactivities continue to challenge the safety and
stability of cyberspace. The last one and a half years have revealed that State and
non-State actors will take advantage of any opportunity, even a global pandemic, to
carry out malicious activities in cyberspace. Such activities are unacceptable. They
threaten the integrity, security and prosperity of our societies and undermine
international peace and stability.
Let me highlight three interrelated trends that pose a challenge to international
peace and security.
First, the recent increase in cyberattacks against the supply chains of companies,
organizations and governments has left tens if not hundreds of thousands computer
systems exposed. Such attacks show a blatant disregard to those affected. The goal is
often to steal sensitive information and intellectual property to gain an advantage in
geopolitical competition. Such attacks might have additional unintended effects as
the backdoors are left open for everyone to exploit.
Second, State-sponsored disruptive cyberattacks such as WannaCry and
NotPetya have been released on the world with a complete indifference to their
negative systemic effects across the global. Such attacks have resulted not only in
vast financial losses, they have also crippled information and communications
technology systems including at hospitals and industrial control systems affecting
crucial electricity supply. These activities jeopardise the health and safety of our
citizens.
Third, States need to take action against the increasingly serious and
destabilizing effects of cybercrime originating from their territory. The recent
ransomware attacks against fuel supply in the US, hospitals in Ireland and food
production in Brazil, the US and Australia illustrate that the consequences of
cybercrime have become a national security concern with possible effects on
international peace and security. The increasing conflation of State and non-State
groups further complicates the threat.

54/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Day by day, the threshold for tolerated behaviour in cyberspace is moving in the
wrong direction. We must revert this trend by living up to the shared commitment we,
the Member States, made when we endorsed the Group of Governmental Experts
reports and the Open-ended Working Group consensus report. In this spirit, we once
again reaffirm that international law, including the Charter of the United Nations in
its entirety, international humanitarian law, and international human rights law applies
to States’ behaviour in cyberspace. We also call for stronger adherence to the 11
voluntary non-binding norms for responsible State behaviour in cyberspace
formulated in the 2015 Group of Governmental Experts-report bearing in mind the
guidance and the additional layer of understanding to these norms, provided by the
2021 Group of Governmental Experts-report. This would go a long way in addressing
the challenges mentioned above.
We must raise the cost of malicious cyberactivity by collectively holding those
responsible to account. All States must exercise due diligence and take appropriate
action to address malicious cyberactivity originating from their territory. Hacker
groups should not be allowed to operate with impunity.
We support the continued exchange of information and best practices within the
United Nations, notably on the implementation of norms for responsible State
behaviour, confidence-building measures and the application of existing international
law in cyberspace. We should pursue an action-oriented track that builds on the
consensus framework we have already agreed upon with the General Assembly’s
endorsement of the Open-ended Working Group report and Group of Governmental
Experts-reports. This constitutes the basis for any further discussion. The proposal of
establishing a programme of action is a good way to move towards full
implementation of already agreed norms.
We must recognize that while the cyberthreat is a global challenge, it has
different manifestations in different countries and regions. Upholding strong
cyberresilience throughout all our societies is crucial not only to our shared security,
but to the enjoyment of human rights. We need to cooperate to build capacity globally.
States cannot do it alone. Countering the threats in cyberspace requires a
multi-stakeholder approach to help prevent conflict, build common understanding and
increase confidence- and capacity-building. We need the United Nations as a
convener and platform to establish effective cooperation between governments, civil
society, academia and the private sector. We support the Secretary-General’s Road
map for Digital Cooperation, in particular when it comes to private sector
engagement, which is vital in managing critical infrastructure, collecting information
and protecting systems and personal data.
All States must live up to their responsibility and comply with international law
and respect norms in cyberspace. If not, the threat from malicious cyberactivity to
international peace and security will keep growing. Cyberattacks will continue
enhancing the risk of conflict, endangering human lives, violating human rights,
stifling economic activity, deepening dividing lines and causing disputes. All States
have a role to play in promoting and upholding a rules-based, predictable, open, equal,
free, accessible, stable and secure cyberspace to the benefit of all.

21-09125

55/128

S/2021/621

Annex XXVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ecuador to the
United Nations, Cristian Espinosa
[Original: Spanish]
Allow me first of all to thank Estonia for including this item on the formal agenda
of the Security Council a year after the Arria-formula meeting on the subject. We also
note the leadership of Prime Minister Kallas in this area and welcome the presentation
of the Under-secretary-General and High Representative for Disarmament affairs Izumi
Nakamitsu.
The biennium 2020–2021 marked a milestone in the area of cyber diplomacy not
only because of the mandate and substantive results achieved on 12 March 2021 by the
first Open-ended Working Group on developments in the field of information and
telecommunications in the context of international security and by the consensus
achieved on 28 May by the Group of Governmental Experts on responsible State
behaviour in cyberspace, but also because of the Coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic which accelerated digital transformation.
The pandemic had an impact on all dimensions of peace and security in different
ways. Cybersecurity was no exception. Security of essential services became a major
concern, along with the need to preserve critical infrastructure against possible
cyberattacks that could cause damage in the physical world.
The threats we are facing today are for the most part transnational, and the only
way to counter them, both in the physical and the virtual world, is through international
cooperation and dialogue. Thus, if one Member State is not safe, none is safe.
Ecuador thus reaffirms its commitment to the norms in force, as reflected in the
reports of the Group of Governmental Experts and the results of the Open-ended
Working Group, in conformity with international law. My delegation wishes to stress
that no sphere can remain outside the spectrum of international law, including
international human rights law and international humanitarian law, which does not
mean that the militarization of cyberspace would be acceptable.
On the contrary, Ecuador defends the exclusively peaceful use of cyberspace. The
Charter of the United Nations prohibits the use of force, and therefore all international
disputes in cyberspace should be settled by peaceful means.
Accordingly, we promote trust and capacity building, for which we believe that
an operational platform is required to facilitate the implementation by States of the
existing framework. That platform could take the form of a programme of action.
We defend and support any mechanism that would promote greater international
cooperation to reduce imbalances in the ability to implement the rules for responsible
State behaviour.
In addition, we recognize the contribution that regional organizations can bring to
capacity development and implementation of such norms. An example is the valuable
work of the Organization of American States in this area, in particular its efforts against
cybercrime and terrorism.
I conclude by recalling the need to preserve and promote the responsible use of
information and communications technologies as a key guarantee of stability and
security in cyberspace. Likewise, we believe that the existing norms should be
strengthened, taking into account rapid technological development. For its part, the
Security Council must consider mechanisms to strengthen the use of technologies as a
means to consolidate peace as a complement to regular efforts.
Thank you.
56/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XXVIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the
United Nations
Egypt attaches great importance to the international security aspects of
information and communications technologies (ICT) and strongly calls for a central
and leading role by the United Nations in promoting and developing rules and
principles for the use of ICT by States through an inclusive and equitable process with
the participation of all States.
A number of States are developing ICT capabilities for possible malicious uses
and offensive military purposes. The use of ICT in future conflicts between States is
becoming a reality and the risk of harmful ICT attacks against critical infrastructure
is both real and serious. This new arms race has far-reaching ramifications on
international peace, security, and stability, especially as the lines between
conventional and nonconventional weapons continue to erode.
Furthermore, the relevant technologies developed by States are being
transferred, copied, or reproduced by terrorists and criminals. The malicious use of
ICT by terrorist and criminal organizations is a serious threat to international peace
and security, especially in light of the attribution-related challenges.
Under international law and the Charter of the United Nations, all Member
States should refrain from any act that knowingly or intentionally damages or
otherwise impairs the use and operation of the critical infrastructure of other States
as well as interfering in their internal affairs.
There is no doubt that the international security aspects of ICT have become too
important and strategic to be left without clear binding rules at the international level.
An inclusive process within the United Nations System is the best and most efficient
way to establish arrangements that are equitable, comprehensive, and effective in this
domain.
The United Nations has already taken some steps towards establishing a
normative framework that complements the principles of international law. With the
recent adoption by consensus of the Final Report of the Open-ended Working Group
established pursuant to General Assembly resolution 73/27 on developments in the
field of information and telecommunications in the context of international security,
the United Nations has already established the initial elements of a framework for
conflict prevention and stability in cyberspace.
The General Assembly called on Member States to be guided in their use of ICT
by the norms for responsible State behaviour contained in the consecutive reports of
the Groups of Governmental Experts under the First Committee. However, the
implementation of these modest norms remains quite minimal at best, namely due to
their voluntary nature and the lack of any follow-up mechanism.
The success of the Open-ended Working Group, which is the first inclusive
process on this important topic, and the establishment of a new Open-ended Working
Group by General Assembly resolution 75/240 represent promising progress towards
a possible agreement on important mutual understandings among Member States on
a number of key aspects.
Inclusive processes within the United Nations, primarily under the auspices of
the General Assembly, are the most efficient way to establish equitable,
comprehensive, and effective arrangements in this domain. For its part, the Security
Council is encouraged to take into account the opportunities offered by emerging
technologies while considering topics such as peacekeeping and counterterrorism.
21-09125

57/128

S/2021/621

Nevertheless, the Council should not be utilized as a legislative body that attempts to
set norms and rules on behalf of the Member States on matters that necessarily require
inclusive and transparent processes.
The recommendations which have been endorsed by the General Assembly b y
consensus can form the basis for politically or legally-binding rules, especially that
they are derived from the principles of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations.
Egypt has also encouraged the consideration of the establishment of an inclusive
institutional platform dedicated to international cooperation on safeguarding the
peaceful uses of ICT and mitigating their associated risks.
While we believe that international law and the principles of the Charter do
apply to all domains including cyberspace, we also believe that there is a pressing
need to identify specific obligations that make State behaviour in cyberspace
consistent with international law and the objectives of the Charter of the United
Nations.
In an increasingly connected world, any international regime on cybersecurity
will be only as strong as its weakest link. Fortunately, there is consensus that capacity building efforts have to be intensified and strengthened to prevent potential attacks
against critical infrastructure and to develop the capabilities and technical skills
needed in developing countries. The United Nations should lead a coordinated effort
towards the provision of the necessary assistance for to developing countries.
In conclusion, ICT offer both massive opportunities and challenges. And we
underscore that there is a pressing need to identify and develop rules for responsible
State behaviour to increase stability and security in the global ICT environment and
prevent cyberspace from becoming another arena for conflicts and arms races.

58/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XXIX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of El Salvador to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
El Salvador thanks the delegation of Estonia in its capacity as President of the
Security Council for June 2021 for holding this open debate, which represents the
first time that the Security Council has addressed cybersecurity in a substantive and
formal manner. The initiative is a very important measure by which this body fulfils
the international commitment to consider at the multilateral level the existing and
potential threats to security in the field of information and communications
technologies.
The development of new technologies represents an important opportunity to
promote economic and social development of States. However, those information
systems are vulnerable to attacks by persons who intend to manipulate
communications networks for ideological purposes or for their own benefit. Given
that criminals and terrorists take advantage of new information and communications
technologies to meet their goals, efforts and resources must be invested to produce
specialized guidelines for the development and application of common norms that
will help us to prevent that type of crime and make it easier to bring to justice those
who operate outside them.
We would thus like to highlight the importance of the international and regional
instruments related to fighting cybercrime, as well as progress in that area, such as
the establishment of the Open-ended Working Group for the purpose of elaborating a
comprehensive international convention to combat the use of information and
communications technologies for criminal purposes.
We welcome with satisfaction the efforts by the United Nations Member States
in the area of terrorism within the international peace and security agenda.
Nevertheless, we note that among the internationally binding instruments in that area,
it is still impossible to find any direct mention of cyberspace. That is a gap that we
all must bridge as soon as possible. We commend the efforts of the Security Council
to discuss this major threat in a substantive way with a view to offering effective
solutions. We urge this body to continue those efforts, leaving aside all political and/or
personal interests and upholding the objective of the prevention of new conflicts and
the creation of scenarios for its development.
El Salvador recalls General Assembly resolution 58/199, adopted in 2004,
which included a list of the elements of critical information infrastructure of States,
which, due to growing technological interdependence, are exposed to an everincreasing number and greater variety of threats. That resolution also recognized that
the vulnerabilities of critical information infrastructure continued to pose major
problems of security.
Furthermore, in order to create the conditions for progress towards the common
objective of international peace and security, the full exercise of human rights an d
economic and social development, we believe that the framework provided in General
Assembly resolution 58/199 should be expanded to address the need to protect the
activities of critical infrastructure from cyberattacks, in addition to current efforts to
prevent cyberspace from becoming a platform for propaganda for radicalization,
recruitment and collection of funds for criminal activities.
The world will continue to confront one of the greatest challenges since the
establishment of this Organization, the outbreak of the coronavirus disease
21-09125

59/128

S/2021/621

(COVID-19) pandemic having revealed the vulnerabilities of essential systems in
States. We have seen how during the COVID-19 pandemic cyberattacks have
increased against national health systems, putting at risk the lives of millions of
people and directly impacting the most vulnerable communities and sectors. We wish
to use this forum to condemn the cyberattacks against the World Health Organization
and the attempts at identity theft suffered in recent months. Undoubtedly, increased
interconnectivity assumes that an increase in those attacks could be seen in the
coming years.
The malicious use of information and communications technologies has
extended in recent months to cyberattacks against the energy, financial and food
supply sectors; among other sectors, those are highly vulnerable to cyberattacks.
Likewise, we have seen how disinformation activities for the purpose of influencing
the perception of government officials and institutions have increased, which are
often able to delegitimize their work, unleashing instability and social conflict.
All of the foregoing makes it imperative to continue working for prevention and
codification of international law aimed at preventing their malicious use, which
recognizes the interrelation with applicable international humanitarian law, including
the area of cyber operations during armed conflict.
We stress the importance of working on the basis of consensus, without the
intention of imposing solutions that are incompatible with the realities of States, as
well as ensuring that progress achieved by the General Assembly through the various
consensus agreements of the Group of Governmental Experts and the Open-ended
Working Group on developments in the area of information and telecommunications
in the context of international security are taken into account. In particular, we
welcome the adoption by consensus of the agreement by the Open-ended Working
Group in 2021, with the participation of the 193 Member States of the United Nations,
including the 15 members of the Security Council and other relevant parties to the
process.
El Salvador expects to work constructively in the Open-ended Working Group
on development in information and communications technologies in the context of
international security, which will conduct its substantive work from 2021–2025, and
we applaud the work of the Permanent Representative of Singapore to the United
Nations, Burhan Gafoor, as the Chair-designate of the process.
The fundamental role of regional organizations, the private sector, civil society,
academia and other related sectors in preventing and combating those threats should
be noted. It is urgent to continue the work of strengthening regional and international
cooperation mechanisms to prevent and combat those challenges, through a dynamic
exchange of information and good practices, capacity-building, standardization of
legal frameworks and the use of new technologies as the path towards development
and fighting organized crime.

60/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XXX
Statement by the Head of Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, Olof Skoog
I am honoured to contribute the open debate on cybersecurity on behalf of the
European Union and its Member States.
The Candidate Countries Turkey, the Republic of North Macedonia*,
Montenegro* and Albania*, the country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine and the Republic
of Moldova, align themselves with this statement.
First, we would like to commend Estonia for holding this open debate on this
crucial topic, at a moment where malicious cyberactivities continue to be at a rise,
and the increasing challenges posed risk international security and stability in
cyberspace, in particular under these special circumstances of a pandemic.
Digitalization has a growing impact on our security, economies and societies at
large, creating both opportunities and challenges. Transport, energy and health,
telecommunications, finance, security, democratic process, space and defence are
heavily reliant on network and information systems, which are increasingly
interconnected.
In this light, we are in particular alarmed by the recent increase in malicious
cyberactivities targeting essential operators globally, including in the health -care
sector, and affecting the availability, security and integrity of information and
communications technology (ICT) products and services and consequently the
continuity of operations, which might have spillover and systemic effects and
enhanced risks of conflict.
We welcome therefore the opportunity to discuss this important issue in the
Security Council, which has the primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. It is an opportunity to underline a number of challenges faced, to
reiterate the achievements to date by the United Nations community, and to provide
an outlook on how to address these issues within the United Nations.
In this regard, the European Union and its member States welcome the
meaningful reports agreed by consensus of the recent Open-ended working group on
Developments in the Field of information and communications technologies in the
Context of International Security (Open-ended Working Group) and United Nations
Group of Governmental Expert to advance responsible State behaviour in cyberspace.
The reports significantly contribute to increasing awareness, and allow
enhancing the ability to prevent, respond to and recover from cyberthreats and
malicious cyberactivities. This is much needed, as a lack of awareness and capa cities
constitute a threat in and of itself, as all countries are increasingly reliant on ICT.
Increasing global cyberresilience is therefore essential, as it reduces the ability
of potential perpetrators to misuse ICT for malicious purposes. It also all ows States
to exercise due diligence and take appropriate actions against actors conducting such
activities from their territory, consistent with international law and the 2010, 2013,
2015 and 2021 consensus reports of the United Nations Groups of Governme ntal
Experts (UNGGEs) in the field of Information and Telecommunications in the
Context of International Security.

* The Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania continue to be part of the
Stabilization and Association Process.
21-09125

61/128

S/2021/621

The reports of the consecutive UNGGEs and the Open-ended Working Group
offer a baseline for conflict prevention, cooperation and stability i n cyberspace,
i.e. reaffirming the application of international law, addressing norms of responsible
State behaviour, confidence-building measures in cyberspace, and cybercapacitybuilding.
The European Union and its member States reaffirm that a framework for
conflict prevention, cooperation and stability in cyberspace can only be grounded in
existing international law, which includes the Charter of the United Nations in its
entirety, international humanitarian law, and international human rights law, as
endorsed by the General Assembly since 2013.
Deepening understanding on how international law applies in cyberspace is to
further reduce misunderstanding and increase accountability in cyberspace and the
United Nations membership should continue to advance and implement this
framework in view of international security and stability in cyberspace.
For instance, the European Union and its member States are of the view that
international humanitarian law is fully applicable in cyberspace in the context of
armed conflict. We reiterate that its application in cyberspace should not be
misunderstood as legitimizing any use of force inconsistent with the Charter of the
United Nations. International humanitarian law sets out essential protections for those
who do not, or do not any longer participate in hostilities, inter alia to protect civilians
against the effects of hostilities and combatants against unnecessary suffering, among
others. It also imposes limits on permissible means and methods of warfare, including
new ones.
Secondly, the adherence to norms of responsible State behaviour is of utmost
importance. The set of agreed norms reflects the shared expectations of international
community, which set standards for responsible State behaviour. It allows th e
international community to assess the activities and intentions of States in order to
prevent conflict and increase stability and security in cyberspace.
Thirdly, cyberrelated confidence-building measures constitute a practical means
of preventing conflict. Through cooperation and information sharing, regional
confidence-building measures have proven to reduce the risk of misinterpretation,
escalation and conflict that may stem from ICT incidents.
Lastly, the framework includes the important issue of capacity-building. We
actively support the call for better coordination for enhancing coherence in capacity building efforts in the use of ICT to close the digital divide, including by our
numerous efforts with partners around the world.
The European Union supports cybercapacity-building work through its External
Financing Instruments, which encompass a range of programmes with a global reach
including actions implemented in Africa, Asia and Latin America, as well as the
European Union’s Neighbourhood and the Western Balkans. Concretely, the European
Union is currently investing in activities worldwide, to support the implementation in
cooperation with its implementing partners, though projects such as European
Union’s Cyber Resilience for Development, Glacy+, EU Cyber Direct and Enhanced
Security In and With Asia Initiative.
In order to underline the framework for conflict prevention, cooperation and
stability in cyberspace, the European Union will continue to promote responsible
behaviour in cyberspace. In this light, the European Union and its Member States are
committed to the settlement of international disputes by peaceful means also when
such disputes arise in cyberspace.

62/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

The framework for a joint European Union diplomatic response is therefore pa rt
of the European Union’s approach to cyberdiplomacy, contributing to conflict
prevention, the mitigation of cybersecurity threats and greater stability in
international relations. In order to promote and protect an open, free, stable and secure
cyberspace, the European Union will continue to use its cyberdiplomacy toolbox, and
to cooperate with international partners to this end.
From the outset, and given the complex nature of cyberspace, it is of utmost
importance for States as well as the multi-stakeholder community to tackle the
challenges that cyberspace brings, improve cooperation and strengthen their
capacities. We also have a primary responsibility to enable all stakeholders to seize
their responsibility to advance an open, free, secure and stable cyberspace, grounded
in human rights, fundamental freedoms, democracy and the rule of law, and support
their efforts. The European Union’s approach to cyberdiplomacy also take into
account the prominence of gender perspectives in reducing the “gender digital divide”
and promoting an effective and meaningful participation of women in the decision making processes related to the use of ICT in the context of international security.
To strengthen the cooperation, we see a central role for the United Nations to
advance the implementation of achievements to date. To promote an effective
multilateral multi-stakeholder debate to advance peace and security in cyberspace,
there is a clear need to take forward the United Nations framework for responsible
State behaviour in cyberspace. Together with 53 Member States, the European Union
propose to establish a programme of action to advance responsible State behaviour in
cyberspace.
Building on the existing acquis as endorsed by the General Assembly, the
programme of action offers a permanent platform for cooperation and exchange of
best practices within the United Nations. The programme of action offers the
opportunity to foster capacity-building programmes tailored to the needs identified
by beneficiary States. It also provides an institutional mechanism within the United
Nations to improve cooperation with other stakeholders such as the private sector,
academia and civil society on their respective responsibilities to maintain an open,
free, secure, stable, accessible and peaceful ICT environment.
Because of the permanent and action-oriented character of this platform, we
think the programme of action proposal is timely and merits further exploration by
the international community. It constitutes a solid and action-oriented basis for further
work on the framework for conflict prevention, cooperation and stability in
cyberspace and to ensure that States are able to reap the benefits of a global, open,
stable and secure cyberspace.

21-09125

63/128

S/2021/621

Annex XXXI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Georgia to the
United Nations
We would like to express our gratitude to the Estonian presidency for convening
today’s high-level debate on this important issue and thank the distinguished
speakers.
Georgia has been long committed to developing responsible and ethical
cyberspace, including cybersecurity and resilience, to enable comprehensive
frameworks for safe, reliable, trusted digital environment for the benefit of the whole
nation. In last decade, we established necessary legal base of information and
cybersecurity and identified critical information system subjects; adopted and
implemented two cybersecurity strategies with relevant action plans; and the process
for adoption is under way for the 3rd national cybersecurity strategy.
However, as we all know, together with major economic and social
opportunities, innovation and development, cyberspace brings new kinds of security
threats. In recent years we witnessed cyberspace being used not only for the purposes
of terrorism, fraud and crime but also as a powerful tool for hybrid warfare and
interference into internal affairs of States.
Unfortunately, Hybrid warfare also became a powerful instrument in the hands
of for some States to further their national interests, and as this body is well informed,
Georgia has a long and painful experience of dealing with hybrid threats emanating
from one of its permanent members. Russian Federation has been waging the hybrid
warfare against Georgia since early 90s and it has never seized trying to undermine
the sovereignty, territorial integrity, European and Euro -Atlantic aspirations of our
country.
The list of the incidents is extensive. In August 2008, during the Russia’s full scale military aggression against Georgia, we witnessed the first precedent of a
massive cyberattack undertaken in parallel to on-going aggression. In 2019 a largescale cyberattack was launched against websites, servers and other operating systems
of the Administration of the President of Georgia, the Courts, municipal assemblies,
State bodies, private sector organizations and media outlets. The investigation
conducted by the Georgian authorities, in cooperation with our partners, concluded
that this cyberattack was planned and executed by the Main Division of the General
Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.
Regrettably, even when the international community is in a fight against the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, Russian Federation is still trying to gain
political dividends by intensifying propaganda war against Georgia’s one of the most
successful institution in the fight against spread of the Coronavirus – Richard Lugar
Center for Public Health Research. Russia’s accusations represent a typical piece of
misinformation and propaganda campaign against this unique laboratory that was
established to identify and address outbreaks just like the pandemic.
Today we all witness aggressive application of hybrid toolkit by Russia not only
in our region, but on a global scale as well. The most prominent instruments within
the Russian hybrid toolkit are military presence, information operations, cyberattacks,
support of proxy political groups, interference into domestic affairs and economic
influence.
In conclusion, we must underline that cyberattacks and hybrid warfare against
sovereign States represent grave violations of international law, its norms and
principles and undermine international peace and security. And while reaffirming our
64/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

commitment to continue strengthening the cybersecurity at national and international
level, we also call on the international community to increase its attention towards
malicious information and communications technology activities of the Russian
Federation in Georgia and elsewhere.

21-09125

65/128

S/2021/621

Annex XXXII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Germany to the
United Nations
One and a half years ago, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic hit the
world and made us aware – with dramatic suddenness – of the extent to which digital
technologies shape both our everyday lives and our economic resilience. At the same
time, it has mercilessly exposed our vulnerabilities. Cyberattacks, including those
conducted against critical infrastructures, can constitute a threat to international peace
and security, and Germany remains convinced that this is an important topic for the
Security Council.
International peace and security is coming under pressure from different sides:
first of all, cybercriminal activities undermine the reliability and trustworthiness of
technologies that are by now crucial for the functioning of our economies,
governments and modern societies as a whole. To name just a few examples, there
has been a sharp increase in denial-of-service attacks, phishing and the spread of
malware since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. Attacks on critical
infrastructure in Europe and North America and cyberattacks used as a vehicle for
extortion, too, are on the rise.
Second, State-sponsored malicious cyberactivities for the purpose of espionage,
sabotage, disinformation and destabilization or financial gain are damaging both
international trust and cooperative mechanisms of conflict mitigation, and thereby
threatening security worldwide.
Third, civil society as a whole and Human Rights Defenders in particular a re
under increasing pressure in cyberspace. Room for the freedom of expression,
transparency and genuine communication – which the Internet is designed to provide –
keeps shrinking.
In order to cope with these growing threats, a multi-pillar approach needs to be
pursued: One pillar is to strengthen our resilience nationally and internationally. This
includes improving technical infrastructure, political and legal capacities, as well as
an increased international cooperation.
A second pillar is to further advance and define our common understanding of
responsible State behaviour in cyberspace and to set red lines that must not be crossed.
We must therefore defend the existing acquis achieved by the Open-ended Working
Group and the Group of Governmental Experts and further advance the development
of norms of responsible State behaviour.
It is Germany’s position that international law, including the Charter of the
United Nations and international humanitarian law, applies online as it does offline.
States should strictly refrain from supporting information and communications
technology (ICT) activity contrary to their obligations under international law – not
least in the light of the potential to create and escalate inter-State tensions. ICT
activity must not intentionally damage critical infrastructure or otherwise impair the
use and operation of critical infrastructure. In particular, no actor should jeopardize
the general availability or integrity of the public core of the Internet, which is vital to
the stability of cyberspace. We call on all States to adhere strictly to their due
diligence obligations and to take swift action against actors conducting malicious
cyberactivity from their territory – in accordance with international law.
In order to stimulate ongoing discussions on international law in cyberspace,
Germany has published a policy paper on the applicability of international law in
cyberspace, and we encourage others to do the same.
66/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Agreeing on a common acquis is not enough, however. It is equally important
for there to be a firm response to unacceptable behaviour. Various instruments can be
considered, ranging from dialogue and exchange to political declarations by States or
groups of States exposing and denouncing irresponsible behaviour, or i mposing
sanctions against the respective persons and entities. Together with our partners in the
European Union, we have put in place a cyberrelated sanctions regime that allows us
to respond to cyberattacks in a firm, effective and targeted manner and in full
consistency with international law. We have used this instrument in the past and we
will not hesitate to use it again if our security is compromised. Additionally, a culture
of attribution can strengthen the normative framework and foster accountabili ty in
cyberspace.
A continuous exchange with civil society, the private sector and academia is
essential in order to increase our resilience in cyberspace, and to advance the cause
of Internet governance. The abundant expertise residing outside of public authorities
has to be harnessed by, and included in, these efforts, with the aim being to maintain
international peace and security in cyberspace.

21-09125

67/128

S/2021/621

Annex XXXIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Greece to the
United Nations
Digital technologies deeply contribute to the current transformation of
economies and societies, offering significant opportunities for economic growth, as
well as sustainable and inclusive development. Cyberspace, in particular, has become
one of the backbones of our societies. At the same time, the rise of malicious
behaviour in cyberspace, including the abuse of information and communications
technologies (ICT) by both State and non-State actors for malicious purposes, has
become the source of new risks and challenges. Such behaviour threatens economic
growth and can lead to destabilizing and cascading effects with enhanced risks of
conflict.
We therefore strongly support the strategic framework for conflict prevention,
cooperation and stability in cyberspace, endorsed by the General Assembly and we
stress the need to focus our collective efforts on developing the skills and capacity to
adequately address cyberthreats. The need for global cyberresilience is highlighted
by the current global health crisis, in which we have observed cyberthreats and
malicious cyberactivities targeting the health-care sector.
Global cyberresilience reduces the ability of potential perpetrators to misuse
ICT and strengthens the ability of States to effectively respond to and recover from
cyberincidents. As part of our latest efforts in strengthening global resilience and
developing practical cooperative measures, we are currently in the process of
organizing a regional cybersecurity seminar, with participants from the Western
Balkans.
Through our active participation in international organizations such as the
United Nations, NATO and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
we seek to cooperate, exchange experiences and best practices, and contribute to the
highest extent possible in developing appropriate means to address cyberthreats.
Furthermore, as a member of the European Union, we implement an inclusive and
multifaceted strategic framework for conflict prevention and stability in cyberspace.
Within the European Union, cybersecurity is a coordinated and collective effort
between Member States that sets a unique and valuable precedent of multilateral
cooperation.
We are highly committed towards a global, peaceful, secure, open and
independent cyberspace governed by international law, where human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law fully apply. We have been actively sharing
our experiences in the implementation of norms, confidence-building measures, and
capacity-building both bilaterally and multilaterally at all regional and international
fora in which we participate. We are strongly committed to participate actively in
further discussions at the United Nations on the issues of cybersecurity and we
reaffirm our willingness to engage positively in an effort to make constructive
progress.

68/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XXXIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
Guatemala would like to express its gratitude to the Estonian delegation as
President of the Security Council for convening this open debate on an issue that,
without any doubt, is of utmost important for States to address. Cyberspace has
become a central and indispensable domain of global activity, and its protection
through responsible State behaviour is critical to ensuring the maintena nce of
international peace and security. We are confident that this kind of meetings are an
excellent opportunity for our countries to exchange opinions and good practices on
the different levels of implementation of an increasingly relevant topic.
The world is currently facing several security challenges that are exacerbated
by the emergence of new threats, such as cybersecurity issues. Looking back at past
cyberattacks, as well as their increase during the times of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, the need to address this topic is evident, especially if we take
into account that it could affect the most vulnerable sectors of our society.
Cyberthreats and attacks arise and evolve derived from the various activities
that are developed by the interconnection of digital media, which represents a
complexity of conditions that require the participation and cooperation of all sectors
of our countries, in order to develop the technical and legal frameworks that
strengthen cybersecurity both domestically and globally.
As is the case in all countries, the increase in the use of information and
communications technologies (ICT) has become widespread in all sectors of our
society. This new scenario facilitates an unprecedented development of information
exchange and communications, but at the same time, it involves new risks and threats
that can affect the security of our populations.
Given this, my delegation would like to express its concern about these new
technologies, especially given the civilian and dual-use nature of cyberspace and
digital networks, which may be used by criminal and terrorist groups. It is extremely
worrying that several States are developing information and communications
technologies capabilities for military purposes and that the use of these technologies
in future conflicts between States is becoming more and more probable.
Guatemala recognizes that the interconnected and complex nature of cyberspace
requires joint efforts by governments, the private sector, civil society, an d academia
to address cybersecurity challenges in a comprehensive and balanced way. It is the
responsibility of all these sectors to maintain an open, free, secure and stable
cyberspace.
For this reason, my country promotes confidence-building and transparency
measures and supports capacity-building activities, information exchange and the
dissemination of best practices, both at the subregional, regional and international
levels.
My delegation stresses that the applicability of international law to State
behaviour in cyberspace, the voluntary non-binding norms of State behaviour
applicable in peacetime and the implementation of confidence-building measures,
remains crucial. Furthermore, after witnessing the existing gaps between countries on
cybersecurity and defense, my country gives special interest to capacity -building
efforts in order to find a more equitable playing field that would help maintain
international peace and security.

21-09125

69/128

S/2021/621

Guatemala believes that regional organizations play an indispensable role in
peacemaking on the ground. There is considerable potential in stepping up their
presence in cyberspace, both regionally and globally, to innovatively advance the
sustaining peace agenda. Regional and sub regional organizations have focused on
improving States’ security, which has made great strides in implementing practical
confidence-building measures in the different regions to improve cyberstability.
There’s no doubt that, without these organizations’ contributions, the efforts to
conflict prevention and stability would be less.
Guatemala currently has a National Cyber Security Strategy whose main
objective is to strengthen the capabilities of the country, creating the environment and
conditions necessary to ensure the participation, development and exercise of the
rights of people in cyberspace. Additionally, it has a Cyber Incident Response Center
(CERT), which provides cybersecurity auditing, vulnerability scanning and alert
classification services. Both of them were achieved with the accompaniment of the
Organization of American States.
In addition to that, Guatemala is in the process of development of a law on
cybercrime, clearly defining the lines of action and the types of crime with and in ICT
in order to promote capacity-building through international cooperation, favouring
due process by having well-defined protocols for the chain of custody and the
handling of digital evidence. It is also necessary to mention that my country is
honoured to be an observer country of the Budapest Convention, which seeks to tackle
computer crimes and crimes on the Internet through the harmonization of laws
between nations, the improvement of investigative techniques and the increased
cooperation between nations.
My delegation considers the need to continue carrying out transformations and
adjustments in the laws that govern each country in a harmonized way and to design
systems that allow the detection, investigation and prosecution of probable crimes
within a framework that safeguards the rights of individuals and at the same time
reduces the risk of that computer networks are used against the confidentiality,
integrity and availability of information. We hope that our discussion today will
contribute positively and complement the process of cybernorm-making, taking place
in the General Assembly, in particular through the meaningful works of the Group of
Governmental Experts and the Open-ended Working Group 2021–2025.
At last we recall all States that ICT must be used peacefully and for the common
good of humanity, promoting the sustainable development of all countries, regardless
of their level of scientific and technological development.

70/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XXXV
Statement by the Chargé d’Affaires of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Mohammad Kurniadi Koba
Allow me to thank Estonia for convening this meeting. I also would like to thank
the briefer for her valuable briefing.
As people’s dependence on digital connectivity increases, information and
communications technologies (ICT) have become an integral part of our daily lives.
Moreover, during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, ICT has
provided a lifeline for the public and private sectors in rendering essential services
for the population.
In this regard, it is critical to stress that malicious cyberactivities by State and
non-State actors, in particular those aimed at critical infrastructure, could jeopardize
national stability as well as international peace and security.
In that context, Indonesia wishes to underscore the following:
First, the primacy of the rule of law to guide our conduct regarding the use of
ICT as well as its implication for international peace and security.
The principles of international law and the Charter of the United Nations
provide the fundamental legal rules guiding States on their use of ICT, including in
responding to any malicious attacks.
All States must be guided by the same set of rules and laws. No one should be
exempted.
Furthermore, Indonesia supports the norms of responsible State behaviour
outlined in General Assembly resolution 70/237.
While continuing to address the growing need to identify and develop
international legal framework on this matter, our endeavour should also be dir ected
towards addressing gaps among countries and regions.
Apart from technical gaps, it is imperative to strengthen national policy
frameworks as well as the implementation of existing international law and the
voluntary and non-binding norms in cyberspace.
Second, the role of bilateral, regional and multilateral approaches in
strengthening trust in cyberspace.
Cooperative measures at the bilateral, regional and multilateral levels are
mutually reinforcing in advancing understanding and bolstering stability in
cyberspace, in particular in the area of capacity and confidence-building.
ASEAN Confidence-building measures, through the establishment of Points of
Contact, regular information exchanges, dialogue and sharing of best practices, have
been contributing towards cyberstability in the Southeast Asian region and beyond,
in particular through the ASEAN Regional Forum.
Furthermore, Indonesia underlines the merit of meaningful partnership with
other multi-stakeholder entities to help States apply the framework of responsible
behaviour in their use of ICT.
In this regard, we emphasize the need for developed countries to share ICT
technologies with the developing countries. Just like all other global problems,
ensuring that others have the right tools and capacities to address this threat, will
contribute to overall stability in the ICT domain.
21-09125

71/128

S/2021/621

Third, the role of the United Nations in leading a coordinated effort in
addressing conflicts that may stem from ICT incidents.
Today’s discussion is the first formal, dedicated Council debate on the impact
of information and communications technologies on the maintenance of international
peace and security.
It marks an important step forward on this issue in the United Nations.
In the future, the Council needs to anticipate rise in threats in the cybersphere,
as well as possible significant incidents in the ICT environment which could lead to
major war.
We underscore the importance of ensuring that United Nations actions remain
coordinated and synergized. The Council should continue to respond to the
international peace and security, as well as humanitarian implications of
developments in the ICT domain.
At the same time, the Council must be guided by the norms and rules that are
being deliberated upon and developed by the General Assembly.
Let me conclude by reiterating Indonesia’s commitment to advancing our
common efforts to appropriately respond to the ever-growing challenges to the
maintenance of peace and security relating to the use of ICT.

72/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XXXVI
Statement by the International Committee of the Red Cross
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) is grateful for the
opportunity to contribute to this Security Council open debate on “Maintaining
International Peace and Security in Cyberspace”.
Over the past two decades, hostile cyberoperations have become an increasingly
important concern for the maintenance of international peace and security. As
societies are digitalizing, so are military capabilities of States and other actors. Today,
the international community recognizes that “a number of States are developing ICT
capabilities for military purposes” and that “the use of ICT in future conflicts between
States is becoming more likely”.10
In light of this reality, the ICRC would like to recall the potential harm to
humans that the use of cybertechnology can cause, and afterwards present how States
can mitigate these adverse humanitarian consequences through action at the
international and at the national level.
It is today well-known that cyberoperations against critical civilian
infrastructure have caused significant economic harm, disruption in societies, and
tension among States. In the final report of the “Open-ended Working Group on
Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Context of
International Security”, all States recognized that cyberoperations against critical
infrastructure risk having “potentially devastating humanitarian consequences”. 11
While the ICRC cannot confirm any cyberoperations with human casualties, we are
concerned about the destructive effects of cyberoperations, such as the disruption of
electricity supplies, water systems or medical services. 12 These kinds of operations
pose acute risks to humans at all times. Our experience shows, however, that
disrupting critical civilian infrastructure has particularly severe consequences in
societies that are already weakened by armed conflict.
Adverse humanitarian consequences are not inevitable. States must take
decisive steps to ensure that their use of cyberoperations during armed conflict
complies with existing rules of international law. In the ICRC’s view, this requires
action at the international and at the national level.
At the international level, States have affirmed that international law applies in
the ICT environment. This comprises, first and foremost, States obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations, in particular the prohibition against the use of force
and the obligation to settle international disputes by peaceful means. Most recently,
the Group of Government Experts also noted that “international humanitarian law
applies only in situations of armed conflict”. The group recalled “the established
international legal principles including, where applicable, the principles of humanity,
necessity, proportionality and distinction that were noted in the 2015 report”, and it
recognized “the need for further study on how and when these principles apply to the
use of ICT by States and underscored that recalling these principles by no means
legitimizes or encourages conflict”. 13 The ICRC fully supports this view:
cyberoperations during armed conflict are not happening in a “legal void” or “grey

__________________

Open-Ended Working Group, Final Report, 2021, para. 16; Group of Governmental Experts,
Final Report, 2021, para. 7.
11
Open-Ended Working Group, Final Report, 2021, para. 18.
12
Available at www.icrc.org/en/document/potential-human-cost-cyber-operations.
13
Group of Governmental Experts, Final Report, 2021, para. 71(f).
10

21-09125

73/128

S/2021/621

zone” – they are subject to the established principles and rules of international
humanitarian law.
To ensure that international humanitarian law is understood and applied
effectively, the ICRC welcomes further study of how and when this field of law
applies. To avoid adverse humanitarian consequences and disruption of societies, we
ask States to interpret and apply the rules and principles of international humanitarian
law in a manner that takes into consideration the specific characteristics of the ICT
environment. Essential questions on the protection of civilian life require further
study and clear positioning by States. For instance, in an increasingly data-driven
world, it should be a priority for States to agree that civilian data enjoys protection
against attack, just as civilian paper files do. Moreover, States should affirm that
cyberoperations that damage civilian objects by disrupting their functionality are
subject to all international humanitarian law rules on the conduct of hostilities. 14
While further study and agreement on how international law limits
cyberoperations during armed conflict is important, these rules will only become
effective through implementation at the national level. From discussions with military
operators and experts, the ICRC identified a number of key steps on how States can,
and should, avoid civilian harm from military operations during armed conflic t. 15
Today, we would like to emphasize four of them:
– First, each State is responsible for all its organs involved in cyberoperations and
other actors that act on that State’s instructions, or under its direction or control.
States must ensure that all of these actors respect international humanitarian law.
– Second, States should develop clear internal processes to ensure that if cyberrelated means or methods of warfare are used, they comply with the applicable
legal framework.
– Third, States have an obligation to take all feasible precautions to avoid or at
least minimize incidental civilian harm when carrying out attacks, including
through cyber-related means and methods of warfare. In the ICT environment,
this may include implementing technical measures such as “system-fencing”,
“geo-fencing”, or “kill switches”.16
– Four, States also have an obligation to put in place measures to protect the
civilian population against the dangers resulting from military cyberoperations.
Some of these measures may have to be implemented already in peacetime.
To conclude, the ICRC commends Member States for striving to advance
international dialogue and agreement on the potential human cost of cyberoperations
and measures to prevent and mitigate human harm. In our view, international
humanitarian law must be part of such debates, and the ICRC remains available to
lend its expertise to them.

__________________

See also International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), International humanitarian law and
cyberoperations during armed conflicts: ICRC position paper, 2019.
15
ICRC, Avoiding Civilian Harm from Military Cyber Operations During Armed Conflicts, 2021.
16
“System-fencing” means preventing malware from executing itself unless there is a precise
match with the target system, “geo-fencing” means limiting malware to only operate in a specific
IP range, and “kill switches” signify a way to disable malware after a given time or when
remotely activated.
14

74/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XXXVII
Statement by the Executive Director for Police Services of the
International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL)
Introduction
Cybercrime is a global challenge in the digital era. Its impact goes far beyond
what is being reported or detected, affecting the daily lives of over 4.5 billion people
online. The recent increased reliance on the digital environment has created more
criminal opportunities in cyberspace. Shifting its targets to governments, businesses,
key infrastructure and even hospitals, cybercrime today poses a formidable challenge
to security worldwide. Owing to its rapid growth both in scale and severity, the
International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) has put priority on
combating cybercrime.
As a global and neutral inter-governmental organization, INTERPOL is
cognizant of international law, norms, confidence-building measures and capacitybuilding efforts to maintain peace and security in cyberspace. In light of the objective
of this open debate to better understand the growing risks stemming from malicious
activities in cyberspace, INTERPOL presents this written statement to the Security
Council to support their commitment to achieving a peaceful and secure cyberspace.
The statement outlines the latest cybercrime trends and their impact as well as
INTERPOL’s global mechanisms and solutions that are available for its 194 member
countries to address these pressing challenges.
Present and emerging cyberthreats
In the last year, INTERPOL has analysed a broad range of cyberthreats. Its
recent assessment underlined that the coronavirus disease (COVID -19) pandemic has
opened up new avenues for cybercriminals to carry out various forms of online
criminality regardless of the region. The prominent threats include ransomware -based
extortion, Business Email Compromise, illegal data-harvesting operations,
misinformation and the re-emergence of older types of malware, repurposed to take
advantage of the global pandemic.
The identified trends also involved a shift of targets to major corporations,
governments and critical infrastructure. 17 Cybercriminals and fraudsters were
exploiting fundamental social needs and anxieties. Since March 2020, INTERPOL
has been receiving a number of requests from its member countries to address
ransomware attacks against hospitals and other institutions on the front lines of the
fight against the coronavirus. 18 By attacking these critical infrastructure which play a
crucial role in responding to the outbreak, criminals were able to maximize the
damage and financial gain.
While ransomware attacks are not new, it is the fastest growing form of
cybercrime. Ransomware provides a highly enticing and lucrative business model for
cybercriminals, with the use of double extortion and Ransomware -as-a-Service
model. We also saw a pattern whereby such attacks were not geographically limited,
suggesting that criminals were expanding their focus to target any institution across

__________________

INTERPOL, Assessment Report of the Impact of COVID -19 on Cybercrime, retrieved from
https://www.interpol.int/en/content/download/15526/file/COVID 19%20Cybercrime%20Analysis%20Report-%20August%202020.pdf.
18
https://www.interpol.int/en/News-and-Events/News/2020/Cybercriminals-targeting-criticalhealthcare-institutions-with-ransomware.
17

21-09125

75/128

S/2021/621

the globe. For instance, the same ransomware strain which shut down a hospital in
Europe was also used in Asia.
In addition, we have seen complex frauds hitting victims in Europe, and
proceeds being routed as far as West Africa and South East Asia within hours. Massive
data breaches also continue to occur causing significant financial losses to businesses
worldwide. At the same time, cybercriminals are hiding in the Darknet that guaranties
anonymous and untraceable access. This heightens the importance and relevance of
INTERPOL’s Notices, 19 in particular the Purple Notice, which is a tool for member
countries to share information about the modus operandi of these fraudulent schemes.
The goal is to disseminate this critical information faster than the next attack.
Furthermore, the convergence between cybercrime and financial crime is posing
a complex challenge. This type of crime contains multiple phases from cyberattack to
data exploitation, and then to money laundering phases of layering and eventual
cashing-out. The use of cryptocurrency in this process also hinders an effective and
timely response. Given the complexity, a joint operating model is required combining
capabilities of different specialized units in law enforcement to better combat
cyberenabled fraud and money laundering. To offer the full array of operational and
analytical support in this regard, INTERPOL has launched the INTERPOL Global
Financial Crime Task Force at the end of 2020.
Global mechanism to mitigate cyberthreats
Indeed, international police cooperation is vital in keeping the highly
interconnected world safe and secure. As recognized in the UNODC’s Comprehensive
Study on Cybercrime, INTERPOL plays a unique role in facilitating police to pol ice
cooperation. 20 In support of 194 member countries, it is entrusted with the mandate
of facilitating cross-border law enforcement cooperation and, as appropriate,
supporting governmental and intergovernmental organizations, authorities and
services whose mission is to prevent or combat crime − within the limits of the laws
existing in the different countries and in the spirit of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
Given its neutrality and global presence, INTERPOL is uniquely positioned to
lead and coordinate the global law enforcement response to cybercrime. It also allows
law enforcement worldwide to share information on cybercrime and threat actors, and
offers a wide range of expertise, technical guidance and operational support. Based
on this unique role, INTERPOL advocated and underlined the importance of
international police cooperation in various United Nations policy processes such as
the United Nations Expert Group to Conduct a Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime 21
and the United Nations Open-ended Working Group on ICT Security.
Taking the partnership to the next level, the second biannual review of the
General Assembly resolution on the cooperation between United Nations and
INTERPOL was unanimously adopted on 23 November 2020. 22 It was a meaningful
achievement as it introduced new language on key areas of cooperation including
cybercrime, thus providing greater legitimacy for further collaboration between the
two organizations in this field.
__________________

https://www.interpol.int/en/How-we-work/Notices/About-Notices.
UNODC Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime, p.195.
21
https://www.unodc.org/documents/Cybercrime/IEG_cyber_comments/INTERPOL.pdf and
https://www.unodc.org/documents/organized-crime/cybercrime/Cybercrime-April2021/Statements/Item-3/INTERPOL_item_3.pdf.
22
General Assembly resolution 75/10 on cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL).
19
20

76/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

In this era of digitalization, national solutions and even regional solutions are
no longer sufficient. To help achieve international peace and security in cyberspace,
INTERPOL is able to serve as a global mechanism to effectively combat cybercrime
and provide its member countries with a variety of services and tools including:
• A secure global police communications system called the I-24/7 to share urgent
police information securely and in real-time;
• 19 Databases 23 and Notices 24 that are instrumental in giving alerts to the
international community and supporting transnational investigations;
• INTERPOL’s Global Cybercrime Programme that delivers policing capabilities
in preventing, detecting, investigating and disrupting cybercrime, with the aim
to reduce to the global impact of cybercrime and protect communities for a safer
world;
• INTERPOL Global Cybercrime Expert Group and Regional Working Groups
with Heads of Cybercrime Units to discuss pressing issues pertaining to
cybercrime and devise operational and strategic plans;
• Communications platforms such as Cybercrime Knowledge Exchange for
sharing information securely within the wider law enforcement community and
Cybercrime Collaborative Platform – Operations for closed operational
discussions;
• Cyber Fusion Platform to aggregate cybercrime data and conduct in-depth
analysis;
• INTERPOL’s 24/7 Cybercrime Point of Contact to connect in real time
cybercrime units from different countries for law enforcement cooperation;
• INTERPOL Global Cyber-Incident Response Team (I-CIRT) framework to
coordinate global law-enforcement responses to major cyberincidents;
• INTERPOL Global Financial Crime Task Force to reduce the worldwide volume
and impact of financial crime through enhanced international cooperation and
innovation, with focus on cyberfraud and money laundering schemes.
A multi-stakeholder approach
Cybercrime investigations feature a number of challenges that are not
experienced in the physical realm. For law enforcement, it is difficult to know first hand that an attack has occurred, and even then reporting rates are low. Investigating
cybercrime also takes specific skills and technology, which is not universally
available. Cybercrime being inherently global is often detrimental to effective
response with evidence and suspects located in multiple jurisdictions simultaneously.
To overcome these challenges, INTERPOL has placed partnership at the heart
of its efforts in tacking cybercrime. At the 88th session of INTERPOL’s General
Assembly held in 2019, member countries have endorsed a legal framework titled
“Gateway” that enables INTERPOL to share information with private sector
companies. 25 This decision was based on the fact that law enforcement needs to work
closely with the private sector where the majority of data and expertise lies in relation
to cybercrime.

__________________

https://www.interpol.int/en/How-we-work/Databases/Our-19-databases.
https://www.interpol.int/en/How-we-work/Notices/About-Notices.
25
https://www.interpol.int/en/News-and-Events/News/2019/INTERPOL-s-General-Assembly-setsroad map-for-global-policing.
23
24

21-09125

77/128

S/2021/621

INTERPOL’s Global Cybercrime Programme currently has 12 private partners
under this framework which share up-to-date cybercrime information and expertise
as well as provide technical assistance for law enforcement agencies. The access to
data – from both the public and private sectors – allows INTERPOL to provide
tailored operational support and technical guidance to member countries.
Furthermore, collaborating with various actors in the global ecosystem of
cybersecurity is crucial as diverse datasets can help shape effective policies and
operational responses to cybercrime. This also helps pool our wisdom to be resilient
and agile especially in times of uncertainty. At the end of last year, INTERPOL
supported the Nigerian Police, jointly with its private partner, in the arrest of members
from an organized crime group responsible for phishing campaigns and Business
Email Compromise scams affecting governments and private sector companies in
more than 150 countries. 26
INTERPOL also puts particular emphasis on prevention. To prevent cybercrime,
INTERPOL works closely with its public and private partners to promote good
cyberhygiene by running a series of global awareness campaigns. These efforts also
support law enforcement organizations to overcome numerous challenges in tackling
cybercrime by raising public awareness on the crime itself, ways to protect
themselves and what to do when it occurs.
Conclusion
As the nexus of criminal actors, infrastructure and victims goes beyond national
borders and jurisdictions, local law enforcement does not always have the capabilities
or capacity to address these transitional elements in tackling cybercrime. Member
countries should bear in mind that the gaps in law enforcement cybercapabilities or
capacity across regions remain a fundamental enabler of crime networks to distribute
their infrastructure and activities where risk is lower.
To mitigate these ever-evolving threats and risks concerning cyberspace,
member countries should leverage and maximize the use of police-level cooperation
for a timely and effective response. With a local footprint in each country, INTERPOL
is able to connect the dots; to identify and disrupt the criminal actors in cyberspace,
together with our member countries and partners.
It is evident that cybercrime can only be effectively combated through a globally
coordinated – and importantly a rapid – response. We need to protect systems, prepare
our leadership, share solutions and encourage the right response. In particular, law
enforcement must be a trusted and effective partner, as the exchange of data is key –
including between national police forces, the private sector, and global experts su ch
as INTERPOL. Increasing trust within the global law enforcement community with
“dare to share” attitude is crucial under the common goal of combating cybercrime.
At a time when the international community is put under exceptional pressure,
ensuring our common security requires us to move towards more collaboration and
inclusion. This is what INTERPOL stands for: assisting international law enforcement
cooperation for a safer world. As we share the conviction that security and justice are
key to achieving a peaceful and sustainable cyberspace, INTERPOL works at the side
of the United Nations by facilitating international law enforcement cooperation. To
make this endeavour a success, INTERPOL will continue to support its member
countries in the fight against cybercrime.

__________________
26

78/128

https://www.interpol.int/en/News-and-Events/News/2020/Three-arrested-as-INTERPOL-GroupIB-and-the-Nigeria-Police-Force-disrupt-prolific-cybercrime-group.
21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XXXVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
Cyberspace provides golden opportunities for mankind to constantly develop
and promote all aspects of its life. Such an outstanding enabler must therefore not
only be promoted throughout the world particularly in developing countries but also
be protected against all threats.
Cyberspace can also be used to commit acts of aggression, breaches of the
peace, “the threat or use of force”, “to intervene in matters which are essentially
within the domestic jurisdiction of any State”, to violate the sovereignty of States or
to coerce other States. These must also be effectively prevented.
As a guiding principle, the existing “applicable” principles and norms of
international law, of course without misinterpretation or arbitrary interpretation, must
govern the rights, duties and conducts of States with regard to cyberspace.
Yet, when there is no consensus about the applicability of international law, or
even there is lack of international norms related to cyberspace, the international
community must work towards developing required norms.
To that end, and given that the General Assembly is mandated by the Chart er
for the “progressive development of international law and its codification”, the
Assembly must continue its ongoing efforts to develop and codify international
principles and norms required for cyberspace, including in the form of an
international legally binding instrument.
Parallel to such efforts, States must make every effort to promote the widest
possible use of cyberspace for their development and in so doing, act responsibly and
in accordance with applicable international law, in particular the Purposes and
Principles of the United Nations.
The primary responsibility for maintaining a secure, safe and trustable
cyberspace rests with individual States. Therefore, given the current complex
situation of cyberspace governance, the prominent role and serious involvement of
States in cyberspace environment governance at global level, in particular in policy
and decision-making, must be promoted and ensured.
At the same time, the envisaged cyberspace governance must be developed in a
manner that does not adversely affect the rights of States in making their choices of
development, governance and legislation with respect to cyberspace environment.
The right of States to have “free access to information and to develop fully,
without interference, their system of information and mass media and to use their
information media in order to promote their political, social, economic and cultural
interests and aspirations” as well as “the right and duty of States to combat, within
their constitutional prerogatives, the dissemination of false or distorted news”, which
has also been reaffirmed by General Assembly in the 1981 “Declaration on the
Inadmissibility of Intervention and Interference in the Internal Affairs of States”, must
be fully observed.
In discharging their responsibilities for maintaining a secure, safe and trustable
cyberspace, States must adopt a cooperative rather than confrontational approach.
As the General Assembly, in the 1965 “Declaration on the Inadmissibility of
Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States and the Protection of Their
Independence and Sovereignty” has reaffirmed, “No State has the right to intervene
directly or indirectly for any reason whatever in the internal or external affairs of any
21-09125

79/128

S/2021/621

other State”. All States must therefore prevent and refrain from such acts, inter alia,
against political, economic and cultural elements or cyberrelated critical
infrastructure of States, including through cyberrelated ways and means.
Moreover, the Assembly, through the 1981 “Declaration on the Inadmissibility
of Intervention and Interference in the Internal Affairs of States” has reaffirmed the
duty of a State “to ensure that its territory is not used in any manner which would
violate the sovereignty, political independence, territorial integrity and national unity
or disrupt the political, economic and social stability of another State”; “to refrain
from any action or attempt in whatever form or under whatever pretext to destabilize
or to undermine the stability of another State or of any of its institutions”, as well as
“to abstain from any defamatory campaign, vilification or hostile propaganda for the
purpose of intervening or interfering in the internal affairs of other States”. These
rules must also be observed by States with respect to cyberspace.
According to one of the principles reaffirmed by the General Assembly in the
1970 “Declaration on Principles of international law concerning Friendly Relations
and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations”,
States must not use any “type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain
from it the subordination of the exercise of its sovereign rights and to secure from it
advantages of any kind”. Accordingly, States shall not use cyberspace -related
advances as tools for economic, political or any other type of coercive measures,
including by limiting or blocking measures against other States.
Likewise, States must refrain from the threat or use of force within or through
the cyberspace environment. They must also refrain from, and prevent, abusing
cyberspace-related supply chains developed under their control and jurisdiction, to
create or assist development of vulnerability in products, services and maintenance
compromising sovereignty and data protection of other States.
States must also exercise due control over cyberspace-related companies and
platforms under their jurisdiction, and take appropriate measures to make them
accountable for their behaviour in the ITC environment, including for violating
national sovereignty, security and public order of other States. At any rate, States are
responsible for their internationally wrongful acts within or through cyberspace.
Furthermore, all cyberspace-related international disputes must be settled
exclusively by peaceful means and based on “the sovereign equality of States and in
accordance with the principle of free choice of means” as stated in the 1970 “Manila
Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes”.
It is worth recalling in this context that, during the recent years, we have been
witnessing an alarming trend of systematic accusations by certain States against other
States of launching cyberattacks or similar activities in cyberspace. Given the existing
challenges associated with attribution in the cyberspace environment as well as the
absence of a set of internationally developed and agreed standards on genuine,
reliable and adequate proof for substantiating the attribution, such accusations must
be considered merely politically motivated.
All in all, cyberspace and its related means, technics and technologies must be
used exclusively for peaceful purposes, and to that end, States must act cooperatively,
responsibly and in full accordance with applicable international law.
Finally, we share the views that consideration of cyberspace-related issues must
be continued in the General Assembly. For its part, the Islamic Republic of Iran, as
one of the victims of cyberattacks, through the Stuxnet malicious computer worm –
believed to be built jointly by the United States and the Israeli regime to cause damage
to the Iranian peaceful nuclear installations – stands ready to contribute to Assembly’s
efforts in developing principles and norms required for cyberspace.
80/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XXXIX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
Italy commends Estonia for bringing the issue of cybersecurity to the attention
of the Security Council and is pleased to participate in today’s open debate.
We also appreciate the support and dedication of the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Nakamitsu, and her readiness to brief the Security Council
at a moment when there is concern among Member States for the rising number of
cybersecurity incidents.
Italy aligns itself with the European Union statement and wishes to add the
following remarks in its national capacity.
The timing of this debate could not have been more appropriate. The General
Assembly has recognized the work of the past two years carried out by the First
Committee on developments in the field of information and communications
technologies on international security and on the advancement of responsible State
behaviour in cyberspace. The two reports adopted by the Open-ended Working Group
and the Group of Governmental Experts during this semester represent important
achievements that should contribute to building trust among Member States. The also
gave visibility to a domain which for several years has been considered eminently
technical.
The pace of digitalization is picking up at a global level and, along with the
benefits associated with this development, comes the challenge to maintain
cyberspace as a global, open, and stable domain. The surge in incidents in recent
months, at times targeting critical infrastructures and imposing high costs to world
economies, is deplorable. Some of the attacks offered a glimpse into the loss of human
life that these actions can cause, especially during a pandemic. The destructive
potential of the misuse of new technologies is becoming more and more evident and
so is the need to keep them in check. Italy believes that the United Nations are the
best positioned for this task and for promoting cyberpeace and stability.
Italy would like to echo the European Union statement with regard to the
applicability of international law in cyberspace, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law, the importance of adhering to norms of responsible State
behaviour, and the usefulness of confidence-building measures as a practical means
to prevent conflict. We also wish to highlight the important role that regional
organizations can exert in the field of cybersecurity. As staunch supporters of
multilateralism, we encourage the dialogue between the United Nation s and regional
organizations and, in this regard, we welcome the recent discussions between the
United Nations Secretary General and the European Council, as a worthwhile
opportunity to exchange views on the challenges we are facing. We also appreciate
the efforts of the Swedish presidency of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, which is bringing to the fore the interlinkages between human
rights, gender issues and cybersecurity.
In an increasingly interconnected world, dialogue becomes even more essential
to promote shared understandings and increase opportunities for cooperation. In this
spirit, we support the dialogue of the European Union with the United Nations and
with regional organizations, notably the African Union, the Regional Forum of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Office of the Special Adviser.
Through regional organizations, Member States can maximize their own
bilateral contacts, sharing best practices and lessons learned, thus ensuring that
regional approaches do not diverge. Further efforts should be dedicated to
21-09125

81/128

S/2021/621

mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of disputes, as well as to initiatives to develop
cyberdiplomacy and cybermediation.
We believe that the cyberdomain should stay open, free, secure and stable, as a
means for States to implement policies that will enable societies to thrive and
guarantee sustainable development for all, contributing to the attainment of the SDGs.
The importance of capacity-building cannot be underestimated, as it guarantees
homogeneous resilience of States, increases awareness and stimulates the
development of capabilities. Much more needs to be done in this sector, and we
believe that the programme of action to Advance Responsible State Behaviour in
Cyberspace, promoted together with other 52 Member States, can represent the
priority platform from which to coordinate and promote this endeavour. We have
already flagged our availability to exchange further on this initiative in the context of
the First Committee discussions and wish to reiterate our resolve today. The
programme of action can also be the forum where the multi-stakeholder approach is
shaped and Public-Private Partnerships are developed.
The pandemic has been a dramatic setback in 2020 and 2021. Our joint efforts
need to focus on relaunching sustainable development and the cyberdomain is an
essential ingredient for that. Italy is working toward this goal as a member of the G7
and is promoting this vision in the context of its current G20 presidency. Today’s
debate is a vital step toward increasing awareness and ensuring that developments
linked to digitalization occur in a safe and stable cyberdomain, while safeguarding
every effort from being undermined.
This debate takes place as the G20 Foreign Ministers are meeting in Matera to
discuss the issues of recovery and sustainable development, with the aim of leaving
no one behind. It is our hope that these efforts are mutually reinforcing and that the
Security Council will remain focused on cyberissues, monitor progress and be ready
to call non-compliant States to their obligations. Hopefully such instances will be
very few as Member States converge on the need to dedicate time and effort to a
positive cybersecurity agenda – one which develops trust, transparency and
inclusiveness.

82/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XL
Statement by the Ambassador for United Nations Affairs and
Cyber Policy of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan,
Akahori Takeshi
Japan would like to express its sincere appreciation to Kaja Kallas, the Prime
Minister of the Republic of Estonia, for organizing this open debate on cybersecurity.
Japan thanks Estonia for recognizing in its concept note the open debate on complex
contemporary challenges to international peace and security organized in 2017 under
Japan’s presidency.
Japan welcomes the adoption of the Open-ended Working Group report in
March and the adoption of the report of the sixth Group of Governmental Experts in
May, both by consensus.
The greatest value of the Open-ended Working Group report was that it was
adopted by consensus in a process where all Member States could participate fully.
The Member States affirmed the acquis directly, including that international law, in
particular the Charter of the United Nations in its entirety, is applicable in cyberspace.
The Group of Governmental Experts report has additional value. For each of the
11 norms included in the 2015 Group of Governmental Experts report, the new report
provides guidance and examples of implementation. Japan hopes that this content will
further promote cooperation between States in advancing responsible State behaviour.
In addition, it is clearer now that internationally wrongful acts attributable to a State
entail State responsibility. The applicability of international humanitarian law is
expressed in a clear manner. The Group noted again the inherent right of States to
take measures recognized in the Charter.
We look forward to deepening concrete discussions on the application of
international law in cyberspace in various fora in the future. Japan hopes that the
position paper which it provided to the Group of Governmental Experts compendium
of national positions will contribute to such discussions. Here, I would like to share
the most essential points in Japan’s position.
Japan takes the view that a State must not violate the sovereignty of another by
cyberoperations. Moreover, a State must not intervene in matters within domestic
jurisdiction of another State by cyberoperations. Internationally wrongful acts
committed by a State in cyberspace entail State responsibility.
States have a due diligence obligation regarding cyberoperations under
international law. Norms 13(c) and (f) and the second sentence of paragraph 71(g) of
the 2021 Group of Governmental Experts report are related to this obligation.
Regarding the recent Colonial Pipeline incident, the U.S. President mentioned efforts
toward “sort of an international standard that governments knowing that criminal
activities are happening from their territory move on those criminal enterprises”. We
recognize the difficulty of attributing cyberoperations to a State. The due diligence
obligation may provide grounds for invoking the responsibility of the State from the
territory of which a cyberoperation not attributable to any State originated.
Any international dispute involving cyberoperations must be settled through
peaceful means pursuant to article 2(3) of the Charter of the United Nations. In order
to ensure the peaceful settlement of disputes, the powers of the Security Council based
on Chapters VI and VII of the Charter of the United Nations and the functions of the
other United Nations organs should be used in disputes stemming from
cyberoperations. Japan has reservations to the idea of establishing a new international
mechanism for attribution.
21-09125

83/128

S/2021/621

Japan’s view is that when a cyberoperation constitutes an armed attack under
article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations, States may exercise the inherent right
of individual or collective self-defense recognized under the same article.
International humanitarian law is applicable to cyberoperations. This
affirmation contributes to the regulation of methods and means of warfare. The
argument that the affirmation will lead to the militarization of cyberspace is
groundless.
International human rights law is also applicable to cyberoperations. Individuals
enjoy the same human rights with respect to cyberoperations that they otherwise
enjoy.
On the relationship between international law and voluntary norms, for the
stabilization of cyberspace, it is essential that international law and norms work
together to prevent internationally wrongful acts using ICT and to promote
responsible State behaviour in cyberspace. As clearly expressed in the Open-ended
Working Group report, norms do not replace or alter States’ obligations under
international law.
Japan hopes that a large number of Member States will voluntarily publish their
national positions on how international law applies.
Japan believes that it is time to prioritize implementation of the agreed voluntary
norms and obligations under international law, together with confidence -building
measures and capacity-building measures.
In the context of implementation, Japan would like to invite Governments to
proactively announce their legal assessment when a malicious cyberoperation occurs,
including, inter alia, on whether it constitutes a violation of international law. Such
practice will promote shared understanding on how international law applies to
cyberoperations. Application of international law by international and domestic
courts and tribunals to cyberincidents would have similar effect. It is Japan’s hope
that malicious activities in cyberspace will be deterred by accumulating such practice.
Japan strongly supports the programme of action. We believe that the
programme of action will be an effective mechanism to secure and monitor
implementation of agreed norms, obligations under international law, confidencebuilding measures and capacity-building. We look forward to deepening discussions
on the programme of action. We will also continue to participate proactively in the
new Open-ended Working Group.
Japan is committed to safeguarding a free, fair and secure cyberspace and will
continue to actively contribute to discussions and efforts to promote rule of law in
cyberspace, including at the United Nations.

84/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XLI
Statement by Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan to the
United Nations, Мagzhan Ilyassov
We express our gratitude to the Estonian Chairmanship for organizing and
conducting the debate entitled “Maintenance of international peace and security:
cybersecurity”.
In conditions of global threats, ensuring security requires the coordination of
the international community and the settlement of many aspects of a political and
economic nature. In this context, it should be noted that a new and at the same tim e
complicated component has appeared in the world – cybersecurity.
It should be clear that information and communications technologies having
enormous potential for the development of States. At the same time, they create new
opportunities for perpetrators and may contribute to a rise in the levels and complexity
of crime, the potential risk of the misuse of emerging technologies, including artificial
intelligence. In this regard, the prevention and suppression of the use of information
and communications technologies for criminal purposes should be a priority for the
work of States at the present stage.
In this regard we welcome the established an open-ended ad hoc
intergovernmental committee of experts, representative of all regions, to elaborate a
comprehensive international convention on countering the use of information and
communications technologies for criminal purposes, taking into full consideration
existing international instruments and efforts at the national, regional and
international levels on combating the use of information and communications
technologies for criminal purposes, foreseen by resolution 74/247 adopted by the
General Assembly on 27 December 2019.
We believe that the work of the United Nations in this area will be further
influenced by the final substantive report of the Open-ended Working Group on
developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of
international security adopted in March 2021 and consensus by resolution 75/240,
which established an Open-ended Working Group on security of and in the use of
information and communications technologies 2021–2025, as well as by the
consensus report adopted by the Group of Governmental Experts on Advancing
Responsible State Behaviour in Cyberspace in the context of international security in
May 2021.
States should continue to strengthen measures to protect of all critical
infrastructure from ICT threats, and increase exchanges on best practices with regard
to this sphere.
In this regard, we welcome cybersecurity negotiation process in the United
Nations and understanding of the participants and Member States that all decisions
on this specified agenda must be taken by consensus.

21-09125

85/128

S/2021/621

Annex XLII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Latvia to the
United Nations
Developments in information and communications technologies (ICT) have
provided States and societies with myriad of benefits in the sphere of economy,
services, education and communication. Alongside vastly positive effects of the
application of ICT, Latvia is increasingly concerned about the implications of the
malicious and disruptive use of ICT with the implications for both international peace,
security, stability and human rights.
More often States suffer from such offenses, including those affecting
democratic institutions and critical infrastructure. It is even more alarming that
malicious cyberactivities are exploiting the coronavirus pandemic targeting medical
care systems essential for maintaining human health, vaccine research as well as
information space.
Broad participation and the very discussion displayed at the United Nations
(UN) Security Council Arria-formula meeting last year confirmed the increasing
relevance of the cybersecurity for the international peace and stability agenda.
Therefore, it is only timely and appropriate to bring the issue of cybersecurity on the
formal agenda of the Security Council. Latvia fully supports the efforts of Estonia to
properly reflect upon mitigation of irresponsible behaviour in cyberspace on the
international peace and security.
The United Nations must remain a significant global player to promote peace,
security and stability, including in the cyberspace. Active work of the Group of
Governmental Experts on Advancing Responsible State Behaviour in Cyberspace in
the context of international security and of the Open-ended Working Group on
Developments in the Field of Information and Communications in the Context of
International Security over the past years have laid substantial groundwork for the
discussion of today.
The two consensus-based final reports of the Group of Governmental Experts
and the Open-ended Working Group are welcome stepping stones for further work
with a view to forging common understanding on broad range of issues.
In this regard, the programme of action on responsible use of ICT by States in
the context of international security is a valuable outcome of Group of Governmental
Experts and Open-ended Working Group reports. The cyberrelated programme of
action should serve as a solid and, most importantly, action-oriented basis for further
work to make tangible progress in the implementation of the norms of responsible
behaviour.
In this context, Latvia would like to emphasize the multi-stakeholder nature of
cyberspace, which requires the engagement in discussions of a range of non -State
actors from the private sector, civil society and academia. Considering their
commanding stakes in the ICT ecosystem those stakeholders can contribute
significantly in many different ways, sharing their perspectives, knowledge and
experience.
States should continue to work actively and be ready for in-depth discussions
within future United Nations processes to advance responsible State behaviour in
cyberspace in the context of international security. While we all have to work
tirelessly to strengthen the protection and security of our own ICT, States should not
permit another State or non-State actor to use ICT within its territory to commit
internationally wrongful acts. We call on all States to refrain from conducting,
86/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

enabling or tolerating such activities that are not in conformity with the international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations, to avoid impeding security
associated with the use of ICT. Responsibility, building trust and predictability must
be the key elements of international cooperation in the field of cybersecurity.
In order to prevent misunderstandings and misperceptions on one hand and to
establish practice of communication on ICT incidents on the other – we must establish
open communication channels among Member States. The creation of a points-ofcontact network at the policy and technical levels at the United Nations can make a
meaningful contribution to a more effective communication on the global level. The
network of points of contact has already proven to be effective on the regional level
in the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe.
At last, Latvia would like to commend all Member States for demonstrating
commitment to cooperate and work together in order to reach consensus on the reports
in Group of Governmental Experts and Open-ended Working Group processes. This
is the right path and excellent opportunity to further strengthen international
cooperation towards a global, open, stable, peaceful and secure cyberspace where
human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of law fully apply.

21-09125

87/128

S/2021/621

Annex XLIII
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. and Deputy Permanent
Representative of Liechtenstein to the United Nations,
Georg Sparber
Cyberoperations have served as the equalizer in modern warfare by providing
new avenues for both offensive and defensive operations to all actors, including those
with fewer resources. As a result, the frequency and severity of cyberoperations have
intensified in recent years, threatening international peace and security. It is alarming
that such attacks have the potential to cause grave suffering to the civilian population,
including the loss of lives and the disruption of essential services. In this context, we
recall that States increasingly agree that international law, specifically the Charter of
the United Nations in its entirety and rules of customary international law derived
from the Charter’s principles, as well as the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court and international humanitarian law, apply to cyberspace.
The Open-ended Working Group on Developments in the Field of Information
and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security institutionalized
discussions on international peace and security in the cybercontext within the United
Nations. Furthermore, the final report released by the Group of Governmental Experts
on Advancing Responsible State Behaviour in Cyberspace in the Context of
International Security (Group of Governmental Experts) reaffirms the applicability
and necessity of international law in cyberspace. Liechtenstein takes note of the
combined contributions of the Open-ended Working Group and the Group of
Governmental Experts in furthering the discussion on how international law, in
particular the Charter of the United Nations, applies to cyberspace.
One of the landmark achievements of the Charter of the United Nations is the
prohibition on the use of force. The use of force is prohibited except when authorized
by the Security Council under Chapter VII or carried out in self-defence under article
51 of the Charter. However, article 51 is increasingly invoked as the legal basis for
the use of force without necessary legal justifications. There is a substantive risk of
this trend extending to cyberspace with the development of new technologies and
State capabilities. We should ensure that cyberspace does not facilitate unjustified
self-defense operations. And, we recall that invoking article 51 preemptively requires
evidence of the imminence of an armed attack, and it always requires proof of
necessity and the proportionality of measures taken in response.
The Charter of the United Nations foresees an enforcement role for the Security
Council concerning the most serious violations of the relevant rules under
international law that amount to acts of aggression. In addition to the tools contained
in the Charter, the Council now also has the option of initiating individual criminal
responsibility for perpetrators of the crime of aggression by referring relevant
situations to the ICC. In this context, Liechtenstein believes that having a clear
understanding of how the Rome Statute applies to cyberoperations will help to inform
the work of the Council.
In an effort to elucidate the Rome Statute’s application to cyberope rations,
Liechtenstein, together with ten other ICC States Parties, created a Council of
Advisers to explore the role of the ICC in the regulation of cyberwarfare. Composed
of 16 eminent international lawyers, the Council of Advisers convened three times
across 2019 and 2020 to discuss the extent to which the Rome Statute’s core
provisions apply to cyberoperations. A final report is scheduled to be presented this
year. We are hopeful that this will contribute to shared understandings of
accountability in the context of cyberoperations as well as deterring such crimes in
the first place.
88/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Liechtenstein underscores the need for a robust legal framework to regulate
cyberspace for international peace and security. We are pleased to contribute to global
efforts to combat malicious cyberoperations through our upcoming Rome Statute focused report, and we will continue to strive for international peace and security with
our unwavering commitment to international law.

21-09125

89/128

S/2021/621

Annex XLIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Malta to the
United Nations
Malta thanks Estonia for organizing this timely debate on an issue which we
believe should feature on the Security Council’s agenda. Although cybersecurity issues
have been alluded to in a number of Security Council debates, we believe that these
issues should be given more prominence, considering that they represent one of the
most important and constantly-evolving challenges to international peace and security.
Malta aligns itself with the statement delivered by the European Union and
would like to highlight a few points in its national capacity. The evolution in
cyberspace has brought with it a number of opportunities for Member States and
citizens around the globe and has led to increased prosperity, connectivity and
economic growth. However, the cyberdomain has also opened the door to malicious
activities aimed at disrupting and exploiting vulnerabilities in societies and conduct
attacks which can have considerable impact on Member States and its citizens, such
as in terms of sensitive data and critical infrastructure. In fact, the more we shift
towards the virtual and interconnected world, the more susceptible we are to these
kind of malign activities.
Malta believes that the United Nations has a central role to play in the regulation
of State behaviour in cyberspace, specifically because of the extensive body of
international law that already exists. We are also very encouraged by the results
achieved by the Group of Governmental Experts (Group of Governmental Experts)
and the United Nations Open Ended Working Group (Open-ended Working Group)
which have adopted consensus reports on inter alia advancing State behaviour in
cyberspace. We need these processes to continue feeding in the United Nations system
and elaborate on the application of international law in cyberspace, the importance of
confidence-building measures and offering additional guidance and norms. We value
the participation and contribution of Member States to these processes and we urge
these discussions to move forward and keep up with the fast moving developments in
this domain.
We have witnessed the devastating impact cyberattacks can have on sensitive
data and infrastructure. It is vital that norms and regulations for the conduct of State
behaviour in the cyberdomain are well outlined. This will lead to increased
predictability and avoid any miscalculation when assessing cyberthreats. The
malicious use of cyberspace has such a lasting impact that cooperation at the
international level is also needed to avoid any potential conflicts which may arise.
Confidence-building measures between States through the application of good
practices and established norms is a vital component moving forwa rd. This will
reduce any potential misunderstandings and enable better assessments of malicious
behaviour.
The international community must also reach out to the myriad of other
stakeholders on this file including civil society and the private sector to ensure a level
playing field and an equitable set of rules. All the potential users of cyberspace need
to recognize the role they play in increasing cyberresilience and in preventing the
malicious use of the tools which are at our disposal.
Malta believes that the Security Council has an important role to play when it
comes to new technologies which could have an impact on international peace and
security. The Security Council must ensure that all the relevant actors in cyberspace
respect international law and the established rules and guidelines with a view to avoid
potential conflict arising from cyberattacks. We urge the Council to remain seized of
this matter and to ensure that we foster together increased understanding and mutual
trust.
90/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XLV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
First of all, the Kingdom of Morocco wishes to thank Estonia for organizing this
first open debate of the Security Council on the relevant and timely question of the
maintenance of international peace and security in cyberspace. Morocco welcomes
the detailed statement by the Prime Minister of the Republic of Estonia, Ms. Kaja
Kallas, as well as that country’s excellent leadership on cyber matters and the security
of cyberspace. Morocco also wishes to thank the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her informative briefing on current
challenges to the maintenance of international peace and security in cyberspace.
As a developing country with a high level of connectivity, the Kingdom of
Morocco very quickly showed particular interest in the development of information
and communications technologies (ITCs) and their advantages as engines of
sustainable development. However, although we are unanimous in recognizing the
benefits and advantages of progress in those technologies for the day-to-day wellbeing of humanity, we are beginning to become aware of the threats that can arise,
from the simple circulation of “fake news” to actual attacks on peace and security,
both at the national and international levels.
At a time when such terms as the Internet of things, the digital revolution or
cyberwarfare are in common use, however, our ability to combat cyber threats
remains much lower than our high level of dependence on these indispensable tools.
On top of that, it is important to note that the current context marked by the
COVID-19 pandemic has brought us even more into the cyber era, and at the same
time exponentially and irreversibly increasing our exposure and vulnerability to
cyberattacks and threats, including ones targeted at critical infrastructure.
Such malicious operations, beyond threatening State sovereignty, have the
unfortunate potential of heightening the risk of conflicts in cyberspace, but also of
causing considerable human and material damage. This is likely to undermine the
structure of international peace and security and present cyberattacks as a major
emerging threat.
“We are living in dangerous times”, as the Secretary-General stated at the launch
of his Agenda for Disarmament in 2018.
Indeed, now more than ever, the potential and real risks related to threats in
cyberspace are confronting the international community and United Nations Member
States. It is only through their efforts, both collectively and individually, to prevent
malicious use of ICTs that we can guarantee that cyberspace will continue to serve as
an engine for peace, security, stability and development.
In that regard, Morocco believes that the need to secure and protect cyberspace
remains a shared responsibility of States as the leaders. Therefore Morocco, in
accordance with Royal Directives, has undertaken immediately the following major
actions at the legislative, organizational and preventive levels:
• The definition of a cybersecurity strategy centred around four strategic factors:
evaluation of risks to information systems within administrations, public
agencies and critically important infrastructure; protection and defense of these
information systems; strengthening the foundations of security (legal
framework, raising awareness, training and research and development); and the
promotion and development of national, regional and international cooperation.
21-09125

91/128

S/2021/621

• Promulgation of Act No. 05-20 on cybersecurity on 25 July 2020, with the aim
of establishing a legal framework requiring entities to have a basic minimum set
of security measures and rules in order to ensure the reliability and resilience of
their information systems. It also has the objective of the development of digital
trust, the digitalization of the economy and, more generally, to assure the
continuity of economic and social activity in Morocco in order to facilitate the
development of a national cybersecurity ecosystem.
• The establishment, over the course of this decade, of several organizations
aimed at ensuring state governance of cybersecurity, such as the Strategic
Committee for Information System Security in 2011, the General Directorate of
Information System Security, the Nation Agency for the Regulation of
Telecommunications, the National Commission for the Monitoring and
Protection of Personal Data, and the Moroccan Centre for Polytechnic Research
and Innovation that conducts the national campaign to combat cybercrime.
On the eve of this open debate, on 28 June 2021, Morocco also approved a draft
decree having to do with cybersecurity that set the rules applicable to information
system security, as well as the African Union Convention on Cybersecurity and
Personal Data.
However, in view of the global nature of cyber threats, major internationally
agreed measures should be able to work in concert with regulations put into effect at
the national level. Morocco has thus ratified the Council of Europe Convention on
Cybercrime, also known as the Budapest Convention and in 2018 joined the Paris
Call for Trust and Security in Cyberspace. Under United Nations auspices, it
participates in the Open-Ended Working Group on development in information and
telecommunications in the context of international security and the Group of
Government Experts to promote responsible behaviour by States in cyberspace in the
context of international security, the new Open-Ended Working Group on security of
and in the use of information and communications technologies (2021–2025) and the
elaboration of the forthcoming Programme of Action to promote responsible
behaviour by States in cyberspace. Morocco is also a member of the Group of Friends
on e-governance and cybersecurity of which Estonia is the excellent co-chair, along
with Singapore.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco stresses that it is the shared
responsibility of States to show proof of their common and firm will to protect
cyberspace, mainly due to the fact that the facets of prevention and security of
cyberspace are corollaries of the use of information and communications
technologies.
The Security Council in particular is called on to play a key role, especially
when cyberattacks constituting a direct threat to international peace an d security
occur, but also as a pioneer in the area of prevention.
Morocco reiterates its warm thanks to Estonia for organizing this necessary and
timely open debate, as we need greater awareness and discussion on the question of
the maintenance of international peace and security in cyberspace, and for having
introduced this question on the agenda of the Security Council.

92/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XLVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Netherlands to
the United Nations, Yoka Brandt
The Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to thank Estonia and Prime Minister
Kallas for organizing this open debate on maintaining international peace and security
in cyberspace.
A timely meeting – seen the steep rise in cyberattacks, by State and non-State
actors alike. These malicious cyberactivities can lead to potentially vast disruption in
our societies, through relatively limited resources. With the result of destabilizing
international relations.
Therefore, the time is now, to work together in securing an open, free and secure
cyberspace by advancing responsible State behaviour, call out irresponsible
behaviour and impose consequences.
While acknowledging that there are many other relevant angles in this issue, the
Netherlands will limit itself to three specific elements that remain imperative to
increasing stability in cyberspace:
• Adherence to the acquis
• Attribution
• Capacity-building
Adherence to the acquis
Over the years, cyberoperations against critical and civil infrastructure have
shown to be a real and credible threat. Even more so over the past year where we have
witnessed cyberattacks evolving in scope, scale, severity and sophistication.. As
societies, we have increasingly shifted almost all aspects of our life to a digital world
and must realize that it is the Internet that facilitates these connections throughout the
world. It should therefor come as no surprise that the harmful effects of malicious
cyberoperations against critical infrastructure, governments or societies, will be felt
immediately and widely. Posing a significant risk to international security and
stability, economic and social development, as well as the safety and well -being of
individuals.
With the recent consensus reached on the reports of both the Open-ended
working group on Developments in the Field of information and communications
technologies in the Context of International Security and United Nations Group of
Governmental Expert to advance responsible State behaviour in cyberspace (Group
of Governmental Experts), States are now equipped with a framework of responsible
State behaviour in cyberspace. Allowing States to have a better understanding of the
applicability of international law and the agreed 11 voluntary non-binding norms. The
Netherlands recalls that existing international law, in particular the Charter of the
United Nations is applicable to cyberspace and essential to maintaining peace and
stability and to promoting a free, open and secure cyberspace including respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms in cyberspace.
States agreed that malicious cyberoperations against infrastructure and
information infrastructure supporting essential services to the public infrastructures
are off-limits, confirm Group of Governmental Experts norm 13(f). It is each State’s
prerogative to determine which infrastructures it designates as critical may include:
medical facilities, financial services, energy, water, transportation and sanitation. The
Netherlands has consistently focused on three (non-exhaustive) infrastructures:
21-09125

93/128

S/2021/621

1.
The technical infrastructure essential to the general availability or integrity of
the Internet;
The technical infrastructure essential to elections;
The health-care sector.
In that vein, we encourage States to publicly define and share what they consider
to be critical infrastructure by issuing national declaratory statements, detailing
Member States positions’ on the adherence to the framework for responsible State
behaviour. This is the only way, we can increase transparency, develop common
understanding, create predictability and build confidence. Continuing efforts on the
implementation of the agreed framework are needed to reduce the risk of esc alation
as well as adherence to the acquis by all States.
Attribution
We all seem to agree on the rules and norms in cyberspace. Yet, we continue to
witness an increase in cyberthreats. The Netherlands is appalled by the abuse of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic for malicious cyberoperations against
critical infrastructure; the health sector, technical infrastructure essential to the
general availability or integrity of the Internet as well as the technical infrastructure
for elections.
Let us be clear – we will work together on a voluntary basis to hold States
accountable when they act contrary to this framework, including by taking measures
that are transparent and consistent with international law. There must be consequences
for bad behaviour in cyberspace.
Capacity-building
Digital resilience is key to manage cyberrisks and mitigate their impact.
However, different levels of capacity of cybersecurity among different States amplify
the vulnerability of our interconnected world. Therefore, it is in our common interest
to engage in targeted capacity-building efforts to ensure that all responsible States
can implement this framework and better protect their networks from significant
disruptive, destructive, or otherwise destabilizing cyberactivity. Moreover, effective
cybercapacity-building requires cooperation between both State and non-State actors.
In that light, the Netherlands established the Global Forum on Cyber Expertise, which
has matured into a strong public-private capacity-building platform that harnesses and
consolidates the more than 700 existing cybercapacity-building efforts providing
assistance in building technical resilience, help in drafting legislation that ensures
safety, security, and respect for human rights.
We commend Estonia for laying the groundwork for future cyberdiscussions in
the Security Council and welcome today’s first official debate on cybersecurity.

94/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex XLVII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of New Zealand to the
United Nations
New Zealand would like to note our appreciation to Estonia for bringing the
important issue of maintaining international peace and security in cyberspace to the
Security Council agenda.
Cyber threats are a pressing and pervasive issue for all Member Stat es. Cyber
threats pose significant risks to New Zealand’s prosperity and security, as well as to
international peace and security.
We must work together to build a stable and secure online environment in order
for us all to enjoy the benefits of digital connectivity, which is an important enabler
for economic, social, and cultural development.
We value the opportunity to share New Zealand’s perspectives on the
international efforts to maintain peace and security in cyberspace. To that end we
reiterate the critical importance of the agreed framework of responsible State
behaviour online:
• We must abide by our obligations under existing international law, which we
have all agreed applies online as it does offline;
• We must implement the norms of responsible State behaviour online, which we
have each endorsed through General Assembly resolution 70/237;
• We must ensure that Confidence-Building Measures are widely adopted and
utilized; and
• We must redouble our capacity-building efforts to ensure we are all
cyberresilient.
This framework provides what we need to encourage responsible behaviour
online, but it needs to be lived if it is to be effective. We need to continue to implement
the framework in practical, meaningful and concrete ways. New Zealand is committed
to continuing to work with you all to this end.
International law
As a small State, New Zealand is a steadfast supporter of the international rulesbased order. This is especially true with respect to trans-boundary threats. Our
geographical isolation does not protect us from cyberthreats.
Ensuring that this system promotes an open, secure, stable, accessible and
peaceful online environment and encourages responsible State behaviour in
cyberspace is a key New Zealand priority.
Reaching consensus on precisely how international law applies online is a
crucial contribution towards the maintenance of peace and stability. We are all in
agreement that international law applies online as it does offline. Applicable
international law includes: the Charter of the United Nations; the law of State
responsibility; international humanitarian law; and international human rights law.
But we acknowledge that there remain some differences on these matters. To
support understanding of how international law applies online, in December 2020,
New Zealand released a national position statement. We encourage other Member
States to share their national perspectives in order to develop and enhance our
common understanding on these issues.

21-09125

95/128

S/2021/621

Norms of responsible State behaviour
New Zealand is committed to preventing, detecting, deterring and responding to
malicious cyberactivity, and to upholding the norms of responsible State behaviour as
endorsed in the 2021 United Nations Open-ended Working Group report. The norms
we have all committed to are a central component of stability and security in
cyberspace. We need to continue to be held accountable – and hold others to account –
to the commitments we have made.
Among other things, we must promote cooperation between States, prote ct
critical infrastructure, safeguard global supply chains, provide assistance when
required, respect human rights and privacy, and prevent the malicious use of digital
technologies on States’ national territories.
We continue to reflect on the way in which the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has underscored the importance of a safe and secure cyberspace. We have
seen reports internationally of a range of different malicious activity online, from both
State and non-State actors. This activity has targeted, among others, critical healthcare infrastructure; officials working on the response; and members of the public.
This is unacceptable and highlights that threats in cyberspace put lives at risk. New
Zealand, along with a number of other States, has publicly condemned malicious
cyberactivity undermining the response to the pandemic.
Confidence-building measures
We remain committed to constructive, practical and concrete outcomes to
improve international and regional cybersecurity. Confidence-building measures
provide an important avenue to achieve this, and we welcome practical initiatives that
support mutual understanding, transparency, predictability, and stability in
cyberspace.
For New Zealand, the Regional Forum of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) is a key forum for regional cybersecurity discussions. We
appreciate the cooperation we have with members within that forum and look forward
to continuing to work with you all in the years ahead. New Zealand welcomes the
opportunity to share lessons learned within and across regions to improve
transparency, understanding and confidence among regional partners in cyberspace.
Capacity-building
New Zealand wants to help ensure that all States can lower the risks associated
with increased connectivity, while still benefiting from it. That includes supporting
broader and deeper understanding of and adherence to the framework of responsible
State behaviour in cyberspace.
To achieve this, we need to ensure all of us have the tools and capacity needed
to participate meaningfully in ongoing discussions and areas of debate, and to
implement initiatives domestically and regionally that support stability
internationally.
New Zealand remains committed to building regional cybersecurity capacity,
with a particular focus on working with our Pacific and South-East Asian neighbours.
We continue to deliver initiatives under New Zealand’s NZ$10 million Cyber Security
Support to the Pacific programme, and to support the ASEAN-Singapore
Cybersecurity Centre of Excellence.

96/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Conclusion
We have much work ahead but we are not starting from scratch. We once again
welcome the outcomes of both the recent UN Group of Governmental Experts and the
Open-ended Working Group processes. These processes, and the resulting reports, are
significant complementary and mutually reinforcing achievements. We must continue
building on the foundation created by this – and other – consensus agreements
endorsed by the General Assembly.
It is important that that discussions involve a diverse range of views, including
those from small States, and from non-governmental stakeholders. The breadth of
interest in cybersecurity from Member States has heartened us – peace and security
in cyberspace do affect us all – and it is encouraging to see such a wide range of States
genuinely engaged in efforts to address these challenges. New Zealand stands ready
to engage with you all on this challenge.

21-09125

97/128

S/2021/621

Annex XLVIII
Statement by Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations
I would like to express my deep appreciation and sincere thanks to the
Permanent Mission of the Republic of Estonia for convening this important and timely
open debate of the Security Council on the theme “Maintaining international peace
and security in cyberspace”.
Information and communications technologies (ICT) provide vast opportunities
and continue to grow in importance for the international community. At the same
time, the complexity of the issues inherent in the use of ICT poses serious risks for
international peace and security.
The hostile use of cybertechnologies is fast approaching the stage where it can
constitute a breach of peace or a threat to international peace and security.
Misuse and un-regulated use of ICT could lead to serious implications for
international peace and security in the event of a cyberattack launched on critical
infrastructure. Recent incidents of suspected cyberattacks are illustrative.
There is a need to address the growing prospect of cybersecurity on urgent basis
as part of broader United Nations efforts to prevent conflicts.
In this regard, the adoption of consensus report by the Open-ended Working
Group on Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the
Context of International Security in March this year was of historic significance in
supporting the global efforts towards the common goal of creating a safe, secure,
stable and peaceful ICT environment.
It was also a strong reaffirmation of the international community’s ability to
come together to address key global challenges in the most difficult circumstances,
such as the pandemic.
While we understand that the report did not address the concerns of all Member
States, we consider it important to consolidate the progress that has been achieved
thus far and to maintain the momentum for continuing this inclusive and transparent
process.
Pakistan remained positively and constructively engaged in the work of the
Open-ended Working Group and welcomes the establishment of the new Open-ended
Working Group on Security of and in the use of information and Communication
technologies (2021–2025) established pursuant to the General Assembly resolution
75/240.
It (the new Open-ended Working Group) provides extremely useful forums for
achieving meaningful progress, building on the previous recommendations in order
to strengthen rules for responsible behaviour in cyberspace and to achieve meaningful
international cooperation to minimize threats posed on international security by the
malicious uses of ICT.
The 2015 Group of Governmental Experts and the recent report of Open-ended
Working Group agreed on a set of important findings that contributed to generating a
broad consensus among Member States that international law, and in particular the
Charter of the United Nations is applicable and essential to maintain peace and
stability in the ICT environment.
The Charter of the United Nations is unequivocal in its categorical upholding
the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference in internal
98/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

affairs of other States. These principles should serve as guiding star as we navigate
the complexities of cybergovernance.
At the same time, the extent, scope and nature of the applicability of
international law and its interpretation in the conduct of States and their use of ICT
require careful consideration.
A simple assertion of the applicability of existing international law to
cyberspace is not sufficient in addressing the multifaceted legal challenges arising
from the ICT. It needs to be adapted according to the unique characteristic of the
cybersphere.
Pakistan recognizes the importance of developing a legally binding international
instrument, specifically tailored the unique attributes of ICT, to provide a regulatory
course that seeks to create stability and safety in cyberspace. Such legal framework
should address the concerns and interests of all States, be based on consensus, and
pursued within the United Nations with equal participation of all States.
Voluntary, non-binding norms of responsible State use of ICT can contribute to
reducing risks to international peace and security. However, given the unprecedented
threats in ICT environment and the rapid pace of technological developments, there
is a need to strengthen international efforts to develop binding rules that can help in
maintaining peace and stability and promote open, secure, stable accessible and
peaceful ICT environment.
We should ensure that cyberspace is not misused to perpetuate State sponsored
disinformation campaigns, incitement to violence, hate speech and other related form
of intolerance, including Islamophobia.
The United Nations has a central role in promoting dialogue and international
cooperation among Member States to develop common understanding on key aspects,
including, on the application of international law and norms, rules and principles for
responsible State behaviour, promoting confidence-building and transparency
measures and supporting capacity-building and the dissemination of best practices.
With a population of over 200 million people, and a flourishing digital landscape
marked by growing number of online users, Pakistan attaches immense importance to
leveraging digital technologies for enabling socio-economic development and
facilitating more effective and efficient governance and public service delivery.
Pakistan is committed to promoting international cooperation in ICT and
cybersecurity as a means of bridging the digital divide. All countries are equal
stakeholders in the development of rules governing digital economy and security of
cyberspace and ICT.

21-09125

99/128

S/2021/621

Annex XLIX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Peru welcomes the initiative by the Estonian Presidency to convene this high level open debate of the Security Council on a matter of growing and primary
importance for the maintenance of international peace and security. We also welcome
the briefings by the other speakers.
We are aware of the relevance of the use of information and communications
technologies (ITC) in the context of international security, their rapid evolution and
the benefits they generate. The health crisis stemming from the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has highlighted our dependence on them, the urgency of
reducing the digital divide and the importance of protecting critical infrastructure.
In the same way, we are also aware of the dangers that can arise from the
malicious use of ITC, thereby increasing the risk of conflict in cyberspace. Their
malicious use by terrorist groups, criminal organizations, armed groups and other
agents constitutes a grave and systematic threat to international peace and security.
Considering that the threats do not arise from the technologies themselves, but
from the use that is made of them, we must deepen our understanding of their
appropriate use and how to avoid deliberate malicious uses, by promoting open, free,
stable and secure cyberspace.
To that end, we recognize the primacy of the Charter of the United Nations as a
firm basis for security, and we support the application of international law and
international humanitarian law in cyberspace. Furthermore, we believe that it is of
primary importance that international norms in this area be developed through the
establishment of legally binding obligations.
We appreciate the notable efforts and progress made in the United Nations for
the formulation of elements to promote the application of international law and the
implementation of norms for responsible behaviour of States in cyberspace in the
context of international security. We commend the substantive reports adopted by the
Open-ended Working Group and the Group of Governmental Experts, and we hope
that by harmonizing the work of both processes we will be able to have a single
coherent statement and course of action on cybersecurity.
In addition to international efforts, we believe that regional and national actions
are essential, in particular in the promotion of confidence building measures, capacity
building, exchange of information and sharing of best practices to guarantee
cybersecurity. For countries with lower technological development, to us it seems
essential that they specify understandings and agreements that avoid making
cyberspace into an arena for conflict because of the potential effects resulting from
their lack of capacity to avoid it.
Taking into account the interconnected and complex nature of cyberspace,
continual innovations in information and communications technologies and the
growing incorporation of emerging technologies, we support the participation of the
private sector, in particular the information industry, civil society and academia, in
confronting those challenges. We are convinced that their contributions will continue
to enrich the multilateral deliberations on the matter.
We will conclude by underlining the need for coordinated work by the
international community as a whole and the adoption of new actions to study existing
threats and possible cooperation measures to address them. The role of the Security
100/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Council in the prevention of conflict and promotion of peace and security will be
essential in order to guarantee cyberspace that is open, peaceful, secure and
beneficial, and that promotes sustainable development and well-being of peoples.

21-09125

101/128

S/2021/621

Annex L
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the
United Nations
The first ever open debate in the Security Council on cybersecurity constitutes
an important landmark of our perception of contemporary challenges to international
peace and security.
We thank and commend the Estonian Chairmanship for enabling us to address
cybersecurity issues at this very timely moment.
In 2019, during our membership, Poland has drawn attention of the Security
Council to the problems of cyberincidents in the Middle East.
Now, it is the time to raise awareness of the international community as a whole
of steadily raising malicious activities in cyberspace. For two decades, in parallel with
unprecedented development of digital technologies, we have been observing all over
the world more and more sophisticated cyberattacks and cyberincide nts. Poland is
experiencing them on a daily basis.
They are of course of a different nature. Some have purely criminal background,
others are motivated by economic goals and – more and more often – political ones.
However, there is one common denominator of these activities – all of them are
illegal. Malicious cyberactivities cannot be, in no way, justified or defended.
As you, Madam Chair, rightly pointed out in your concept note: “Existing
international law, in particular the Charter of the United Nations, provides sufficient
guidance for States on conducting cyberactivities”. It is a great task of the
international community to work out commonly acceptable paradigm of activities in
cyberspace.
Poland strongly supports achievements of the Groups of Governmental Experts
(Group of Governmental Experts) and actively participated in the work of the Open ended Working Group, which in its report, has reaffirmed the application of
international law in cyberspace. We hope that the 2nd Open-ended Working Group
will contribute to better common understanding of the importance of peaceful use of
cyberspace. We also attach a great importance to the work of Ad Hoc Committee
within the Third Committee of General Assembly.
Apart from the common assessment of the situation even more important is
common and well-orchestrated action. Poland, therefore, supports broad participation
of multi-stakeholders, NGOs, private sectors and academia in international debate on
cybersecurity.
We also strongly believe that the crucial work should be conducted within
regions. With engagement of regional organizations, individual States and
representatives of civil society, we can develop useful instruments for capacity building or confidence-building measures.
In order to stimulate international efforts both on the global and regional levels
we need to pool our resources and diplomatic energy. This is why we firmly support
and promote the establishment of the programme of action as an ultimate format of
international cooperation on cyberspace activities.
With this open debate, we hope that cybersecurity will take up its permanent
place on the Security Council agenda. The political and economic costs of malicious
activities in cyberspace are too high to be overlooked by this important United
Nations body.

102/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Please be assured that Poland will spare no efforts to contribute to all global and
regional processes, which will lead to strengthening the cyberorder on the basis of
respect for international law and commonly agreed norms.

21-09125

103/128

S/2021/621

Annex LI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Qatar to the
United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
Allow me to thank the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Izumi
Nakamitsu, for her briefing. The work of the Office for Disarmament Affairs helps to
give cybersecurity its rightful place on the United Nations disarmament agenda.
Every day we see the transformative impact of the world’s heavy reliance on
cyberspace. However, digital technologies and global connectivity also facilitate
misuse of cyberspace, which is particularly worrying given the reliance of vital public
infrastructure and services on the digital sphere. Misuse of cyberspace and
information and communications technology (ICT) by governmental and
non-governmental actors poses a threat to national security and affects regional and
international peace and security and international relations. In addition, terrorist
groups are using emerging digital technologies to enhance their capabilities to commit
crimes.
Clearly, no country is immune from the threat of the misuse of cyberspace.
Collective action is therefore necessary to meet this global challenge. Fortunately,
cyberspace itself could provide an excellent tool for coordinating such efforts. As we
have seen over the past year, digital platforms have proven an indispensable means
of continuing the work of United Nations bodies and other forums for international
cooperation.
We must assess potential threats and the impact of cyberpiracy and misuse of
cyberspace on peace and security. Collective efforts are needed to strengthen the
regional and international security environment in the face of such threats and to
promote the peaceful use of cyberspace and the relevant advanced digital
technologies.
In that regard, due consideration must be given to the application of
international law to the use of ICT by States and to promoting responsible conduct
relating to States’ electronic space in the context of international security.
At the same time, the free flow of information and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms must be maintained in an open and secure digital environment
accessible to all.
In addition to international frameworks, national strategies are important for
guiding action and coordination among relevant stakeholders. That includes the
private sector, which plays a pivotal role in digital technology.
Protecting information security and information infrastructure is one of the
priorities of Qatar. It is taking comprehensive measures and developing its resources
in this regard, with a focus on promoting international cooperation and capacity building.
Information security and cybersecurity have been on the United Nations agenda
for several years. However, steps must be taken to keep pace with rapid developments
in this area. We therefore welcome the attention devoted to this issue by the Secretary General, who has made promoting a peaceful ICT environment one of his main
priorities. We are also pleased to see that consensus has again been reached ag ain
within the Group of Government Experts. We also look forward to the next session of
the open-ended working group, with a view to contributing to expanding the
international consensus in this regard.
104/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

In closing, I should like to reiterate that the State of Qatar will continue to strive
at all levels to contribute to global efforts to promote peace, security and stability in
cyberspace.

21-09125

105/128

S/2021/621

Annex LII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
I would like to first thank you for convening today’s timely open debate on
“Maintaining international peace and security in cyberspace”. My appreciation also
goes to the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Nakamitsu, for her in depth briefing.
Over the past couple of decades, the human race has witnessed technological
advancement in the field of digital technology like never before. The concept of
cyberspace, which was once only in the imagination of science fiction, has since
become an everyday reality to us all; with the virtual and physical space surrounding
us being integrated into one ecosystem. And, as much as this advancement has
brought us unprecedented economic and social benefits, we have also become ever
more vulnerable against malicious cyberactivities. Over the past year, in the midst of
the global pandemic, our lives have become even more susceptible to cyberthreats as
more people have been online. At the same time, the increasing number of
cyberattacks against critical infrastructure, including medical infrastructure and
facilities around the world, is increasingly concerning.
Against this backdrop, I would like to highlight the following four points that
are of particular importance to my delegation.
First, the Republic of Korea supports the United Nations’ central role in ongoing
discussions on how to address the challenges at hand and advance responsible State
behaviour in cyberspace. In this regard, my delegation welcomes the adoption of the
consensus report earlier this year of the United Nations Open-ended Working Group
on developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of
international security, as well as the fourth consensus report of the Groups of
Governmental Experts (Group of Governmental Experts) which was adopted last
month. These achievements reflect the progress that has been made in the cumulative
and evolving framework for responsible State behaviour in their use of ICT, and,
through these exercises, has enhanced the understanding of the international
community as a whole in this critical area.
As all Member States agreed by consensus in the previous Open-ended Working
Group report, international law applies to State use of ICT, and States should be
guided by the framework for responsible State behaviour in the use of ICT, as outlined
in the Group of Governmental Experts reports. The primacy of international law and
the rules-based order must be equally applied to cyberspace in order to ensure peace
and security.
Second, my delegation highly appreciates the recent Group of Governmental
Experts consensus report presenting an additional layer of understanding on the norms
of responsible State behaviour, confidence-building measures, capacity-building, and
how international law applies to the use of ICT by States. The report reaffirmed the
applicability of international law including the Charter of the United Nations, and
notably, international humanitarian law in situations of armed conflict. We also
strongly support the recommendation of the Group of Governmental Experts that
States party to any international dispute, including those involving the use of ICT,
shall first seek a solution by peaceful means, as described in article 33 of the Charter
of the United Nations.
Specifically, my delegation is happy to see the report further elaborating on the
norm that States should not knowingly allow their territory to be used for
internationally wrongful acts with the use of ICT. This principle of “due diligence”,
106/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

which was suggested by the ROK and first reflected in the 2015 Group of
Governmental Experts report, points out that each State should take appropriate and
reasonable steps to address the situation if it is aware of or if notified of an
internationally wrongful act.
Third, we must further elevate our efforts towards building confidence and
promoting common understanding. The Republic of Korea, as a responsible Member
State and a leading nation in the digital and technological sector, has been actively
participating in and contributing to various regional and multilateral fora. Just last
week on June 22nd, the ROK, in close cooperation with the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, successfully hosted “The Third Inter-Regional
Conferences on Cyber/ICT Security” to discuss current trends in cybersecurity and
promote cybersecurity cooperation between regional organizations. We also hosted
the 19th ROK-United Nations Joint Conference on Disarmament and
Non-proliferation focusing on the development and impact of emerging technologies
in 2020, and will be co-chairing the ARF Inter-sessional Meeting on ICT security for
2021–23. Moreover, this coming November, the ROK will launch an international
forum to further invigorate discussions to address emerging security threats including
cyberattacks and malicious use of emerging technologies in the context of
international peace and security. Under the principles of inclusivity, transparency, and
openness, the Forum will provide a welcoming international platform that is
accessible to various stakeholders.
Fourth, we cannot emphasize enough that cybersecurity requires a multi stakeholder approach, as international security dimension of cyberspace cuts across
multiple domains and disciplines. While governments remain at the centre, we can
only be truly effective when we involve other key stakeholders such as the private
sector, academia, civil society, and the technical community in the process. We should
also keep in mind that engagement with other stakeholders can contribute
significantly to promoting common understandings and implementation of the
framework of responsible behaviours in cyberspace.
In closing, I would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm the Republic of
Korea’s commitment to working with the United Nations and all Member States in
further promoting an open, secure, stable, accessible, and peaceful cyberspace.

21-09125

107/128

S/2021/621

Annex LIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Romania to the
United Nations
1.
We commend Estonia for its initiative of organizing the first open debate on
cybersecurity as a formal specific issue on the agenda of the Security Council. This
represents a timely initiative to further enhance the rule-based international order, as
well as our multilateral cooperation on a subject of utmost importance for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
2.
Today’s debate reinforces the remarkable progress made by Member States within
the last UNGGE and Open-ended Working Group consensus reports in consolidating the
normative framework for responsible State behaviour in cyberspace – premised on
existing international law, norms, confidence-building measures and capacity-building.
3.
In an international security environment that is constantly evolving, information
and telecommunications technologies (ICT) present both outstanding benefits as well
as some of today’s most prominent and acute threats. Such threats originate from both
State and non-State actors, and target a variety of key sectors, such as energy,
transport, finance and health, which rely on both physical and digital key
infrastructures for providing services domestically, regionally or globally. Digital
technologies can also be misused to attempt to weaken our democratic institutions
and erode public trust in democratic principles. In addition, they can be used to exploit
systemic vulnerabilities for geopolitical purposes. The coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic stands as a dire recent example of the destructive impact o f
cyberoperations aiming to compromise or alter strategic information on vaccine
research and distribution.
4.
In this environment, the value of multilateral cooperation between responsible
States cannot be overestimated, nor can that of strengthened partnerships between
public administration, the private sector, civil society and academia. We need to work
together to share reliable, accurate, timely and trustworthy information on threats and
credible responses, and to coordinate our efforts and strengthen relevant preventive
mechanisms at the global, regional and national levels. Most importantly, we need to
concentrate our efforts towards developing the resilience of our societies to the impact
of threats to our critical infrastructures – whether they are physical, digital or
institutional.
5.
With this in mind, it is worth noting that within its current presidency of the
Community of Democracies, Romania actively promotes the link between technology
and democratic processes as one of its main priorities; as the host of the newly created
European Cybersecurity Industrial, Technology and Research Competence Centre in
Bucharest, Romania welcomes and actively promotes the planned co-managed
partnership investments between European Union member States and industry; as the
initiator and host of the newly-established Euro-Atlantic Centre for Resilience,
Romania will work for generating new ideas and strategies for adaptation of societies
to new challenges to peace, security and democratic stability.
6.
As an European Union member State, Romania is working for promoting and
implementing the main dimensions of the new European Union Cybersecurity
Strategy for the Digital Decade, especially the Cyber Diplomacy Toolbox, including
European Union Cyber Deterrence and Strategic Communication tools against
malicious cyberactivities. The European Union Cyber Diplomacy Toolbox has an
important role to prevent, deter and respond to cyberincidents that affect the security
of European Union and Member States.

108/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

7.
Romania approaches cybersecurity as a key dimension of national security,
undertaking efforts to ensure the development and adaptation of a proper national
legal framework in order to facilitate cooperation and the efficient exchange of
information between competent authorities, and meet its international obligations.
Responsible State behaviour involves key positive obligations: of having in place
modern and effective national legislation, cyberstrategies and institutions, of
promoting and participating in substantial international cooperation, and, very
importantly, of transparency, upholding agreed norms, promoting democratic
principles and fully respecting human dignity.
8.
The security of cyberspace represents for Romania one of its highest political
and diplomatic priorities, pursued through advancing responsible State behaviour and
consolidating preventive and normative mechanisms at global, regional and national
level. We are committed to supporting a global, open, safe and secure cyberspace
where human rights and fundamental freedoms and the rule of law fully apply. We are
also of the view that an open, secure, stable, accessible and peaceful online
environment cannot be imagined outside an international rules-based system,
primarily founded on international law.
9.
Romania was actively involved in both United Nations processes aiming to
consolidate the cybersecurity framework (UNGGE and Open-ended Working Group),
which successfully concluded their work through agreeing on important
recommendations for preventing conflict in cyberspace (from consolidating
understanding on the application of international law in cyberspace, to non -binding
voluntary norms for responsible State behaviour, as well as to proposals for a future
institutionalized dialogue).
10. Going forward, Romania is of the view that establishing a United Nations
programme of action for advancing responsible State behaviour in cyberspace would
foster the adoption of concrete practical measures for capacity and confidence building, as well as facilitate access to financing sources, in an open, inclusive and
transparent, permanent manner, thus assisting all Member States in their efforts to
prevent conflict, develop common perceptions of threats and increase their
cyberresilience.
11. Within all future United Nations processes, Romania will actively promote its
position that international law applies to cyberspace. It is our firm conviction that
there is no reason to consider that the existing international law could not
appropriately govern inter-States relations carried out in cyberspace/ or through the
medium of cyberspace. This includes international humanitarian law in the context of
cyberoperations carried out as part of an armed conflict (whether international or
non-international). In such circumstances, the planning of and carrying on of
cyberoperations must be done in conformity with the principles governing the conduct
of hostilities, namely distinction, proportionality, necessity and precaution.
12. Nevertheless, increased dialogue and exchanges among States can help clarify
some of the specific circumstances of the applicability of the international law to
cyberspace. With this in mind, we note that Romania’s preliminary view on this topic
has been issued for the purpose of contributing to the work of the Group of
Governmental Experts pursuant to General Assembly resolution 73/266.

21-09125

109/128

S/2021/621

Annex LIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Senegal to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
First, I would like to thank Ms. Kaja Kallas, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Estonia for presiding over this important high-level virtual public debate on
cybersecurity, a subject of increasing importance within the United Nations system
given the growing security threats noted in cyberspace. I also wish to thank the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, whose briefing my
delegation followed with great interest.
The fact is clear: the proliferation of malicious acts in cyberspace represents a
real threat to international peace and security which calls for the Security Council to
act. The debate that brings us together today shows that the Council is aware of this
threat and is part of the ongoing and unfailing efforts on cybersecurity for over a
decade by the General Assembly.
In this spirit, the various deliberations conducted by the four Groups of
Governmental Experts and the Open-ended Working Group, respectively, on
responsible behaviour by States in cyberspace and development in information and
telecommunications in the context of international security, are positive and represent
a clear signal of the will of States to find consensus on the modalities for regulation
of cyberspace.
In recognizing the applicability of several principles and norms of existing
international law and declaring State responsibility for internationally illicit acts they
might commit in cyberspace, the conclusions of the reports of the Open-Ended
Working Group and the latest Group of Governmental Experts, in March and May
2021, represent an additional contribution to the understanding of the exercise of
international law in cyberspace.
Furthermore, like several countries, Senegal believes that confidence -building
measures and transparency are essential to promote responsible behaviour by States
in cyberspace, and should thus be strengthened.
Indeed, through regularly exchanging information on their cyber activities,
States can help to avoid errors in perception and misunderstandings, to prevent an d
manage crises born out of the use of cyberspace, and as the case may be, lay the
foundation for fruitful cooperation on digital matters.
Nevertheless, because of the huge changes in the sector and the emergence of
new cyberthreats, Senegal believes that the rules of positive international law and
confidence-building measures and transparency will not be enough in themselves to
regulate cyberspace appropriately. They should be complemented by a binding
international legal instrument.
Thus, a general approach joining voluntary confidence-building and
transparency measures with a binding international convention would become
necessary, not only to establish the rules of cyberspace, but also to take into account
the positions and interests of all Member States. The deliberations of the new Openended Working Group on the security and use of information and communications
technologies should tend toward that approach during the 2021–2025 period.
For its part, the Government of Senegal is firmly committed to making a positive
contribution to the work in this area, which remains one of its priorities since the
November 2017 adoption of the National Cybersecurity Strategy. This document,
with the vision of instituting in Senegal in 2022 a cyberspace that is trustworthy,
110/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

secure and resilient for all, contains an evaluation of the strategic context of
cybersecurity in Senegal, taking into account current and future threats. It defines five
strategic objectives: strengthening the legal and institutional framework of
cybersecurity; protection of critical information infrastructure and State information
systems; promotion of a culture of cybersecurity; building capacity and technical
knowledge of cybersecurity in all sectors; and participation in regional and
international cybersecurity efforts.
In accordance with the last objective, Senegal was the first country to become
party to the African Union Convention on Cybersecurity and Personal Data Protection
(Malabo Convention). It also joined the Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime
(Budapest Convention) and Council of Europe Convention No. 108 for the protection
of individuals with regard to automatic processing of personal data (STE no. 108) as
well as its Additional Protocol regarding supervisory authorities and transborder data
flows (STE No. 181). In addition, it adopted the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Directive of 19 August 2011 on fighting cybercrime and
endorsed the Paris Call for Trust and Security in Cyberspace of 12 November 2018
and the Christchurch Call of 15 May 2019 to eliminate terrorist and violent extremist
online content.
Domestically, the country has established a legal framework for digital
regulation and utilization. In addition to Act No. 2008-08 of 25 January 2008 on
electronic transactions, we can mention Guidance Act No. 2008-10 of 25 January
2008 on the information society, Acts Nos. 2008-11 and 2008-12 of 25 January 2008
on cybercrime and on protection of personal data, and Act No. 2018-28 of
28 November 2018 on a code of electronic communications. Along the same lines,
the Code of Criminal Procedure was revised to take into account procedure in the area
of offenses committed using information and communications technologies.
In parallel, the institutional structure was reinforced by the establishment of a
central technical service for data and information system security, the Special
Division to combat cybercrime, and the Data Protection Commission. This structure
will soon be further enriched by the establishment of a national cybersecurity advisory
committee and a national cybersecurity agency to implement the 2022 National
Cybersecurity Strategy.
Building cybercapacity presents another challenge, especially for developing
countries. Senegal has thus made multiple efforts to provide training in information
security. Currently the country has several training establishments in the field, of
which the most noted are the National and Regional Cybersecurity School of Dakar,
opened in November 2018, and the Professional Institute for Information Security,
established in October 2015.
Cybersecurity should not inhibit the innovation and development opportunities
offered by new information and communications technologies or be used for the
purpose of restricting the development of those technologies.
As a means of prevention and combating the malicious use of cyberspace,
cybersecurity initiatives should have the ultimate goal of promoting a digital
environment that is accessible, safe, peaceful and prosperous and which leave s no one
out, in accordance with target 9.c of Goal 9 of Agenda 2030.
With this ambition in mind, the Government of Senegal has developed the
Digital Senegal Strategy 2016–2025, in accordance with the Emerging Senegal Plan.
This document, which embodies the ambition of Senegal to maintain a position as the
lead country in Africa for digital innovation, is centred on the slogan “digital for all
and for all uses by 2025 in Senegal, with a dynamic and innovative private sector in
an effective ecosystem”.
21-09125

111/128

S/2021/621

Annex LV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Singapore to the
United Nations, Burhan Gafoor
Thank you for convening this important meeting, which marks the first time that
the Security Council will address cybersecurity formally.
It is a timely topic. The accelerated speed of digitalization brought on by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has benefited our lives in new ways. It
has also opened us up to new vulnerabilities. Cyber threats and malicious
cyberactivities are becoming more frequent and sophisticated with more severe
consequences. In 2020, malicious cyberactivities were estimated to have cost losses
of nearly $1 trillion. The recent spate of such activities is a stark reminder that the
international community must continue to guard against and be prepared to respond
to these global and transboundary threats. I would like to highlight five points in this
regard.
First, we must recognize that cyberspace is fundamentally an issue of managing
the global commons. As a small State, Singapore has always supported a rules-based
multilateral system rooted in respect for international law. Our approach is no
different regarding cyberspace. To maintain a cyberspace that is secure, trusted, open,
and interoperable, we must adopt a global approach, based on global rules and norms
and adherence to international law. To do so will be challenging, given the backdrop
of a volatile and fractious global landscape caused by growing geopolitical tensions.
However, we have no option but to continue to advocate and support the applicability
of international law and norms in order to encourage responsible State behaviour in
cyberspace. We need to double down on international collaboration for greater
cyberresilience and stability.
Singapore is committed to the role of the United Nations, as the only universal,
inclusive, and multilateral forum, in developing rules that govern cyberspace. We are
encouraged by the maturing cybersecurity discussions at the United Nations. Since
the first time information and communications technology (ICT) security was
included in the agenda of the United Nations in 1998, six Groups of Governmental
Experts (Group of Governmental Experts) have studied the threats posed by the
misuse of ICT in the context of international security and how these threats should be
addressed. Four of these Groups have agreed on substantive reports, including the
latest iteration which has just completed its work.
The cybersecurity discussions were brought to the wider membership for the
first time at the s session of the General Assembly. This was done through the
establishment of the Open-ended Working Group on developments in the field of
information and telecommunications in the context of international security. We are
encouraged by the successful recent adoption of the consensus report of the Openended Working Group. The report contributes to our common understanding on many
issues and identifies areas where more discussions are needed.
Singapore participated actively in both the Open-ended Working Group and the
most recent Group of Governmental Experts. Singapore is also honoured to be elected
as Chair of the new Open-ended Working Group on security of and in the use of
information and communications technologies 2021-2025. As Chair of this body,
Singapore is strongly committed to continuing the open, inclusive, and transparent
discussions on cybersecurity at the United Nations. We are hopeful that the work of
the new Open-ended Working Group will contribute to a rules-based multilateral
order in cyberspace, and give all States, big or small, the confidence, predictability,

112/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

and stability that are essential for economic progress, job creation, and technology
adoption. We look forward to working closely with all Member States in this regard.
Second, all States are vulnerable to malicious cyberactivity which is growing in
scale and sophistication. But small States are particularly vulnerable, especially
developing countries and least developed countries. If we are serious about a global
approach to cybersecurity, we must maintain a strong focus on capacity-building for
countries that need help. This is one area where the United Nations can help to
coordinate efforts. Singapore partnered with the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs to develop an online training course open to all Member States
to promote a greater understanding of the use of ICT and their implications for
international security. We remain committed to working with and supporting the
United Nations to offer further capacity-building programmes.
Third, Singapore believes that more can be done to promote greater awareness
and implementation of the existing 11 voluntary, non-binding norms of responsible
State behaviour in the use of ICT. We support the exchange of best practices and
experiences on the implementation of norms. This will help to identify challenges
which we should tackle and gaps where additional norms may be needed. Singapore
supports further work to elaborate the existing norms. For example, malicious
cyberactivity against any cross-border Critical Information Infrastructure (CII), such
as clouds and banking systems, can cause wide-ranging disruptions to essential
services in multiple States, including those related to international trade, transport,
and communications. States should consider how to improve cross-border
cooperation with the relevant infrastructure owners and operators to enhance the ICT
security measures accorded to such infrastructure.
This brings me to my fourth point on greater engagement with other
stakeholders, in particular the private sector. With a significant portion of CII owned
by the private sector, the international community must find ways to cooperate closely
with the private sector to prevent and mitigate the impact of such disruptions.
Singapore supports a collaborative approach between the public and private sectors
to exchange best practices to support a strong cybersecurity framework.
Fifth, Singapore believes that regional organizations play an essential role to
support United Nations discussions and to assist in the implementation of rules and
norms developed at the United Nations. Cybersecurity was a priority for Singapore’s
Chairmanship of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in 2018. That
year, ASEAN became the first regional organization to subscribe in-principle to the
11 voluntary, non-binding norms of responsible State behaviour in the use of ICTS.
ASEAN is now developing an action plan to implement these norms. Within ASEAN,
Singapore has also been supporting capacity-building programmes. The ASEANSingapore Cybersecurity Centre of Excellence was established in 2019 as a
multidisciplinary centre for capacity-building on areas such as confidence-building
measures, policy, strategy, legislation, and operations. We look forward to working
together with Member States to enhance our collective cybercapacity-building efforts.
Let me conclude by saying that a safe and secure digital infrastructure must
undergird our ambitions for the digital economy. It is more important than ever for
Member States to tackle the challenge of cybersecurity together, in a sustained,
holistic, and coordinated manner. Singapore stands ready to work with all countries
to build partnerships and cooperation towards a secure, trusted, open, and
interoperable cyberspace.

21-09125

113/128

S/2021/621

Annex LVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Slovakia to the
United Nations, Michal Mlynár
Slovakia associates itself with the statement delivered by the European Union.
We would like to make some additional remarks in national capacity.
I would like to thank the President for organizing this timely discussion that
provides an opportunity for reflection on the growing risks stemming from mal icious
activities in cyberspace and their impact on international peace and security as well
as to address the global efforts to promote peace and stability in cyberspace.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis has made the need to bolster the
security and stability of cyberspace even more topical and pressing. The crisis has
shown that digital capabilities have become crucial for the provision of essential
services as well as for the continuation of effective governance. The disruption of the
functioning of critical infrastructure can cause serious consequences. Malicious
cyberactivities against vital sectors and services have destabilizing effects and may
ultimately threaten international peace and security.
Since cyberthreats are largely transnational in nature, it is important to maintain
international cooperation and dialogue between States as well as between States and
the multi-stakeholder community. It is through our shared responsibility and joint
efforts of the governments, private sector and civil society that we can effectively
support the maintenance of international peace and security in cyberspace, and protect
human rights.
The United Nations plays an important role in driving international debates to
raise awareness of cyberchallenges to international peace and security, and to make
progress on advancing responsible State behaviour in cyberspace.
Slovakia strongly supports multilateralism which helps to manage and tackle
current and future challenges in cyberspace. We are convinced tha t the stability in
cyberspace should be based on existing international law, including the Charter of the
United Nations in its entirety, international humanitarian law, and international
human rights law. Slovakia fully supports the applicability of existing international
law to State conduct in cyberspace as recognized by three consensus reports of Groups
of Governmental Experts endorsed by the General Assembly in 2010, 2013 and 2015.
Our best efforts shall go towards holding transparent and constructive discussions, so
that we can mutually benefit from each other´s experience, good practice and
expertise.
Slovakia is also a co-sponsor of the programme of action to advance responsible
State behaviour in cyberspace within the Open-ended Working Group. We believe in
an inclusive and constructive institutional dialogue focused on results, regularity and
consensus-based approach. In our view, the programme of action proposal offers
grounds for such dialogue across the whole United Nations membership.
When it comes to confidence-building measures and capacity-building in
cyberspace, Slovakia is of the opinion that these two are the most important measures
in order to keep stability in cyberspace. Regional organizations such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe are being very useful tools in
conflict prevention and strengthening cooperation between States. Regular
communication and interaction between States in cyberspace help to avoid conflict
and to deescalate potential rising tensions and, at the same time, they create a platform
for dialogue.

114/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

The international law is one of the main pillars of stability and predictability in
relations between States. Slovakia strongly stands with those reaffirming that existing
international law – notably the Charter of the United Nations in its entirety and
international humanitarian and human rights law – do apply to actions of States in
cyberspace. The Charter of the United Nations sets out the rules and principles of
international law of particular importance for the maintenance of peace and stability.
There is no doubt that human rights apply online as they do offline and States must
respect and defend those rights.
Thank you, Madam President.

21-09125

115/128

S/2021/621

Annex LVII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Slovenia to the
United Nations
Slovenia welcomes the first open debate of the Security Council, dedicated to a
specific thematic issue of the cybersecurity. Addressing cybersecurity is timely and
beneficial for all Member States. An open debate in the Security Council on this topic
is contributing to raising awareness in the framework of international peace and
security. In this regard, Slovenia welcomes the recent reports agreed by consensus of
the Open-ended working group on Developments in the Field of information and
communications technologies in the Context of International Security (Open -ended
Working Group) and United Nations Group of governmental Expert to advance
responsible State behaviour in cyberspace.
Slovenia aligns with the statement of the European Union and we would like to
make additional remarks in the national capacity.
We live in an interconnected and rapidly changing world. A global, open, free,
stable and secure cyberspace contributes to economic and social benefits. However,
there are also malicious cyberactivities. Misuse of cyberspace can affect vital
economic sectors and essential services to the public, such as health-care and energy,
and other basic infrastructure. Malicious purposes in the use of ICT by State or nonState actors can undermine trust between governments with negative implications
leading to destabilization of international peace and security.
To mitigate existing and emerging threats Slovenia firmly believes that
cyberspace should be governed in full respect of existing international law, in
particular the Charter of the United Nations in its entirety, international humanitarian
law and human rights, as well as the implementation of norms and rules for
responsible State behaviour. To this end, our first objective should be to promote the
application of existing international law and to focus our collective efforts on
advancing the implementation of existing norms of responsible State behaviour,
including criminal prosecution of private entities operating from a country
jurisdiction.
The norms of responsible State behaviour go hand in hand with the policy of
confidence-building and capacity-building measures. This is where we can make a
real difference. Slovenia firmly supports – within the framework of the 53 Member
States – the proposal to establish a programme of action to advance responsible State
behaviour in cyberspace. The programme of action will build on the existing acquis
of the General Assembly. The programme of action will provide an opportunity to
foster capacity-building programs and will provide an institutional mechanism within
the United Nations for cooperation and exchange of best practice and cooperation
with other stakeholders.
Moreover, in implementing norms of responsible State behaviour, Slovenia will
continue to promote and support the prominence of a gender perspective in reducing
the “digital gender divide” and effective and meaningful participation of women in
decision-making processes related to the use of ICT in the context of international
security.
Slovenia, as the incoming presidency of the Council of the European Union
starting on the 1st of July 2021, will strengthen cooperation in the field of
cybersecurity and streamline cyberissues between the European Union and Western
Balkans region. Bringing Western Balkans closer to the European cyberecosystem is
an important element in building trustful and secure environment for digital

116/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

development, better connectivity and better access to the digital economy and society.
It is also a contribution to global stability in cyberspace.
To this end, Slovenia plans to organize the informal European Union and
Western Balkans Summit in early October 2021. Slovenia will also organize a Cyber
Security Conference – the event on the Western Balkans in cooperation with the
EUISS. Additionally, we will contribute to a review and progress of cooperation with
Western Balkans States in the field of prevention and investigation of sexual abuse
and exploitation of children.
Slovenia, as the incoming presidency of the Council of the European Union will
also promote European regulatory efforts to strengthen cyberresilience and
cybercrisis management, with the review of the Directive on Security of Network and
Information Systems (NIS 2 Directive) outlining measures for high common level of
cybersecurity across the Union, as well as the efforts to actively promote the
implementation of European Union Cyber Diplomacy Toolbox as a means of
contributing to conflict prevention, mitigation of cybersecurity threats and greater
stability in international relations. We are going to strive for increased international
cooperation, and reducing risk of misperception, escalation and conflict.
Let me conclude by reiterating that Security Council plays a central role in
supporting efforts in the field of cybersecurity which are crucial to maintaining
international peace and security. By organizing this open debate, you have already
actively encouraged to foster an environment that leads to the promotion of
cooperation, building confidence related to ICT and to global, open, free, stable and
secure cyberspace.

21-09125

117/128

S/2021/621

Annex LVIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
South Africa has noted with interest the convening of this open debate of the
Security Council to consider, for the first time as a dedicated thematic matter, the
maintenance of international peace and security in cyberspace. We also thank the
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Nakamitsu, for her bri efing.
We have further noted the guiding questions provided for the discussion today,
which we will endeavour to respond to in our statement.
At the outset, South Africa would like to emphasise that the issue of peace and
security in cyberspace is a pervasive and complex matter that requires the full
engagement of all Member States of the United Nations. It is for this reason that we
believe that the proper place for this matter to be addressed is within the proceedings
of the First Committee of the General Assembly, which has already been engaging on
this matter.
In this regard, Member States have been engaged through the work of a number
of Groups of Government Experts, the latest of which focused on advancing
responsible State behaviour in cyberspace, producing its consensus report at the end
of May 2021 under the able leadership of Ambassador Guilherme de Aguiar Patriota
of Brazil.
Furthermore, the broad engagement of all Member States have taken place in
the Open-ended Working Group on Developments in the Field of Information and
Telecommunications in the Context of International Security from 2019, which
adopted its consensus Report at the end of March 2021; and the newly established the
Open-ended Working Group on Security of and in the use of information and
communications technologies 2021–2025 that will be guided by Ambassador Burhan
Gafoor, the Permanent Representative of the Republic of Singapore as its Chair.
The United Nations membership has therefore come a long way in discussing
emerging threats to international peace and security in cyberspace; the international
law frameworks that govern this aspect of international peace and security; the norms,
rules and principles that guide Member States; the required confidence -building
measures; capacity-building requirements; as well as ways to continue dialogue in
this regard.
Allow me to make the following brief points in this context.
South Africa believes that the multitude of emerging threats necessitates the
engagement of all relevant actors including civil society and the private sector. This
will be necessary both to understand the nature of these threats and to cooperate across
all of society to on the threats posed by both State and non-State actors in cyberspace
and adequately address them.
South Africa would like to emphasise the need to bridge the digital and gender
divides, as well as the transformation of the digital divide into digital opportunities,
which will be key to building resilience while at the same time fostering greater
development. The increasing sophistication of harmful ICT incidents, however, are a
concern for developing countries such as South Africa.
South Africa remains concerned by the growing threat of cyberattacks on critical
infrastructure and critical information infrastructure. While we believe we should
confront these threats through greater cooperation and the development of best
practice mechanisms, these efforts should support national priorities and efforts to
118/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

identify and designate such infrastructure. We are also aware that despite the exposure
to threats the positive economic and social opportunities that can be derived from ICT
should not be overshadowed by the malicious use of these technologies. Therefore, it
is not the technologies themselves, that are of concern, but the misuse of such
technologies.
In order to govern the use of cyberspace and especially the threats posed to
international peace and security, South Africa supports the applicability of
international law and specifically the Charter of the United Nations in its entirety.
In view of the significant work already done, we believe that we should focus
on implementing existing norms, rules and principles. It is a fundamental principle
shared by developing countries that we must also recognize the fact that we are all at
varying positions of risk, given the varying capacities of States to guard against the
threats posed by malicious acts in cyberspace. Therefore, my delegation would like
to emphasise the need for capacity-building programmes from both State and other
stakeholders to assist countries in combating the destabilising threats from malicious
actors in the cyberrealm. South Africa believes that capacity-building is critical in
bringing States on par for the betterment of the security of global cyberspace, as this
is truly a global challenge that requires global solutions.
Finally, South Africa remains committed to continuing the engagement to
address these matters, especially within the context of the Open-ended Working
Group on Security of and in the use of information and communications technologies,
which will begin its substantive work in December. This will serve as an all-inclusive,
single-track for discussing how we can all address the emerging, complex and
pervasive threats to international peace and security in cyberspace.

21-09125

119/128

S/2021/621

Annex LIX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to th e
United Nations
[Original: French]
I would like to thank Estonia for organizing this open debate and the High
Representative for her briefing. Cyberspace has become an integral part of our
societies and creates tremendous opportunities for social and economic development .
At the same time, malicious cyber operations pose a risk of instability and have
become a threat to international peace and security. We are concerned that cyberspace
is being instrumentalized for projection of power and is becoming increasingly
fragmented and destabilized.
An open, secure, stable, accessible and peaceful cyberspace is beneficial to all.
The United Nations plays a crucial role in this respect. Switzerland welcomes the
recent adoption by consensus of the reports of the Group of Government al Experts
and the Open-ended Working Group. These reports represent essential steps towards
responsible behaviour of States in cyberspace.
To promote peace and stability in cyberspace, I would like to highlight several
points.
First, international law applies in cyberspace. Respect for international law is
an essential condition for conflict prevention and the maintenance of international
peace and security. The obligation to resolve disputes by peaceful means also applies
to the activities of States in cyberspace. Furthermore, international humanitarian law
is applicable when an armed conflict, whether international or not, exists de facto.
Switzerland welcomes the fact that the latest Group of Governmental Experts report
clearly states this. This is a significant milestone. International humanitarian law and
its fundamental principles place important limits on the execution of cyber operations
in the context of armed conflict.
Second, Switzerland is concerned about the humanitarian impact of malicious
cyber operations, which have been on the rise since the pandemic and frequently
concern medical infrastructure. Switzerland stresses that such infrastructure is
protected, as demonstrated in the open debate in April. The Group of Governmental
Experts reports provide a framework to protect critical infrastructure from malicious
cyber activities. In addition, data collected for humanitarian purposes must be
protected. We also encourage States to comply with the voluntary norms of
responsible behaviour in cyberspace and additional Group of Governmental Experts
guidance for their implementation, to avoid damage to critical infrastructure, mitigate
humanitarian impacts and ensure the protection of civilians.
Third, confidence-building measures are important to prevent a climate of
mistrust in cyberspace. At the regional level, Switzerland is committed to advancing
the role of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in promoting
cyber stability. It is developing, together with Germany, a proposal for the
implementation of a confidence-building measure that provides for consultations in
the context of a serious cyber incident. Switzerland is also committed to transparency
and capacity building. Our National Cyber Security Centre provides technical support
to other States in the event of an incident and shares data and information on possible
threats. The Security Council and United Nations organizations should take into
account regional initiatives and confidence-building measures that have proven useful
in promoting peace and stability in cyberspace.

120/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Lastly, civil society organizations, academia and the technical community as
well as the private sector play an important role in supporting international cyber
stability, especially with regard to the respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms online and offline. Switzerland, as a member of the Freedom Online
Coalition, engages with over 30 Governments and a network of stakeholders to
promote freedom of expression on the internet. We encourage the Security Council
and Member States to involve the different actors in the implementation of the
Framework for Responsible State Behaviour in Cyberspace.
Multilateral cooperation and adherence to international law, including human
rights and international humanitarian law, are essential for peace and security in
cyberspace. Switzerland encourages further work on these topics, including in the
new Open-ended Working Group and the future programme of action for the
promotion of responsible State behaviour in cyberspace. As a candidate for the
Security Council, Switzerland looks forward to pursuing a multi-stakeholder and
constructive dialogue, building on the existing achievements.

21-09125

121/128

S/2021/621

Annex LX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Thailand to the
United Nations
Thailand appreciates Estonia’s efforts in organizing the Security Council High Level open debate: “Maintaining international peace and security in cyberspace” at
this relevant and timely juncture. We also commend Estonia’s leadership, bei ng the
first to hold a formal Council meeting on cybersecurity. We hope that securing and
preventing the misuse of cyberspace and information and communications
technologies (ICT) will remain high on the Council’s agenda, while continuing to
welcome the participation of the wider United Nations membership on these
important discussions.
Thailand is of the view that cyberspace has benefitted humanity, as evident
during the pandemic, by keeping people connected to basic social services and most
importantly, to each other, as well as a contributor to the achievement of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Nonetheless, the uses of ICT by States and
non-State actors, including terrorists for malicious purposes such as attacks on critical
civilian infrastructure, not only undermine international peace and security, but also
affect the safety of our people. It is therefore the responsibility of States, in line with
relevant international laws and norms, to address these issues.
Thailand believes that the United Nations can play a significant role in
supporting efforts towards the creation of a stable and secure cyberspace. Indeed, the
security of cyberspace has been on the agenda of Member States for more than two
decades. The most evident successes have been the recent historic adoptions, by
consensus, of the report of the Open-ended working group on developments in the
field of information and telecommunications in the context of international security
(2019–2021) and the report of the Group of Governmental Experts on Advancing
responsible State behaviour in cyberspace in the context of international security
(Group of Governmental Experts) (2019–2021).
Thailand welcomes the new Open-ended Working Group on security of and in
the use of information and communications technologies (2021–2025). We are
confident that, under the able leadership of Mr. Burhan Gafoor, Permanent
Representative of Singapore and Chair of the Open-ended Working Group, States will
engage in fruitful discussions, including on enhancing confidence, cooperation and
transparency among States and the further elaboration of norms on responsible State
behaviour in cyberspace.
At the new Open-ended Working Group, Thailand hopes that the following
issues may be resolved or clarified: further developing guidance and
recommendations on how to operationalize norms of responsible State behaviour;
reaching a common understanding on how international law applies in cyberspace and
whether gaps exist; creating sustainable, demand-driven confidence-building
measures, and adopting a “Regular Institutional Dialogue”.
Thailand also takes note of the good efforts by other intergovernmental bodies,
private sector, and civil society organizations and processes that have contributed to
our collective endeavour towards a safe and secured cyberspace. Thailand supports
multi-stakeholder approach in our work to ensure meaningful engagement of relevant
stakeholders and partners in the society, including that of women and youth.
To this end, Thailand supports the strengthening of normative foundations by
enhancing practical implementation of agreed norms, bridging existing divergences
and capacity needs, and ensuring that existing multilateral and bilateral channels are
kept open for continued dialogue. All States must continue working together to
safeguard our shared vision of an open, secure, accessible, and peaceful cyberspace
and ICT environment for all.
122/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex LXI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Turkey to the
United Nations
I would like to thank Estonia for organizing this open debate, which focuses on
a critical topic particularly under current circumstances due to the pandemic. I also
thank Madame Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for her
briefing.
The use of information and communications technologies (ICT) impacts
economy and development around the world. The pandemic has underlined how
heavily reliant we are on digital technologies. Ensuring free, open and secure access
to ICT is certainly crucial.
Turkey is concerned with the growing number of cyberattacks. Malicious
cyberactivities targeting critical infrastructure, terrorism, digital espionage, fraud,
online child abuse and exploitation, and misuse of personal data are among current
threats that also pose risk to international peace and security.
Due to technological developments, cyberattacks have become easier to carry
out, while the negative effects and the cost for the victims are rapidly increasing.
Cyber-attacks are also getting more “target-oriented”. The annual cost of cyberattacks
is increasing exponentially. Defense against these attacks requires new and up-to-date
methods and instruments.
Turkey welcomes the consensus reports of the Open-ended Working Group on
Developments in the Field of information and commun ications technologies in the
Context of International Security and, more recently, the United Nations Group of
Governmental Experts to Advance Responsible State Behaviour in Cyberspace. These
reports are valuable contributions to the existing body of work on cybersecurity under
the United Nations umbrella. It is equally important that both Open-ended Working
Group and Group of Governmental Experts reports are compatible and
complementary in order to increase stability, resilience and international cooperati on
in cyberspace. We hope to see more cohesion in such endeavours in the future.
With its fast rate of digitalization, Turkey has been focusing on taking necessary
measures in order to improve its national cybersecurity. Currently, National Cyber
Security Strategy and Action Plan, which covers the term 2020–2023 is being
implemented. Main strategic objectives of this Action Plan are critical infrastructure
protection and increasing resilience, capacity-building, organic cybersecurity
network, security of new generation technologies (i.e. IoT, 5G, cloud computing etc.),
fight against cybercrime, developing and fostering domestic and national
technologies, integration of cybersecurity into national security, and improving
international cooperation.
In addition, the National Cyber Emergency Response Team of Turkey plays a
vital role in the implementation and coordination of preventive measures against
cyberthreats.
Training programs as well as national and international cybersecurity exercises
complement our efforts. Turkey’s information and communications technologies
Authority (BTK) provides online public trainings on cybersecurity and other related
areas. More than 5.000 people have been trained in different areas of cybersecurity in
the last 4 years.
Annually organized “Safer Internet Day” is among the awareness raising
activities of BTK, aiming at increasing awareness on conscious and safe use of the
Internet. Additionally, Turkey takes steps to counter heightened digital security risks
21-09125

123/128

S/2021/621

to cybersecurity and has taken measures in cooperation with relevant stakeholders, in
order to guarantee business continuity, accessibility and protection of consumers
during the pandemic.
We have also taken steps to strengthen our national legislative framework.
Given the transborder nature of cyberrisks, increased international cooperation
is crucial. With this understanding, Turkey engages in cyberthreat intelligence sharing
and contributes to policies and cooperation strategies within regional and
international organizations, including the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, G20 and OECD. Turkey also participates in international exercises,
including those within ITU and NATO.
The United Nations has a central role for a more strategic and effective
cooperation in the use of ICT by States. Turkey supports the applicability of
international law in cyberspace. It is high time we built on the previous work
undertaken within the United Nations system and find meaningful ways to
operationalize rules, norms, principles and recommendations for responsible State
behaviour in cyberspace.
A priority area for our future work is forging a common understanding on how
international law applies in cyberspace. This is indeed necessary to decrease
misunderstandings and promote accountability in cyberspace.
There is also need for establishing communication channels among Member
States for emergency situations and sharing information and resources through those
channels. This would highly contribute to confidence-building and accelerate our
capacity-building efforts.
In addition, we also need to urgently review and strengthen existing
international instruments in order to enhance cooperation within the framework of
new technologies such as cloud computing, the Internet of Things, 5G and Artificial
Intelligence.
Conducting a survey of national regulatory approaches towards ensuring the
security of new technologies and preparing code of conducts to guide and inform the
national frameworks can be useful tools. Also, we need to develop a common
understanding and definitions of threats.
In the context of capacity-building, we believe that the United Nations as well
as the regional organizations can promote exchange programs for cybersecurity
experts and establish common training platforms. International exercises must be
encouraged in order to enhance national cyberincident preparedness and response
capacities.
Since cyberspace is a borderless field and cybersecurity is a multi -stakeholder
issue, national authorities need to work with users, private sector, NGOs, and
international counterparts in order to fight against cyberthreats. Global vendors,
service providers and security companies should also cooperate more effectively with
governments and international organizations in order to contribute to global
cybersecurity.
Turkey is committed to continue its engagement and dialogue in order to
promote regional and global cybersecurity.

124/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex LXII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ukraine to the
United Nations
We thank Estonia for initiating such an important meeting of the Security
Council, as well as Ms. Nakamitsu, the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
for her briefing.
Rapid development of information and communications technologies
progressively led to the “re-formatting” of Internet space: nowadays it is no longer a
comfortable platform for communication, but also real weapon, which becomes more
and more dangerous in hands of hackers, criminals, some State actors and their
proxies.
Unfortunately, despite existing legal norms and institutional mechanisms
established to combat cybercrimes on national, regional and international levels, the
advantages of modern digital world are too often been abused, with cyberattacks on
the rise, having become a new method of hybrid warfare.
International policy is progressively becoming vulnerable to cyberthreats. Over
the last few years, a number of States in the world have become lucrative targets of
cyberattacks.
Ukraine is the State where cyberattacks since 2014 became one of the major
elements of the external attempt to undermine our sovereignty. In 2014-2021 Ukraine
has faced an unprecedented number of cyberoperations against vital objects of our
critical infrastructure. Most of those attacks were carried out by hacker groups being
controlled from the Russian Federation.
Cyberoperations against major critical infrastructure facilities, energy,
transport, oil and gas sectors are challenges and threats to international peace and
security. Recently, the Colonial Pipeline has been an object of cyberattack that
seriously impacted computerized equipment managing the pipeline leading to serious
consequences.
In times of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the devastating
impact of malicious cyberoperations is evident. Some State and non-State actors
abuse the global crisis to launch cyberoperations, including against the health sector,
which is a matter of an urgent concern for the international community.
Yet not only critical infrastructure, but international politics are becoming
progressively vulnerable to malicious use of ever more complex and sophisticated
ICT capabilities that was confirmed by headline-making cases of interference into
major election campaigns and candidate’s profiles committed by Kremlin’s hackers.
Therefore, cyberstability has become a crucial component of ensuring wider
peace and security that requires strict adherence to international law, the application
of which in cyberspace has been recently reaffirmed in the Open-ended Working
Group and Group of Governmental Experts reports, appropriate implementation of
norms, rules and principles of responsible behaviour, as well as strengthening
international cooperation to preserve a free, open, stable and secure cybe rspace.
We emphasize that a particular attention should be placed on elaboration of
unified standards in combating cyberthreats, sharing best practices, building mutual
trust in the field of cybersecurity, preventing the use of cyberspace for political,
terrorist and military purposes, as well as providing financial and technical assistance
to enhance national capacities to withstand cyberthreats, mitigate the risks and
strengthening resilience.
21-09125

125/128

S/2021/621

As of today, cyberoperations against critical infrastructure and governmental
agencies, as well as disinformation campaigns, that may incite terrorism, is a widely
used method of interference into internal affairs of sovereign States, including
Ukraine.
No doubt, Russia uses high technologies to get its own political and geopolitical
objectives, namely by supporting and exacerbating conflicts in neighbouring States,
conducting aggressive information wars.
We strongly encourage the international community to thoroughly consider the
issue of accountability in cases of identification of a particular State or State actors
behind preparation or exercising targeted malicious use of ICT or dissemination of
lies for hostile purposes.
After all, international efforts made in this domain are simply in vain if there
are no reliable mechanisms to detect, punish and bring to justice individuals and
relevant States, responsible for coordinating and financing illicit activities in the
global cyberspace.

126/128

21-09125

S/2021/621

Annex LXIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Arab Emirates
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has highlighted the world’s
dependence on information and communications technologies which were essential
in keeping us informed and connected to one another, even as we remained physically
apart.
Over the course of the last eighteen months, we have witnessed an increased
trend in malicious cyberoperations targeting medical facilities, including
organizations dedicated to research and vaccine development to combat COVID-19.
We live in a volatile region, and the Middle East is not immune to the risk posed by
malicious cyberactivity—it is often the target of major cyberoperations and
espionage. In the last few years, our region has witnessed severe incidents affecting
the telecommunications, banking, and public sectors. Oil and natural gas installations
have also been targeted, causing hundreds of millions in damages. Such malicious
cyberactivity on the region’s critical infrastructure has the potential to spark a conflict
in an already tense environment, and pose a threat to international peace and security.
The United Arab Emirates is committed to creating the necessary infrastructure
and mechanisms to enhance its cybersecurity capabilities, both to protect itself against
cyberthreats and better work with others to address shared challenges. In November
2020, we established the United Arab Emirates Cybersecurity Council, which will
develop a comprehensive national cybersecurity strategy and a national cyberincident
response plan. We host the largest cybersecurity and digital transformation
conferences including GITEX, GISEC and Cybertech to build domestic capacity, and
we have developed a platform for public-private partnership to facilitate information
sharing. We also collaborate with States, international organizations, and private
sector entities to share information both at a policy and technical level. For example,
the United Arab Emirates contributes to the work of regional organizations, such as
the Gulf Cooperation Council’s new joint malware analysis platform, and is an active
member of the Organization for Islamic Cooperation’s Computer Emergency
Response Team (OIC-CERT). These cooperative and transparency confidencebuilding measures are some of the ways that the United Arab Emirate s is doing its
part to reduce cyberrisks to international peace and security.
The United Arab Emirates welcomes the recommendations in the reports of both
the Open-ended Working Group on ICT and the Group of Governmental Experts.
They underline the importance of supporting efforts to further the implementation of
the voluntary norms of responsible State behaviour in cyberspace as well as the need
to develop common understandings on the applicability of international law to online
activity. More, however, needs to be done, both to encourage and support States in
carrying out the recommendations as well as to provide further guidance in a rapidly
evolving environment. The programme of action for responsible State behaviour in
cyberspace provides an ideal road map for future work, and will contribute to
addressing cyberrisks to international peace and security.
Minimizing cyberrisk to international peace and security will remain a
challenge. The United Arab Emirates proposes two recommendations that can assi st
with this task.
First, States should provide training and capacity-building at the bilateral,
regional and international levels, including through training programmes and the
development of guidance to assist with implementing the norms for responsibl e State
behaviour. These actions can act as confidence-building measures, responding to the

21-09125

127/128

S/2021/621

mistrust and misunderstandings between States in cyberspace that can pose a risk to
international peace and security.
Second, States should continue to share their views and assessments with the
Secretary-General and actively participate in cyberrelated international fora and
cross-regional formats. The sharing of best practice and exchanges of experience can
help States adapt to evolving norms and become responsible actors in cyberspace.
All States have a responsibility of promoting international peace and security,
both online and offline. Abiding by norms of responsible State behaviour in tandem
with obligations under international law is the best place to start.

128/128

21-09125
