154

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

report on the implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian
region of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification.
l l 9th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/199. Co-operation between the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat)
and the United Nations Environment Programme
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/ l 62 of 19 December 1977
and 35/77 B of 5 December 1980,
Having considered resolution 8/14 adopted by the Commission on Human Settlements on 8 May 198588 and decision 13/ l 2 adopted by the Goveming Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme on 23 May
1985, 83
Decides to discontinue the annual meetings of the Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for Human
Settlements (Habitat) and the bureau of the Commission
on Human Settlements with the Executive Director ofthe
United Nations Environment Programme and the bureau
of its Governing Council.
l 19th p/enary meeting
17 December 1985

40/200. International co-operation in the field of the
environment
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the intemational dimension of environmental problems, the role of environmental factors in the
broader economic and social context, and the importance
of taking environmental considerations fully into account
in the implementation of the Intemational Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, 22
Having considered the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme on the
work of its thirteenth session, 82
Having considered a/so the report of the Executive
Director of the United Nations Env1ronment Programme
on intemational conventions and prv:ncols in the field of
the environment, 89
Noting with deep concern that the harmful consequences
of the drought and desertification seriously affecting many
countries, in particular African countries, are exacerbated
by the continued erosion of the resource base for the
development of those countries,
Reaffirming the importance of the interrelationships
between resources, environment, people and development,
and the need to take those interrelationships into account
in development policies and strategies,
Stressing the importance of an international exchange of
experience and knowledge conceming the protection ofthe
environment,
Noting the activity of the United Nations Environment
Programme on the subject "The arms race and the environment", in accordance with its programme of work as
adopted by the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Goveming Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme,
88 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Fortieth Session, Supplement No. lI (A/40/8 and Corr. l ). annex 1, sect. A.
89 UNEP/GC.13/10.

Mindful of the sovereign rights of States o ver their natural resources, including their forests,
Noting a/so the activities of the United Nations and
other intemational organizations, as well as the intemational initiatives being taken that are directed towards the
important objective of rational management, protection
and rehabilitation of the world's forests,
Reca/ling its resolution 38/ l 6 I of 19 December 1983 on
the process of preparation of the Environmental Perspective to the Year 2000 and Beyond,
1. Takes note of the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme on the
work of its thirteenth session and endorses the decisions
contained therein, 82 as adopted;
2. Welcomes the decision ofthe Governing Council to
change to a biennial cycle of sessions on an experimental
basis and in this regard takes note of the establishment of
the open-ended Committee of Pennanent RepresenLltives
to facilitate this process; 90
3. Invites the Governing Council, when reviewing the
experiment with the organization of a biennial work programme, to consider changes that may in consequence be
necessary in the functioning of the Council. mcluding the
term of membership;
4. Welcomes section lII of decision 13/ I of 23 May
1985, 83 and decision 13/10 of24 May 1985 83 by which the
Governing Council initiated steps towards the preparation
of the system-wide medium-term environment programme for the period 1990-1995 and invited the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination to review and further develop the methodology in the light ofthe experience
gained in the system-wide medium-term cnvironment
programme for the period 1984-1989;
5. Takes note of the work done by the Special Commission on the Environmental Perspective to the Year
2000 and Beyond, which has adopted the name World
Commission on Environment and Development, and by
the Intergovemmental Inter-sessional Preparatory Committee on the Environmental Perspective to the Year 2000
and Beyond in the prepara t. .,n of their reports, and recalls
the relationship between the Commi~1oion aHJ the Committee, as set out in General Assembly resolution 38/161;
6. Takes note ofthe progress on international conventions and protocols in the field of the environment during
1985, including the aJoption of the Vienna Convention
for the Protection of the Ozone Layer and of an intemational protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-range
Transboundary Air Pollution, on sulphur emissions and
fluxes, and the organization ofthe first meeting ofthe Conference of the Parties to the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals;
7. Considers that measmes to deal with the erosion of
the natural resource base in countries affected by drought
and desertification should have as one oftheir major aims
the sustainable exploitation and increased productivity of
that natural resource base;
8. Welcomes the importance attached by the Governing Council to regional approaches and programmes
relating to intemational co-operation in the field of the
environment, and in this context stresses the relevance of
specific regional planning identified hy the regions themselves;
9. Notes with appreciation the convening of the first
African Ministerial Conference on the Environment at
Cairo from 16 to 18 December 1985;
90 See Offil'ia/ Records of the General Assemhly, Fortieth Snswn, Supp/1•ment No 25 (A/40/2)), annex, decision 13/2.
