United Nations

A/ES-10/PV.36

General Assembly

Official Records

Emergency Special Session

36

th meeting
Friday, 16 January 2009, 6.40 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

The meeting was called to order at 6.55 p.m.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Illegal Israeli actions in Occupied East Jerusalem
and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory
Draft resolution (A/ES-10/L.21)
The President: In the light of information
received from the Secretariat that Israel has asked for a
vote and that there is no consensus on the text
contained in document A/ES-10/L.21, and in
accordance with rule 36 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, I have no alternative but to
withdraw my sponsorship of draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.21.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Ecuador.
Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): In
response to your recent announcement, Mr. President,
of your withdrawal of your sponsorship of draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.21, I would like to inform you
that my country, Ecuador, now wishes to assume
sponsorship of the draft resolution. In addition, several
other countries have joined Ecuador in co-sponsoring
the draft resolution. Those countries are Venezuela,
Indonesia, Malaysia, Syria, Algeria, Nicaragua and
Senegal.
In that regard, we request that the General
Assembly now proceed to take action without further
delay on the draft resolution contained in document
A/ES-10/L.21, taking into account solely the following

revision to operative paragraph 1. I will read out the
revision in English because the text initially circulated
by the President of the General Assembly was in
English.
(spoke in English)
“Demands full respect for Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009), calls for an immediate
ceasefire and the immediate, unconditional
withdrawal of Israeli forces from Gaza, and calls
for the unimpeded provision and distribution
throughout Gaza of humanitarian assistance,
including food, fuel and medical treatment.”
The President: I call on the representative of
Egypt on a point of order.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): Despite the fact that you
announced, Mr. President, at the end of the last
meeting here in the General Assembly that you would
allow time for consultations that are going on between
the European Union, Palestine and other countries, I
see that you have chosen to give Ecuador the floor
before me, even though I raised my flag earlier. I fully
respect your judgement and your opinion, but I still
believe that we already have an agreement among a
large number of the members of the General Assembly
on another text that has some amendments based on
your guidance and based on the fact that you gave us
half an hour, which has now been extended to one hour.
I think it should be treated with respect.
Mr. President, you gave us the mandate and you
gave us the time to negotiate, and now you are

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-21257 (E)

*0921257*

A/ES-10/PV.36

allowing for a move to take off on another track. I do
not think that that is fair. As much as I always concur
with your judgement, Sir, and as much as I always
respect your opinion, I do not think that that is the right
course to follow in this Assembly.
Mr. President, you gave us time to negotiate and
we negotiated, and we reached agreement on a text.
There were amendments — of course, we have to take
everyone on board — but we have to come to a new
consensus on this draft resolution. I am sure that we
are not going to have consensus, because one party has
asked for a vote anyway.
But this is an extraordinary practice that I am
seeing today for the first time. I have served in this
place for about 15 years over my entire career, and this
is one of the rare times that I see the President
authorizing Member States to go negotiate and come
back with an agreement, and when we have the
agreement, he provides an opportunity for other
delegations to put on the floor another draft resolution
that we know is not going to get more than 70 votes.
The President: I would ask the representative of
Egypt to please hold his horses.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): Okay.
The President: The representative of Egypt
accuses me of being disrespectful. Let me remind him
that respect is a two-way street. I did not see him. I am
never the one who sees anything going up. I get it in
writing, and it is right here. I was reading from the
notes, which call for Ecuador, so, please, I demand
respect from the Permanent Representative of Egypt.
He is accusing me without knowing what he is talking
about.
Secondly, he said he needed time to negotiate. I
do not know what he was negotiating. I said here, very
frankly, to my brothers and sisters in the Assembly that
the European Union has requested more time to talk
about, I do not know, God only knows, what, and I
gave it to them. So I did not know what I was to expect
or what they were even doing there. I am talking about
the European Union. I did not know that he was part of
the European Union. So, please —
I am being told that the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic would like to take the floor.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Mr. President, do not be upset. Do not be

2

upset for the deadlock that has been reached after two
days of intensive, in-depth, sincere discussions that
you, Sir, as President of the General Assembly, have
shepherded very capably, wisely and patiently with the
purpose of arriving at a consensus. It is difficult, it is
even impossible to do so, but you tried anyway. You
tried, and we thank you for your efforts. You have
attempted to arrive at an agreement over a text that, in
principle, should represent to all a service that the
international community is offering the wounded
Palestinian people who have been butchered in Gaza.
Do not be upset, Father, who are honest and
candid, because the battle of good against its enemies
has always been the reason for our presence in this
world. That battle is one that the forces of darkness and
ignorance can never win regardless of their
procrastination, lies and falsifications.
Do not be upset, Mr. President. You have
dedicated yourself to being a role model for us all, and
while we understand the reluctance of some, you have
forced those who disagree with you — who are few
among us — to respect you and hold you in high
regard, even though some have tried to complicate
your leadership of this session. We understand that
differences of opinion do not upset good relations.
Mr. President, the truth of the matter is that you
have reinstituted lost credibility to the conscience of
this international organization. With your proud halo of
humanness you have alleviated the pain of Gaza’s
innocents, its children, its women and its elderly, who
are being burned alive by an Israeli war machine that
leaves no human or stone unharmed.
I support the request of the Permanent
Representative of Ecuador — indeed, I join her in her
request — and I would like to adopt exactly what she
has said, word for word. All of us must work in service
of the Charter, and not simply find ways to circumvent
or manoeuvre around it. As I have said before, people
are dying. That is why some of us are asking for more
time.
But we can wait no more. The Israeli beast is
preying upon innocents in Gaza. The matter is one of
moral principles and not one of negotiating over this
term or that.
Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): Speaking frankly, I
would say that this conversation we have been having
makes me very sad. I speak on behalf of the European

09-21257

A/ES-10/PV.36

Union, and I would like to strongly support what the
representative of Egypt has said. We have really
worked hard, all day, to reach consensus on an
important text. We worked hard with the Permanent
Observer of Palestine. We worked hard to come up
with a balanced text that really can reach consensus in
this Assembly. So we hope that this text, which is now
on your desk, Mr. President, will be considered in a
proper procedural manner, and we are certainly ready
to explain what is in it. I would like to announce that
this text has the support of the whole of the European
Union.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I do not
want to go into detail. My delegation would like to
support what has been said by the Permanent
Representative of Ecuador, and I would like to inscribe
the Islamic Republic of Iran as a sponsor of the draft
resolution. I fully support the revision by the
representative of Ecuador. In addition, what the
Permanent Representative of Syria said reflected the
facts.
I do not wish to go into detail or to explain this
issue further; its urgency is clear to all of us here. As
you said, Mr. President, every passing minute matters
to the lives of the many innocent civilians, including
women and children, in the Gaza Strip. Therefore, once
again, my delegation fully supports the draft resolution
co-sponsored by the representative of Ecuador. I would
also like to request, Mr. President, that the Assembly
take action on the draft resolution.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank you
most openly and sincerely, Mr. President, for your
efforts to ensure that, at this emergency special session,
the General Assembly can adopt a draft resolution that
has the broadest possible support. You have acted
transparently and have assumed responsibility for
enabling the Assembly to exercise the authority
entrusted to it by the Charter of the United Nations.
Your role at this historic turning point will be
recognized by posterity. You can be assured that your
name will be recorded in the annals of modern history,
because we are at a crucial moment when this body
must express itself with equanimity and, above all,
serve the interests of international peace and solidarity.
As all delegations are aware, this morning the
delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
when it officially presented the position of its

09-21257

Government, proposed a number of additions to the
text that you introduced yesterday, Mr. President.
Therefore, all delegations without exception had the
opportunity to consult with their capitals and regional
groups and to carefully study the text. That is why it
should be put to the vote.
In that connection, I should like to recall that the
delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
proposed six amendments to the draft resolution. I wish
to go over them, even though they are set out in the
official document circulated by the presidency this
morning, which sets out precisely in both Spanish and
English the proposals of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela. We officially submitted a number of
amendments that, in our opinion, would enhance the
draft resolution. For example, we demanded that the
occupying Power, Israel, withdraw from the Gaza Strip
and comply immediately and unconditionally with the
provisions of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009).
We also requested that the draft resolution include a
demand for the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of Israeli military forces from the Gaza
Strip, as well as a demand that the occupying Power,
Israel, lift the economic and military blockade imposed
on the occupied territory of Gaza and immediately
reopen border crossings into Gaza to permit
humanitarian access and the free movement of persons.
The President: The representative of Algeria has
requested the floor to speak on a point of order.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria): I apologize to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
for having taken the floor.
I wanted to respectfully request, Mr. President,
that you call on those delegations that are consulting
within the Hall while the General Assembly is debating
to show respect for the Assembly and to retake their
seats.
The
President:
I
kindly
request
the
representatives of the different delegations not to
obstruct the work of the General Assembly and, if they
must engage in consultations, to have the minimal
courtesy to do so outside.
I now ask the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to please continue.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Thank you very much,

3

A/ES-10/PV.36

Mr. President, for urging us to respect the rules that
govern the functioning of this body.
The Venezuelan proposal also called on UNICEF
and all other agencies concerned with humanitarian aid
to establish a programme providing assistance to
Palestinian children and adolescents affected by war
trauma. Finally, we also requested that the resolution
express support for the Human Rights Council
resolution adopted on 12 January 2009, on the grave
violations of human rights after the occupation of
Palestine, including the recent occupation of the region
of Gaza. However, I wish to officially report that the
delegation of Venezuela has decided not to insist on
those amendments, although we believe that some of
them could enhance the text.
Therefore, we support the decision of the
delegation of Ecuador to take over the President’s text.
We believe that that text represents a major effort and
that the President acted appropriately and with dignity
and decorum in giving delegations the opportunity,
after consulting with their capitals and in regional
groups, to speak about this draft resolution. Therefore,
we welcome and enthusiastically support the draft
resolution now co-sponsored by Ecuador and the
revision that its representative read out in this forum.
The only difference, as members are already
aware, is that Ecuador proposes a demand for the
immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the Israeli
forces illegally occupying Palestinian territory. The
whole world is demanding this. The United Nations
cannot carry out its humanitarian assistance as long as
there is a land, sea and air occupation of the Palestinian
people in Gaza.
To sum up, we believe that it is essential that this
forum pronounce itself in favour of the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of the Israeli army from the
Gaza Strip. I would here like to appeal to the
conscience of all delegations of the world, especially
those of the Arab world and members of the Arab
League, and I call on them — and I am speaking from
the very heart of the people of Venezuela — to support
this revision.
This is going to be noted in the records of this
Organization for posterity. Who could agree that the
Israeli occupying forces continue to commit their
crimes against the Palestinian people? Who would
support Israel’s ongoing illegal occupation? This is a
challenge to all countries. We would therefore like to

4

lend our strongest support to the draft resolution now
presented by the delegation of Ecuador, with the
revision introduced.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the observer of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Mr. President, I want
to begin by reiterating for the 100th time the
appreciation of the Palestinian people for your
courageous and principled position in resuming this
emergency special session and in trying very hard to
reach a near-consensus on a draft resolution that will
send the loudest possible message to Israel to the effect
that almost the entire international community is united
in demanding that it stop its aggression against our
people immediately on the basis of resolution 1860
(2009).
I acted as your faithful son in following your
instructions, Sir, and negotiating in good faith with a
very important bloc in the United Nations — the
Europeans — for the purpose not of giving Israel the
gift of splitting the General Assembly, but of cornering
it by having the entire General Assembly united in
demanding compliance with resolution 1860 (2009),
beginning with an immediate ceasefire.
In this connection, I want to thank everyone here,
because all of them are supporting our heroic people in
Gaza, who are fighting and spilling their blood because
of the aggression of Israel against our people. We
appreciate everyone’s efforts. I do not see a split within
the General Assembly, with the exception of Israel,
which is the country that is refusing to comply with
resolution 1860 (2009). In this connection, I thank my
sister, the Ambassador of Ecuador, the European Union
and you, Sir, especially, because you led this effort for
a successful conclusion. That conclusion has to be
successful.
I appeal to everyone in this room. What is needed
is not two sides competing between themselves to
show how faithful they are to the Palestinian people.
We know that the Assembly is truly outraged about
what is happening to our people, and we appreciate
that position. We appeal to all members to support this
text that the Assembly entrusted me with negotiating
with the European group. I believe the text that we
have reached with them, which does not fundamentally
change the original text and is faithful to resolution
1860 (2009), which demands an immediate ceasefire, is
a text that we can live with.

09-21257

A/ES-10/PV.36

Of course, if it were up to us, we would want a
very strong draft resolution that would demand many
things. But for my part, I want to serve the interests of
my people in Gaza well and try to stop this carnage and
these atrocities committed by the Israelis against my
people immediately, and that will require the unity of
the entire General Assembly against Israel and for all
of the small issues — and they are important issues —
to be put aside.
On behalf of the Palestinian people, on behalf of
our brothers and sisters in Gaza, I appeal to the
Assembly to unite behind this text, which would then
acquire almost total consensus, and to adopt it tonight
in order to isolate Israel and not give it the gift of
splitting the General Assembly over issues of who is
more devoted to the Palestinian people and who is not.
We are all concerned about the Palestinian people, and
I appeal to the Assembly to accept this text, to put it to
a vote and to adopt it by almost 190 votes. That would
be the most forceful and most powerful message the
Assembly could send to the Palestinian people. I hope
we do it, and I hope we do it right now.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We thank our
brother from Palestine for his clear, brave and
important statement.
(spoke in English)
I think we all heard that our brother from
Palestine has requested an immediate vote and has
asked for the widest possible support for the
proposition that has been presented. We will therefore
now proceed to an immediate vote.
I call on Egypt on a point of order.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): After that emotional call
by the representative of Palestine in favour of the text
that was negotiated between Palestine and the
European Union and not in favour of the text that was
presented by Ecuador and other delegations, I think
that we have to apply our minds and our hearts in
support of the Palestinian cause and in support of the
text that was negotiated all day long with the European
Union. I think that the text that Ambassador Mansour
is asking for has been given to the Secretariat, and it is
a full text covering all the aspects of the draft
resolution based on the proposal that you, Sir, have
withdrawn.
That is why I was the first to raise my flag. The
fact that Ecuador was written in your notes, Sir, is not

09-21257

my concern. That has to do with your staff, who did not
wait for the flags to be raised and wrote in your notes
that Ecuador should be given the floor before me.
Those are not the rules that apply in this Assembly.
With all due respect and humbleness, I ask you to
support what was said by the representative of
Palestine. We should put the text that was negotiated,
which you allowed time for us to negotiate, to the vote.
A full text has been given to the Secretariat. I would
request the Secretariat to circulate that text to the
members so that everybody knows that it is almost
identical to the text that you presented, Sir, with some
slight adjustments that have been made to obtain the
180 or 190 votes that the Ambassador of Palestine is
looking for. Otherwise we may divide the General
Assembly into many, many categories and then have
Israel evade its responsibility and ignore all the
measures that we are trying to achieve in this
Assembly.
I therefore join the representative of Palestine in
putting the draft resolution that was negotiated between
Palestine and the European Union, with the
participation of many other countries, to the vote first.
The President: It is my understanding that, in the
event that the General Assembly is presented with two
different proposals, it should obviously vote on the
proposal that was presented first. I am saying that that
is my understanding. That is what it is in the rules of
procedure. Representatives may read it.
I call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Shaaban (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly and Conference Management):
Rule 91 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly reads as follows:
“If two or more proposals relate to the same
question, the General Assembly shall, unless it
decides otherwise, vote on the proposals in the
order in which they have been submitted. The
General Assembly may, after each vote on a
proposal, decide whether to vote on the next
proposal.”
It is the Secretariat’s view that the meaning of
“unless it decides otherwise” here gives rise to two
options: either to vote in accordance with the proposals
made or, if that is challenged, to vote on which
proposal is to be voted on first.

5

A/ES-10/PV.36

Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
really must acknowledge that there is some confusion
because we are being asked to decide on a new draft
resolution that we are not familiar with and we do not
really understand whether it is Egypt or the European
Union that is presenting it. We do not have a text. With
all due respect, I think that there is some confusion
here.
The only draft resolution on which there is clarity
on what we are discussing and that includes a revision
that has been circulated is, to my understanding, that of
Ecuador. Now, I would like to ask for a few minutes,
because clearly Ecuador cannot take a decision on a
draft resolution that it had presented with the
agreement of other countries, which have not expressed
their opinions on the issue.
Thus, Mr. President, I would request that you
give us at least a few minutes. Ecuador makes this
request so that we can consult the other countries that
are sponsoring this draft resolution together with
Ecuador.
With regard to the draft resolution of which the
representative of Egypt is speaking, that request is
appropriate, since we are not going to take a decision
on a draft resolution that we are not familiar with or do
not clearly understand where it comes from. In other
words, who is presenting this draft resolution? Where
is it? Not all members have had the opportunity to see
that text, and I think we need the time to do so. Later,
we can focus on the minutiae of procedure, such as
who raised their flags first and so on. But I would like
to remind you, Sir, that as soon as you said the word in
English “withdraw”, Ecuador immediately raised its
flag. In addition, Ecuador will not respond to any kind
of intimidation. I would like to ask with all due
respect, Mr. President, that we be given the time, first
of all, to see the draft resolution that we are supposed
to decide on, with which we are not familiar, that we
have not seen and are not even clear about who
negotiated it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
observations just made by the representative of
Ecuador seem perfectly reasonable to me. I had no idea
that members did not even have the text of the draft
resolution that it is proposed we vote on. In any case, it
appears to me proper that we should take some
10 minutes.

6

Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I think we are a little
overheated here. We are all working in the same
direction in support of the Palestinian people. As we
have already expressed before, what we need here in
the General Assembly, given that the Security Council
adopted resolution 1860 (2009) by 14 votes in favour
with one abstention — with the latter party having
announced in its explanation of vote that it was
supportive of the provisions of the resolution — is
something closer to unanimity.
I am not in dispute with my beautiful lady here,
the Ambassador of Ecuador. We are running on the
same course, but we are running on two different
tracks. There is a confusion about which draft we are
voting on.
So we ask that the Secretariat circulate first the
draft resolution that has been given. The Ambassador
of Ecuador has asked who is sponsoring this draft. This
draft was negotiated between Palestine and the
European Union, and as Palestine is not yet a full
Member State, Egypt is presenting this draft on behalf
of Palestine.
I would second Ms. Espinosa’s request that we
have a 10- or 15-minute break and then we will come
back. I would also request that you, Mr. President, take
that draft first and, pursuant to the text quoted by the
Under-Secretary-General, “unless it decides otherwise”, I
formally move for a vote on that draft unless we reach
a different agreement during this recess, and that we
take this draft as a basis, since it is a draft that is going
to get 180 votes in favour of the Palestinian people. We
believe and we are greatly convinced that this draft is
the best draft to adopt.
We thus accept Ms. Espinosa’s proposal for a
15-minute recess or until this draft is distributed and
until people understand that it contains exactly what is
set down in the Ecuadorean draft. It contains almost
the same language, but within a different context, and
will be found acceptable to everybody in the Assembly.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I would
simply like to say that I think we heard a very moving
statement from the representative of Palestine. France
does not need to present evidence of the efforts it has
made with all its partners in the European Union to
obtain a lasting ceasefire as soon as possible that will
bring peace not only immediately in Palestine and
Gaza, but to the entire region in the future. We should
listen to the Palestinian Ambassador. The Ambassador

09-21257

A/ES-10/PV.36

of Egypt, who has presented the text on behalf of
Palestine, has perfectly summarized our thinking.

The President (spoke in Spanish): That is exactly
what I said half an hour ago.

Mr. President, if you wish to suspend the
meeting, you have the text and you can propose that
the General Assembly vote on the European UnionPalestine-negotiated text. I would like you to do so
very clearly on behalf of France. We could give dozens
of speeches, but I think it is not worth it. It would be
more appropriate to respond forthwith to the request
made by the Ambassador of Palestine and then,
following a brief suspension that would allow all
delegations to obtain the text, which was given to the
Secretariat almost an hour ago, to vote straight away
on the text.

(spoke in English)

Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): I just wanted to
express support once again for the statement made by
the Ambassador of Egypt. Actually, this text is nothing
new and not a mystery; it is your text, Mr. President,
that we have been working with. So I believe that the
basis of this text is very similar to the one
co-sponsored by the Ambassador of Ecuador. But this
text can really attract a consensus, and we have acted
on your instructions to bring the European Union fully
behind it with all its power. Therefore, I hope that after
the break, this text will be taken into consideration.
The President: If this text is so similar to the
other one, why was it necessary?
Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): This
is simply a matter of procedure. People who have much
experience and who have been here for many years
know that a draft resolution cannot be voted upon
when the one it is replacing has not been withdrawn. In
other words, the draft resolution that was formally
introduced and with which everyone is familiar,
including the revision to its operative paragraph 1, is
the one that Ecuador is proposing. We are not just
going to say, “No, here we will vote on the draft
resolution submitted by the European Union, which has
been negotiated with Palestine and other countries”. I
simply want it established that the draft resolution that
was introduced in the first place — I am following rule
84 of the rules of procedure, on voting — is the first
draft resolution, which was introduced with the
revision that was read out by my delegation. Another
draft resolution cannot just appear and then be put to
the vote. Here, we must follow the rules of procedure,
and those rules must be adhered to by all countries,
large and small.

09-21257

Let us not waste any more time, please. I shall
now suspend the meeting for 15 minutes.
The meeting was suspended at 7.45 p.m. and
resumed at 8.15 p.m.
The President: I am sorry, my dear brothers and
sisters, but now the other group has requested a couple
of minutes more, and I therefore suspend the meeting
once again.
The meeting was suspended at 8.15 p.m. and
resumed at 8.25 p.m.
The President: Is there any result to report to the
Assembly?
Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Mr. President, for having given us these
minutes — much less time than was given to the
European Union — to discuss the amendments.
We have conducted consultations with countries
that co-sponsored draft resolution A/ES-10/L.21, as
orally revised by Ecuador, in order to hear the variety
of voices, because we are persuaded that we must come
here in the greatest spirit of cooperation and goodwill
and, above all, thinking of the well-being of the
Palestinian people.
Basically, Ecuador wishes to propose that we
return to the original text. In order to reach an
agreement, Ecuador is willing to withdraw its oral
revision only if this proposal is accepted by Egypt and
the European Union. In other words, we are proposing
to vote on the original draft text as submitted. We are
also proposing to withdraw the revision that Ecuador
submitted with the support of several other countries,
in order to reach the greatest consensus possible and,
of course, heeding the requests of the representative of
Palestine.
That is the position of Ecuador, and of course we
would immediately call for a vote on the original text.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): If I understand my
neighbour correctly, the group of sponsors of the
revision that Ecuador proposed before we suspended
still insist on voting on the original text, but without
the oral revision.

7

A/ES-10/PV.36

In that regard, heeding the appeal of the
representative of Palestine, following the discussions
and informal consultations in which almost all those in
this room have participated and bearing in mind the
Palestinian cause and the need to ensure the largest
possible number of votes in favour of the draft
resolution that I presented, I make a motion, under rule
91 of the rules of procedure, that the draft resolution
contained in document A/ES-10/L.21/Rev.1 be put to
the vote before the draft resolution sponsored by
Ecuador and other countries.
We believe that our draft resolution will garner
180 votes in favour. It is nearly identical to the draft
resolution that the representative of Ecuador is pushing
to the vote. Therefore, we believe that if we wish to
advance the cause of the Palestinian people and to
support an end to the attacks on the Palestinians, the
provision of humanitarian assistance, a lifting of the
blockade and full access to the Palestinian people, our
draft resolution should be put to the vote first. I make a
motion under rule 91 that we proceed to a procedural
vote in that regard.
The President: The General Assembly now has
before it two proposals: the proposal contained in
document A/ES-10/L.21 and the motion by the
representative of Egypt, who has requested that priority
be given to his proposal.
I now give the floor to the Under-Secretary-General
for General Assembly and Conference Management.
Mr. Shaaban (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly and Conference Management): For
the record, rule 91 reads as follows:
“If two or more proposals relate to the same
question, the General Assembly shall, unless it
decides otherwise, vote on the proposals in the
order in which they have been submitted. The
General Assembly may, after each vote on a
proposal, decide whether to vote on the next
proposal.”
In accordance with rule 91, the General Assembly
should first consider the draft resolution contained in
document A/ES-10/L.21. However, in the light of the
request by the representative of Egypt, the Assembly
will first take a decision on his request for priority.
The President: I will first put to the vote the
motion made by the representative of Egypt that

8

priority be given to his proposal, contained in
document A/ES-10/L.21/Rev.1.
We shall now begin the voting process. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Belarus,
Belgium,
Benin,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Dominica, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sri
Lanka,
Swaziland,
Sweden,
Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, Cuba, Ecuador,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Malaysia,
Nicaragua, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)
Abstaining:
Barbados, Belize, Bhutan, Botswana, Côte
d’Ivoire, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, India, Jamaica,
Lesotho, Myanmar, Nepal, Niger, Pakistan, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South
Africa, Trinidad and Tobago, Yemen

09-21257

A/ES-10/PV.36

The motion was adopted by 112 votes to 10, with
20 abstentions.

Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

[Subsequently, the delegations of Malta and
Tunisia advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour, and the delegation of
Djibouti advised the Secretariat that it had
intended to abstain.]

Against:
Israel, Nauru, United States of
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

The President: I will now put to the vote the
proposal by the representative of Egypt, contained in
document A/ES-10/L.21/Rev.1. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Gambia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of

09-21257

Viet

Nam,

America,

Abstaining:
Australia, Canada, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Nigeria,
Syrian Arab Republic
Draft resolution A/ES-10/L.21/Rev.1 was adopted
by 142 votes to 4, with 8 abstentions (resolution
ES-10/18).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Djibouti advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour; the delegation of Micronesia advised that
it had intended to vote against; and the delegation
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela advised
that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: I call on the representative of
Cape Verde on a point of order.
Mr. Lima (Cape Verde): I have a problem here. I
voted, but my vote was not registered. When the
Secretariat came to me, they told me that I had not paid
my arrears and that that is why the name of my country
does not appear on the board. I would like to ask the
Secretariat why my name does not appear. I do not
understand, because I did not receive the necessary
letter from the Secretariat. Bangladesh, Afghanistan
and the Comoros, which are on the same list as I am
on, appear on the board. I do not understand. The
Secretariat must explain to me why Cape Verde cannot
vote while others that have not paid, like me, are
voting. Something is wrong in the Secretariat, because
I am sure we have paid.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Shaaban (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly and Conference Management): On
16 January in the afternoon, the President read from his
notes as follows,
“Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that, since the issuance of document
A/ES-10/438, Afghanistan has made the necessary
payment to reduce its arrears below the amount
specified in Article 19 of the Charter.”

9

A/ES-10/PV.36

It was decided that the Assembly took note of that.
In a letter dated 13 January 2009 from the
Secretary-General to the President of the General
Assembly, contained in document A/ES-10/438, there
is a list of countries. Wherever there is an asterisk, it is
explained at the end of the document that in resolution
63/4, the General Assembly decided that the Central
African Republic, the Comoros, Guinea-Bissau,
Liberia, Sao Tome and Principe, Somalia and
Tajikistan should be permitted to vote in the Assembly
until the end of its sixty-third session.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Gambia on a point of order.
Mr. Faati (Gambia): My delegation requested the
floor in order to raise a point of order. It relates to the
fact that we voted on the draft resolution contained in
document A/ES-10/L.21/Rev.1, which was based on the
original draft resolution submitted by Ecuador. I think
we set a precedent today which is not a good one in
that a revised draft resolution has superseded an
original. That is not the way things are done. In order
to bring forth a revised draft resolution, a delegation
must be a sponsor of the original. That did not happen
in the case here. I just want to register that it is not a
good precedent and I think that should be noted in
future.
The President:
of Palestine.

I

call

on

the

observer

Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I want to thank
members for succeeding in what they wanted to
accomplish — an almost unanimous vote to pressure
Israel to comply with resolution 1860 (2009),
beginning with an immediate ceasefire that will stop
the killing of our people and that will, of course, be
followed immediately by total withdrawal from the
occupied Gaza Strip.
We want to thank everyone, even our brothers
and sisters who abstained. They abstained not because
they objected to the contents of the draft resolution.
They are part of the consensus in applying the pressure
on Israel in order to isolate it so that it will comply
with resolution 1860 (2009).
This evening I want to thank — on behalf of the
Palestinian people and our brave people in Gaza —
each and every representative who worked to
accomplish this very powerful political message. And
if Israel does not comply, we are going to do other

10

things. We will go and knock on the door of the
Security Council with a resolution based on Chapter
VII, and we expect the Assembly to be with us, help us
and support us until we bring an end to the aggression,
achieve a total withdrawal of Israeli forces from Gaza
and the siege against our people in Gaza is lifted and
all border crossings are opened, in accordance with the
Agreement on Movement and Access, especially the
border crossings with Israel, because Israel is the one
that is imposing a blockade against our people. We
shall prevail with the support of the Assembly.
Tonight the Assembly has sent a very
encouraging message to the brave people of Gaza in
their fight to stop the aggression immediately. I wish to
thank the Assembly and to congratulate members for
accomplishing what they wished to accomplish.
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to make statements in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): This is to specify
without further explanation that Venezuela was
convinced that most members of the Assembly would
vote in favour of the withdrawal of Israeli forces from
the Gaza Strip. In that case, and having noted that there
was a majority in favour of the draft resolution
submitted by Egypt, which changes the draft resolution
submitted by the President in some parts, I would like
it placed on record that the delegation of Venezuela
abstained from voting given the circumstances.
Mr. Moreno Fernández (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation would have preferred the
formula originally proposed by the delegation of
Ecuador. In Cuba’s opinion, that formula was closest to
the position adopted by the countries of the
Non-Aligned Movement with regard to the dreadful
situation in Gaza. In fact, we would have preferred the
original text submitted by you, Sir. For that reason, we
voted against giving priority to the draft resolution
presented by the representative of Egypt. Nevertheless,
despite those preferences and to demonstrate our
continuing solidarity with the Palestinian people and
with the cause of Palestine and our firm condemnation
of the continuing aggression by Israel in the Gaza
Strip, we voted in favour of resolution ES-10/18.
Finally, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, and to
thank you for your unstinting efforts and your
dedication, which have been evident in all of the

09-21257

A/ES-10/PV.36

actions taken by the General Assembly over the past
few days.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to express my delegation’s congratulations to you,
Sir, on your hard work and your great leadership. We
admire your noble sense of responsibility and
sympathy for the innocent people of Gaza. What you
have done so far is indeed a true reflection of the vote
of conscience and public opinion. It was our sincere
hope that, under your exemplary leadership, this
meeting could adopt a stronger resolution condemning
the criminal acts of the Israeli regime and forcing an
immediate end to that aggression and massacre in order
to compensate for the inadequate action of the Security
Council on the matter.
Regrettably, since the adopted resolution was not
what it expected, my delegation abstained in the
voting. I would like to reiterate the principled position
of my Government and my people that the root cause
of the current situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, especially in the Gaza Strip, is the occupation
of that territory by the illegitimate Israeli regime. In
our view, as long as that problem is not addressed and
the Palestinian people are not able to fully exercise
their right to self-determination, any hope for durable
peace and stability in the region will be no more than a
futile wish.
Ms. Eilon Shahar (Israel): Many speakers during
this open and endless tenth emergency special session
have excelled at rhetoric, but less at reality. In reality,
it is known that Israel engaged in this conflict against
its will. You, members of the General Assembly, know
well that Israel had no choice, as you would not either
if the lives of your people were at stake. You well
know that you would not place a mere resolution over
the heads of your men, women and children to protect
them from unrelenting terrorist attacks.
Furthermore, as we stated at the opening of this
session, Article 12, paragraph 1, of the United Nations
Charter prohibits the General Assembly from making
recommendations as the Security Council remains
actively seized of the matter.
In addition, the resolution before us is deeply
flawed and flagrantly one-sided. It makes no mention
that Hamas and its terrorist cronies launched thousands
of rockets and mortars at one million Israeli civilians.
It makes no mention that Hamas uses schools,
hospitals, mosques and civilians’ homes to hide

09-21257

weapons and launch attacks. It makes no mention of
Hamas’s enormous efforts to smuggle sophisticated
arms into the Gaza Strip. These and other omissions
make this resolution irrelevant, as it clings to a
distorted reality.
Sadly, there is an ever-widening gap between
what happens in the real world and the reaction here,
on First Avenue. This is a deeply troubling discrepancy
which calls into question the relevance of our work and
the effectiveness of our response. While this body
considers a resolution steeped in prejudice, Israel and
many others in the region are actively engaged in
seeking to bring about conditions on the ground that
will enable a solution.
While many in this Hall find great satisfaction in
empty denunciations, true progress is made on the
ground. Terrorism is a destructive, evil plague.
Fighting terrorism is a value enshrined by the United
Nations and the entire international community. As
such, Israel expects support against the relentless
terrorist onslaught of Hamas and other groups. If the
General Assembly truly desires to unite for peace, and
not only in name, let us unite for peace and unite
against terrorism.
For that reason I just stated, we find the
resolution before us procedurally and substantively
flawed, and that is why we voted against it.
Mr. McNee (Canada): Canada continues to call
for an immediate, sustainable and durable ceasefire.
We support this resolution’s call for compliance with
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) as a means to
achieve such a ceasefire. However, Canada regrets that
the resolution fails clearly to recognize that rocket
attacks by Hamas led to the current crisis. The rocket
attacks must stop. For this reason, Canada abstained in
the vote on the resolution.
Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): I speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU).
The European Union has tonight voted in favour
of the resolution supporting an immediate ceasefire in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1860
(2009). The European Union notes that the resolution
we have just adopted does not contain explicit
reference to the issue of illegal arms smuggling and
underlines that for a sustainable solution, this issue will
need to be addressed. The EU stands ready to
contribute to efforts in that regard.

11

A/ES-10/PV.36

Mr. Wolff (United States of America): As we
stated earlier today, the United States is deeply
concerned about the situation in Gaza and southern
Israel. This is a very serious matter, which is now best
dealt with through active diplomatic efforts on the
ground, including the Egyptian initiative.
The basic elements for a durable ceasefire have
been laid out. The United Nations has spoken through
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009), and the
Secretary-General is in the region right now, working
to find a solution and ensure the resolution’s
implementation.
Other initiatives that complement and support
these efforts are in play as well, including the
memorandum of understanding regarding the
prevention of the supply of arms and related materials
to terrorist groups, signed today in Washington, D.C.,
between the United States and Israel. That is an effort
to end the direct cause of the current hostilities: the
flow of weapons and explosives into Gaza.
A separate General Assembly resolution is neither
necessary nor helpful — and certainly not an
unbalanced one that is silent on the issue of Hamas
rocket attacks. All efforts should be focused on the real
work of implementing Security Council resolution
1860 (2009) in the region, so that we can then turn
again back to the goals of Security Council resolution
1850 (2008) — that is, a lasting peace based on an
enduring commitment to mutual recognition, freedom
from violence, incitement and terror and the two-State
solution, building upon previous agreements and
obligations.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic): Allow me,
first of all, Mr. President, to commend your noble
efforts and your noble mission. I think you have
conducted our tough deliberations with a very strong
faith in justice. If there is a mistake in the outcome of
our deliberations, it is not yours.
I think that the main reason for calling for and
convening the resumption of this urgent session was
that we wanted to handle the paralysis created by the
Security Council in dealing with the suffering of the
Palestinian people. Unfortunately, here we are,
deforming the purpose of the convocation of this
session. Here we are, repeating the same inertia from
which the Security Council suffers. The Council
adopted its resolution 1860 (2009) without providing it
with any teeth or any mechanism of enforcement.

12

The majority that voted in favour of today’s draft
resolution is not the one that the Palestinian people in
Gaza need. This majority is not the one that the
representative of Palestine called for before we
proceeded to the vote. This majority is not the one we
were all aspiring to get after these tough deliberations,
wishing to render service — a minor service — to the
Palestinian people suffering in Gaza from the
aggressive Israeli bloodshed.
The sponsors of the draft resolution were acting
on the basis of good faith when they decided to go
back to the plenary and bow to your request,
Mr. President, that we find a compromise for the sake
of helping the Palestinian people. Unfortunately, we
found ourselves before the machinery of procedural
manipulation, and the masters of that machinery were
not acting, as we were, on the basis of good faith.
All of that resulted in a vote on something related
to the suffering of the Palestinian people. That is not
what the Palestinian people in Gaza were waiting for.
That is not rendering a service to the Palestinian people
in Gaza. That is precisely serving the Israeli aggression
against the Palestinian people in Gaza. We have just
deformed the meaningful concept of the Charter —
what we call “international legitimacy”.
The representative of Israel has shamefully
criticized the resolution minutes after its adoption.
Everyone here heard what that representative said.
Some people may think that they achieved a victory
tonight. This victory is not good for the Palestinian
people in Gaza. This victory is a repetition of the
paralysis of the Security Council, which runs against
the main conception of holding our session.
Those who voted in favour of this important
resolution have done so thinking that they would
render a service and that they would be able to stop
this aggressive Israeli machinery. But they have not
done so, I am sorry to say. Lamentably, Israel will
neglect and duck this resolution, as they have always
done. You, my colleagues, have given them just enough
time to finish their dirty job against the Palestinian
people in Gaza.
My delegation was led, in spite of itself, to
abstain from voting on a draft resolution that we think
is incapable by nature of helping the Palestinian people
in Gaza, the Palestinian people who need real help
from us, real assistance — not literature, not poetry.

09-21257

A/ES-10/PV.36

Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
First, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for your
patience, for your commitment and for your guidance
and direction in this complex process. I agree with my
colleague from Syria that acting in good faith
sometimes seems not to produce anything in this
Organization.
I would like to explain the vote of Ecuador. We
abstained in the voting on this resolution. That seems
to go against the statement I made this morning on
behalf of the Government and the people of Ecuador in
this very room. Why did we abstain? We abstained
simply because we cannot understand how the States
Members of the United Nations could not agree with
the immediate withdrawal of Israeli military forces
from the territory of Gaza.
We are also truly surprised by the third
preambular paragraph of the draft resolution that we
have just massively approved. In the third preambular
paragraph, we are putting the Israeli victims — eight or
nine in number, perhaps — on the same level as the
Palestinian victims, who number more than 5,000 dead
and wounded, most of them, we know, civilians,
women and children — innocent victims. That is what
the third preambular paragraph says, and a majority of
us in this room have just voted for it.
Since procedural formulas seemed to be used as a
shelter, I agree with a colleague who spoke before me
about the problem of procedure. The representatives of
Egypt and the European Union indicated that the
proposal we voted on this afternoon was virtually
identical to the original proposal presented, so
procedure would have called for voting paragraph by
paragraph. I do not know what would have happened if
the Members of this Organization had had to vote on
the third preambular paragraph.
My delegation would have liked votes on the
paragraphs that were amendments in this draft
resolution that was almost identical to the original text.
I simply want to make this comment and place on
record the issue of procedure.
I would finally like to recall that, the people of
Ecuador are here, and it took the position it took this
afternoon because one essential thing matters to us: the
well-being and the preservation of the lives of the
Palestinian people. We regret having had to abstain,
because everybody knows the position of my
Government, my country and my people.

09-21257

Now that I have made that clear, Mr. President, I
would like to thank you once again for your patience,
guidance and direction, and I would like to regret once
again, as I said, that after my delegation acted in good
faith, trying to return to the original proposal, that was
absolutely ignored by the other side. I regret that, and I
reaffirm our unconditional solidarity with the
Palestinian people.
Mr. Hill (Australia): I wanted to take the floor in
explanation of vote, as we abstained. I would explain
that that abstention should not be misinterpreted.
We strongly support the call in Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009) for an immediate, durable and
fully respected ceasefire. We recognize that this
conflict is profoundly affecting civilians and that it is
vital that diplomatic efforts to find a resolution that
effects a durable ceasefire succeed, and succeed very
soon. We believe that all parties should avoid actions
that could result in unnecessary or increased suffering
on the part of innocent civilians.
While we believe that the draft resolution that we
voted upon was an improvement upon that which was
circulated yesterday, we still did not believe in the end
that it went far enough, because to achieve a durable,
sustainable ceasefire, actions need to be taken that do
not appear in the document that we voted upon. In
particular, to achieve that sustainable ceasefire, rocket
attacks against Israel must cease, and the smuggling of
arms into Gaza also must end.
If that had been included, and if we were
genuinely seeking to take the debate one step beyond
that which we have had to date in looking at what is
necessary to achieve that longer-term and durable
ceasefire, we would have been able to support the
resolution.
In conclusion, I also wanted to say that we are
disturbed by the suggestions of some in this debate that
through this debate success will be achieved in
isolating Israel. Isolating Israel is not a path to peace.
Peace must be made between the parties. Our efforts
must be to bring the parties together to achieve that
peace.
This conflict has demonstrated once again the
vital need for a two-State solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. Australia remains strongly
committed to that objective and urges all efforts
towards it.

13

A/ES-10/PV.36

Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): The Palestinian
cause is an Indonesian cause as well. In fact, for many
Indonesians, myself included, to be Indonesian is to be
Palestinian. Therefore it is with an extremely heavy
heart that today, probably for the first time, Indonesia
has not been able to join the consensus and has not
been able to support a General Assembly resolution on
this issue. Our universal Assembly has historically
always supported the Palestinian cause, and Indonesia
has never failed to either sponsor or initiate such
resolutions and, of course, to support the Palestinian
cause.

That is why we are troubled by this amendment
to your text, Sir. In the third preambular paragraph of
the new text in L.21/Rev.1, we find ourselves, the
General Assembly, incapable of even identifying who
the main perpetrator of this whole situation is, namely
Israel. Of course, every life lost is one life too many. It
goes without saying that one civilian life is not more
important than another civilian life. We condemn and
feel saddened by every civilian life lost, whether
Palestinian or Israeli. But to suggest that there is some
kind of parity — that, we find difficult to accept, with
the greatest humility.

It becomes even more galling for us to find
ourselves in a situation where we are not able to
support this resolution because Indonesia was one of
the main proponents for the convening of this
emergency special session. Therefore we feel it is
incumbent upon us to explain in some way why we
find ourselves in this situation of not being able to
support the resolution that has just been adopted, and
therefore to most clearly express our support for our
Palestinian brothers and sisters.

I know that we in this Assembly always seek
balance and compromise, but there are moments — and
this is one such moment — in which we find ourselves
unable to have that kind of conscience. We felt that
tonight was the time for us to say loud and clear: as our
colleague has said, this is not the Security Council; this
is the General Assembly of the United Nations.

There are moments when we here, working in the
United Nations and the General Assembly, have to
place our moral conscience above anything else. We
have seen your draft resolution, Sir, and we stated on
the first day of our debate that we need more than
simple reaffirmations of existing Security Council
resolutions. Rather, we must build on Council
resolutions. However, out of our greatest respect for
the presidency of the Assembly, we resisted the
temptation to add to the resolution in a way that would
make it easier for us to be able to support it. We did so
out of our respect for the presidency and our wish to
have a consensus.
However, at a late hour, we were presented with
certain amendments, which, I fully understand, had
been worked out extremely diligently by our friends
and brothers in the European Union. But with the
greatest humility and the greatest conscience, my
delegation would have tremendous difficulty
explaining — not to ourselves or to our colleagues in
this room, but to our people back home — how it is
that we are not able, as the Assembly — not the
Security Council, but the Assembly of 190-odd
Member States — to explicitly say to Israel, the
occupying Power: enough is enough, end your violence
and leave Gaza now.

14

As a democratic nation, we are accountable to our
public back home, not simply in this room. We can say
that we are not able to support this resolution, not
because we are not in support of Palestine. On the
contrary, we are so fully 110 per cent in support of
Palestine that we feel that this resolution does not go
far enough in condemning Israel and demanding that
Israel immediately withdraw from occupied Palestinian
territory. That is why I would like to make it absolutely
clear that, in fact, by abstaining today, we are showing
more than ever before that our solidarity is 110 per
cent and totally with the Palestinian people and with
the suffering that they are going through, and that we
demand not a day too soon that the Israelis withdraw
from the Gaza Strip and end the carnage now.
Mr. Loayza Barea (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Mr. President, I would like to express, on
behalf of my delegation, our respect for your
commitment to the cause of the Palestinian people. We
have listened to your vehement call at the reconvening
of this session of the General Assembly. When we
became aware of the text of the draft resolution that
you submitted to the members, we made it clear in
several statements that this text unequivocally reflected
the sentiments of the international community.
Of course, Bolivia would have supported the
proposal made by Ecuador, with the revision included,
because it definitely enriched the text and made it

09-21257

A/ES-10/PV.36

effectively call for the occupying Power to withdraw
immediately from the Gaza Strip.
In any case, a resolution has been adopted.
Bolivia voted in favour of it not because of issues
reflected or that are the result of a procedural matter,
which I hope we will all be able to understand
someday, especially those who are suffering the most
at this time. We voted for it because we believe that the
cause of peace comes first, before any other
consideration and because the Assembly has the
unavoidable duty to speak out as many times as may be
necessary. We believe that this resolution should not be
interpreted as something that will not open the way for
other resolutions. On the contrary, we believe that
ground has been broken and that steps are being taken
towards greater prospects.
We wish to express in particular, with absolute
clarity, our condemnation of the aggressor Power. We
have therefore broken off diplomatic relations with it.
Above all, we wish to reiterate our greatest solidarity
with the cause of the Palestinian people.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica voted in favour of resolution ES-10/18
adopted by the General Assembly this evening. Costa
Rica voted in favour because we believe that it
responds to the most urgent aspects of the dire situation
in the Gaza Strip. However, we regret the fact that the
text does not mention Hamas’s share of responsibility
in the deterioration of the political situation and crisis
in Gaza. We also sought an explicit condemnation of
acts of terrorism perpetrated for some time by some
Palestinian extremists against the territory and civilian
population of Israel.
Costa Rica has already established diplomatic
relations with the Palestinian State, which has the right
to exist and live in peace side by side with Israel within
internationally recognized borders.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
specify that our delegation abstained from voting on
the proposal submitted by the Egyptian delegation for
only one reason, or more specifically, for one
fundamental reason. We would have liked for the text
of the resolution to specifically condemn, as did the
proposal submitted by the Ecuadorian delegation, the
Israeli occupation of the territory of Gaza, and to
demand, in line with our beliefs and the appeals of the
international community, the withdrawal of Israeli

09-21257

forces from the Gaza Strip. My country, Venezuela,
believed that this point could have been accepted at
least by the large majority of delegations from Arab
countries.
I have in my hands a cable, a news wire issued in
Qatar by the news agency Al-Jazeera, which records a
meeting held yesterday by the high authorities of
countries of the Arab League. According to the wire,
that major high-level meeting, which was even
attended by Heads of State, approved, “a strong
condemnation of Israel, and calls on Israel to withdraw
from the Gaza Strip”.
Venezuela believed in good faith that this matter
would be welcomed by most delegations represented in
this forum. We were convinced, as a matter of fact, that
only Israel, the occupying Power, and its closest allies
would object to it. It seemed unthinkable, however,
that delegations of countries of the Arab League could
disagree with the fact that we had to call for an
immediate withdrawal of Israel from the occupied
Palestinian territories.
We do not understand — and it pains me to say
this — why that demand, which, I repeat, was
overwhelmingly supported by the international
community, especially the Arab-Islamic world, was not
adopted by the majority of members at this meeting.
Given those circumstances, my delegation reiterates its
unwavering support for the Palestinian people, their
self-determination and their will to attain a free,
independent and sovereign country guided by selfdetermination. You can be certain, Mr. President, that
Venezuela will continue to act in solidarity with the
Palestinian people and its cause, which is also the
cause of the people of Venezuela.
For that very reason, although we would have
liked the draft resolution submitted by the Ecuadorian
delegation to address other matters, we think the
document submitted by our President, who deserves
our deepest respect, essentially reflected the majority
sentiment in this forum. The only amendment,
presented by the Ecuadorian delegation with the
support and sponsorship of Venezuela, among others,
was the demand that the occupying Power, Israel,
withdraw immediately from the Gaza Strip. Resolution
ES-10/18 does not address that issue, which we feel to
be essential because it will not be possible to attain
lasting peace in the Middle East while the occupying
Power remains entrenched and committing its crimes

15

A/ES-10/PV.36

of genocide and against humanity. Therefore, and with
great pain, we abstained for the reasons just mentioned.
We are certain that the Palestinian people, the
Arab peoples and the peoples of the world share the
sentiment that the occupying Power, Israel, must
withdraw from the Gaza Strip. In that regard, we
reiterate that the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
abstained from supporting the resolution for the above
reasons alone.
The President: Before proceeding further, I
would like to announce that those delegations whose
votes have not been accurately reflected on the board
are now invited to approach the Secretariat at the
voting table to inform it of their intended vote.
We are about to close the list of speakers now.
Mr. Belkheir (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): We pay tribute to your humanity and your
nobility, Mr. President, as well as to your efforts to
support the just cause of people who have been killed
and had their land occupied. We have felt that
sentiment fully reflected, Sir, in your statements and in
your very courageous stand and your voice, which has
been resounding since the first day.
My country voted in favour of resolution
ES-10/18. However, we would have liked to see it
more firm and more in line with the disaster on the
ground and the killing of the Palestinian people in
Gaza. However, we realize that it is difficult to do
more than that while maintaining the equilibrium of the
international order within the Organization. We are
aware of that fact. Nonetheless, this minimal resolution
is acceptable to my country.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We
express our deep appreciation for the efforts you have
personally undertaken, Mr. President, to encourage the
General Assembly to adopt resolution ES-10/18 in
order to express solidarity with the Palestinian people
and to condemn the illegal Israeli actions in the Gaza
Strip, particularly and more generally on Palestinian
occupied lands.
Like many other delegations, we would have
preferred more robust language condemning the Israeli
aggression in the Gaza Strip and calling for an
unconditional withdrawal by Israel from the Gaza
Strip. However, in response to the appeal made by the
brotherly Palestinian delegation, we chose to vote in
favour of the resolution. We did so because it was

16

supported by the greatest possible number of Member
States and in order to ensure that it would accompany
the diplomatic efforts and initiatives under way in the
region to achieve an immediate ceasefire and an
immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Israeli
forces from Gaza.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I requested the floor to
express to you, Mr. President, our sincere appreciation
and thanks for your swift action after Israel launched
its aggression against Gaza. Your decision to reconvene
the tenth emergency special session at the end of last
week — perhaps on the very day that Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009) was adopted — greatly
facilitated the adoption of that resolution. Your tireless
efforts also resulted in the draft resolution that we, the
representative of Palestine and all other representatives
here used as a basis for the resolution that we have
adopted today.
In that regard, I would also like to thank all those
who voted in favour of the resolution and even those
who abstained, and to express my sincere appreciation
for my neighbour the representative of Ecuador and the
other sponsors. All of us are in the same boat and have
had the same goal. This resolution is not a victory by
some over others; it is a victory for all of us.
I would just like to address a number of points
that have been made about the resolution. With regard
to the third preambular paragraph, it is very clear in
expressing grave concern about the developments on
the ground since the adoption of resolution 1860
(2009). In no way does it equate the aggressor and the
victims, because it states, “especially following the
intensified military operations in the Gaza Strip” —
which are not intensified military operations carried
out by the Palestinian people against themselves in the
Gaza Strip — “causing heavy casualties among
civilians, including children and women” — and here
comes a very important issue — “and the shelling of
United Nations headquarters, hospitals, media premises
and public infrastructure”. The Palestinians did not
shell hospitals, media premises or United Nations
headquarters. It is quite clear from the language of the
resolution exactly who is being addressed. The last
sentence of this paragraph, which comes from
resolution 1860 (2009) itself, had to be preserved in
order to maintain the required balance.
Those who say we are opposed to the withdrawal
of the forces from Gaza should look at operative

09-21257

A/ES-10/PV.36

paragraph 1, which uses the word “demands”. The
Security Council resolution uses the phrase “stresses
the urgency of and calls for”. Demanding something is
very different from calling for something.
In that connection, what is being called for is a
ceasefire. In order to reach the stage of a full
withdrawal of Israeli forces from the Gaza Strip, we
must first have a ceasefire. How can we ask forces to
withdraw if we do not have a ceasefire? We are
working on many fronts in that regard. As everyone
here is aware, Egypt is working tirelessly day and night
on negotiations between the two sides, and we are
getting very close. I am sure that this will be followed
by a withdrawal of forces from Gaza.
Egypt, like many Heads of State and Government
of the Arab world, did not attend the conference held
for leaders yesterday, because there was no quorum for
the meeting. However, it was attended by other leaders
from outside the Arab world and even by the
representatives of some factions. I have not committed
myself to any statement arising from that meeting,
because I did not attend it. It was a very important
meeting attended by very distinguished persons; but we
were not a party to it. So I regret to respond to my
colleague and friend the representative of Venezuela
that what took place yesterday was not an Arab summit

conference, but side consultations among Heads of
State and Government, eminent personalities, a number
of others from outside the Arab world and
representatives of factions of the Palestinian people
known to all those here. They were consultations on
what is to be done.
Therefore, let us concentrate on what needs to be
done on the ground. The issue here is not whether to
adopt a resolution by the Security Council or the
General Assembly. Let us concentrate on regional and
international efforts to put everything in perspective
and achieve a ceasefire first and then, immediately
after that, a withdrawal.
The President: I know we are all tired. I thank
everyone for sticking it out. But I also would be less
than frank if I did not say that, in addition to being
very tired, I am very sad and disappointed. We are in
far worse shape than I thought. Our brother from Egypt
said we are all in the same boat, and that is for sure.
We are all in the same boat, but we will never make it
if we do not act in a more decisive and affirmative
manner.
In accordance with the terms of paragraph 6 of
resolution ES-10/18, the tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly is adjourned.
The meeting rose at 9.50 p.m.

09-21257

17
