IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

7. Decides that the Special Committee shall accept the
participation of observers of Member States, including in
the meetings of its working groups;
8. Invites Governments to submit or to bring up to
date, if they deem it necessary, their observations and proposals, in accordance with General Assembly resolution
3499 (XXX);
9. Requests the Secretary-General to render all assistance to the Special Committee;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, on the
basis of the outline elaborated by the Special Committee
and in the light of the views expressed in the course of the
discussions in the Sixth Committee and in the Special
Committee, a draft handbook on the peaceful settlement
of disputes between States, and to report to the Special
Committee at its session in I 985 on the progress of work,
before submitting to it the draft handbook in its final form,
with a view to its approval at a later stage;
11. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report
on its work to the General Assembly at its fortieth session;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Report of the Special
Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on
the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization".
99th plenary meeting
13 December I 984

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2837 (XXVI) of 17 December
1971 on the rationalization of the procedures and organization of the General Assembly,
Having considered the conclusions of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization contained in
paragraph 151 of its report on the work of the session it
held in 1984, 39
Conscious of the need to discharge in the most efficient
manner the functions incumbent upon it under the Charter
of the United Nations,
I. Approves the conclusions of the Special Committee
on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization as set forth in the
annex to the present resolution;
2. Decides that the conclusions referred to in paragraph
1 above shall be reproduced as an annex to the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
99th plenary meeting
13 December 1984

ANNEX
Conclusions of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations
and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization concerning the
rationalization of the procedures of the General Assembly
I. The agenda of the sessions of the General Assembly should be simplified as much as possible by grouping or merging related items, after consultation and with the agreement of the delegations concemed. 43

43 The view was expressed that the agreement of the delegations concerned
was not an essential condition.
44 The view was expressed that this recommendation was not intended to
have any financial implications whatsoever and was approved subject to that
condition.

293

2. Specific items should be referred, where relevant, to other United
Nations organs or to specialized agencies. The right of States to request that
specific items be discussed in the General Assembly should remain
unimpaired.
3. The recommendation in paragraph 28 of annex V to the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, according to which the Assembly should
ensure, as far as possible, that the same questions, or the same aspects of a
question, are not considered by more than one Main Committee, should be
more fully implemented, except when it would be helpful for the Sixth
Committee to be consulted on the legal aspects of questions under consideration by other Main Committees.
4. The General Committee should play more fully its role under rule 42
of the rules of procedure and paragraphs I and 2 of General Assembly decision 34/401, reviewing periodically the work of the Assembly and making
the necessary recommendations.
5. The Chairmen of the Main Committees should take the initiative, 10
the light of past experience, to propose the grouping of similar or related
items and the holding of a single general debate on them.
6. The Chairmen of the Main Committees should propose to the Committee the closing of the list of speakers on each item at a suitably early
stage.
7. Agreed programmes of work should be respected. To this end, meetings should start at the scheduled time and the time allotted for meetings
should be fully utilized.
8. The officers of each Main Committee should review periodically the
progress of work. In case of need, they should propose appropriate measures to ensure that the work remains on schedule.
9. Negotiation procedures should be carefully selected to suit the particular subject-matter.
I 0. The Secretariat should facilitate informal consultations by providing adequate conference services. 44
11 The mandate of subsidiary organs should be carefully defined in
order to avoid overlapping and duplication of work. The General Assembly should also review periodically the usefulness of its subsidiary organs.
12.

Resolutions should be as clear and succinct as possible.

39 /89.

Draft Declaration on Social and Legal Principles relating to the Protection and Welfare of
Children, with Special Reference to Foster
Placement and Adoption Nationally and
Internationally

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/167 of 16 December 1981,
whereby it decided, inter a/ia, that appropriate measures
should be taken to finalize the draft Declaration on Social
and Legal Principles relating to the Protection and Welfare
of Children, with Special Reference to Foster Placement
and Adoption Nationally and Internationally,
Noting, in this connection, that the work of the Commission on Human Rights on the draft Convention on the
Rights of the Child is soon to be completed,
Bearing in mind the reports of the Secretary-General of
8 September 1980, 45 19 October 1982,46 6 October 1983 47
and 10 September 1984, 48 containing the views of Member
States on the text of the draft Declaration,
Fully aware of the sovereign right of Governments to
define their national and international policies in accordance with their legal systems as regards the protection and
welfare of children, including foster placement, adoption
and guardianship, as appropriate,
Bearing in mind the existence of different national legislation in the field of the protection and welfare of children,
Recognizing that it is the responsibility of Governments
to determine the adequacy of their national services for
45 A/35/336.
46 A/37/146.
47 A/38/389 and Add.1-3.
48 A/391442 and Add. I.

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

294

children and to recognize those children whose needs are
not being met by existing services.
Noting the usefulness of regional co-operation in matters
regarding the well-being of children,
Recognizing that the best child welfare is good family
welfare and that, when family care is unavailable or inappropriate, substitute family care should be considered, in
conformity with national legislation,
Convinced that adoption of the draft Declaration will
promote the well-being of children with special needs,
I. Appeals to Member States representing different
legal systems to undertake consultations on the draft Declaration on Social and Legal Principles relating to the Protection and Welfare of Children, with Special Reference to
Foster Placement and Adoption Nationally and Internationally, with a view to finding out the extent to which
they would join the common endeavour of completing the
work thereon;
2. Also appeals to the Member States that will take part
in the consultations to submit, before the forty-first session
of the General Assembly, a paper containing their
common conclusions on the matter, including, if appropriate, their suggestions as to the procedure and forum for
future work;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the
paper referred to in paragraph 2 above to Member States
with a view to obtaining their comments thereon, including their views as to the procedure and forum for future
work, and to submit a report to the General Assembly at
its forty-first session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Draft Declaration on
Social and Legal Principles relating to the Protection and
Welfare of Children, with Special Reference to Foster
Placement and Adoption Nationally and Internationally".
99th plenary meeting
13 December I 984

39/90.

Review of the multilateral treaty-making
process

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that multilateral treaties are an important means of ensuring co-operation among States and an
important primary source of international law,
Conscious, therefore, that the process of elaboration of
multilateral treaties, directed towards the progressive
development of international law and its codification,
forms an important part of the work of the United Nations
and of the international community in general,
Aware of the responsibility which active involvement in
the process of multilateral treaty-making places on
Governments,
Convinced that optimum use should be made of the
finite resources available for the elaboration of multilateral
treaties,
Conscious of the desirability of consolidating and disseminating information on the procedures followed by the
United Nations in the preparation and formulation of the
text of multilateral treaties,
49 A/35/312 and Corr. I.
50 A/35/312/Add.l and 2 and Add.2/Con I
5 I A/36/553.
52 A/37/444.
53 A/36/553/Add. l and 2 and A J7 444 Add. I

Taking into account that in certain important and specialized areas interested parties have developed methods
of negotiation of proven and continued value,
Bearing in mind the important contribution of the International Law Commission to the preparation of multilateral treaties during the past thirty-six years,
Aware that the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee has been reviewing certain aspects of multilateral
treaty-making,
Having taken note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the review of the multilateral treaty-making process
submitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session 49 and of the views of Governments and of the International Law Commission contained in the addenda
thereto, 50
Having taken note also of the subsequent reports of the
Secretary-General submitted to the General Assembly at
its thirty-sixth 51 and thirty-seventh 52 sessions and of the
replies and observations made by Governments and international organizations, 53
Having considered the statements made at the current
session during the debate in the Sixth Committee, 54
Noting that the Working Group on the Review of the
Multilateral Treaty-making Process, first established in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 36/112 of
I O December 1981, concluded its mandate, and taking
note of the report of the Working Group, together with its
final document on the review of the multilateral treatymaking process, 55
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Working Group on
the Review of the Multilateral Treaty-making Process for
the completion of its mandate and for its final document;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate to all
States Members the final document of the Working Group
on the Review of the Multilateral Treaty-making Process;
3. Recommends to all States which are considering the
initiation of a multilateral treaty within the framework of
the United Nations to give consideration to the procedures
set out in the final document of the Working Group on the
Review of the Multilateral Treaty-making Process;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to prepare, for
information and possible use by Governments, a handbook on multilateral treaty-making as described in paragraph 18 of the final document of the Working Group on
the Review of the Multilateral Treaty-making Process, to
be made available within two years;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To examine, together with the specialized and
related agencies, and other international organizations
exercising depositary functions, the feasibility and financial implications of consolidating, in a similar way to the
volumes entitled Multilateral Treaties Deposited with the
Secretary-General, 56 the information regarding depositary
functions performed by these international organizations;
(b) To hold consultations on the feasibility and financial implications of publishing, at regular intervals, consolidated information regarding depositary functions performed by Governments;
(c) To examine the regulations in force for giving effect
to Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations, with a
view to their possible up-dating;
54 See Offic,al Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Sixth
( i,mmittee, 59th, 60th and 64th meetings.
,s A/C.6/39/L.12. annex.
56 ST /LEG/SER.E/2 and Add. I.
