52

General AHembly-Twenty-tbird Seuion

4. Confirms the views of the International Conference
on Human Rights, held at Teheran, which recognized
and vigoro~sly supported the legitimacy of the struggle
of the peoples and patriotic liberation movements in
southern Africa and in colonial Territories, in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions;
5. Further confirms the decision taken by the International Conference on Human Rights to recognize the
right of freedom fighters in southern Africa and in
colonial Territories to be treated, when captured, as
prisoners of war under the Geneva Conventions of
1949 ;40
6. Appeals to all Stcrt:es and organizations dedicated
to the ideals of freedom, independence and peace to
continue to give political, moral and material assistance
to peoples struggling against all forms of racial discrimination and colonialism;
7. Calls 1ipon all States to sever all relations with
South Africa, Portugal and the illegal minority regime
in Southern Rhodesia and to refrain scrupulously from
giving any military or economic assistance to these
regimes;
8. Requests the United Nations organs and the
specialized agencies concerned to continue to give all
appropriate assistance to the patriotic freedom movements in colonial Territories and in southern Africa
am! to keep this matter under constant review;
9. Further requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with Member States, to prepare a programme
for the celebration in 1971 of the International Year for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

2447 (XXIII). Education of youth in the respect
for human rights and fundamental
freedoms
The General Assembly,
Noting resolution XX on education of youth in the
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
adopted on 12 May 1968 by the International Conference on Human Rights, 41 as well as paragraph 17
of the Proclamation of Teheran, 42
Noting also Economic and Social Council resolutions
1353 (XLV) and 1354 (XLV) of 2 August 1968 on
youth participation in international co-operation and
on programmes of international action relating to
youth,
Recalling the Declaration on the Promotion among
Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and
Understanding between Peoples proclaimed by the
General Assembly on 7 December 1965,
Aware of the aspirations expressed by large sectors
of the young generation for a more effective protection of human dignity in this age of great scientific,
technological and cultural achievements and of the desire
of youth to have its full share in the accomplishment of
the major humanitarian demands of this century,
C onscio11s of the importance of extending to young
people an education in the spirit of the most noble
humanitarian ideals of mankind and therefore convinced
40 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), Nos. 970-973.
41 See Final Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),

p. 15.
42 Ibid., p. 3.

that States, the United Nations and other international
organizations, youth organizations and society in general
should undertake continuous and permanent efforts to
that effect,
Convinced that the enthusiasm, energy and creative
ability of the young could be a major factor in the
spiritual and material advancement of all peoples,
the universal promotion of human rights and worldwide economic and social development,
Considering that the United Nations and the specialized agencies, in particular the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, within their
spheres of competence, could provide useful channels
through which the deeply felt concerns of youth could
be better understood and studied and constructive
confrontations between spokesmen of the various generations could be harmoniously conducted,
Taking note of the appeal made by the International
Conference on Human Rights to States to take all
appropriate measures to prepare youth for, and stimulate
its interest in, the creation of a better society,
1. Endorses the appeal made by the International
Conference on Human Rights to States to ensure that
all means of e.ducation should be employed so that youth
may grow up and develop in a spirit of respect for
human dignity and equal rights of man without discrimination as to race, colour, language, sex or faith;
2. Further endorses the recommendations made by
the International Conference on Human Rights, in its
resolution XX, to States, international organizations
and youth organizations ;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
invite the Commission on Human Rights, in co-operation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, to study the question of
the education of youth all over the world with a view
to the development of its personality and the strengthening of its respect for the rights of man and fundamental
freedoms;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange from
time to time for an exchange of information on action
taken by States in their efforts to ensure that young
people are educated and brought up in a spirit of
respect for human rights everywhere and given the
opportunity of playing their part in the implementation
and protection of human rights ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to organize,
within the framework of the programme of advisory
services in the field of human rights and in co-operation
with interested Governments, seminars with the participation of persons specially qualified in subjects of
particular concern to youth, including youth leaders;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to .the
General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session on action
taken in implementation of the present resolution.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

2448 (XXIII). Freedom of information
The General Assembly.

H a'l!iny rcqard to article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights which ensures to everyone
the right to freedom of opinion and expression, including freedom to hold opinions without interference and
to seek, receive and impart information and ideas
through any media and regardless of frontiers,

Re,olatiom adopted on the reporb of the Third Committee

Recalling further its resolution 2081 (XX) of 20
December 1965 by which it, inter alia, decided to hasten
the conclusion, among other instruments, of a convention on freedom of information,
Recognizing that freedom of information is indispensable to the enjoyment, promotion and protection of all
the other rights and freedoms set forth in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,
Recalling its .resolutions concerning racism, nazism,
racial discrimination and other similar ideologies,
Recalling also its resolutions and the decisions of
other United Nations bodies regarding the dissemination
of information on the evils of apartheid, racial discrimination and colonialism,
Recalling the deep interest which the United Nations
has shown since 1947 in problems of freedom of information and the various measures, thus far inadequate, which it has taken to promote and safeguard
this freedom,
Mindful that recent technological advances in the
field of telecommunications have, by enormously extending the reach and scope of words, images and
ideas, greatly magnified the potentialities, for good or
evil, of the media of information,
Recognizing that the existence of monopolies in the
media of information is an obstacle to economic and
social progress and prevents the full achievement of
freedom of information,
Believing that the time has come for the international
community to take a renewed interest in measures
calculated to promote freedom of information and to
encourage the responsible exercise of this freedom,
l. Affirms the principle that the primary function
of media of information anywhere in the world is to
gather and impart freely and responsibly objective and
accurate information;
2. Emphasizes that the objectives of freedom of infor~ation could best be attained if everyone had access
to diverse sources of news and opinions ;
3. Recommends to all States and international organizations concerned that freedom of information
should be particularly promoted in the case of dissemination of information on the evils of apartheid
racism, nazism, colonialism and racial discrimination'.,
4. Appeals to the media of information everywhere
to ~o-operate in the strengthening of democratic institutions, the promotion of economic and social progress
and friendly relations among nations, and combating
propaga!1da for war or for natio~al,. racial or religious
hatr~, m accordance with the prmc1ples of the United
Nattons;
5. Draws the attention of the United Nations bodies
and specialized agencies concerned to the continuing
need for assistance in the development and improvement
of information media in the developing countries in
order to enable the latter to share in the benefits flowing
from the modern technological revolution and to redress
the inequality in this field between the developed and the
developing countries ;
6. Commends the existing practice of triennial reporting on freedom of information under the system of
periodic reports on human rights and recommends the
consideration of the _possibility of appointing, as may
be necessary, a special rapporteur on freedom of information to conduct an independent and objective
study of the actual situation and developments in this
field;

SS

. 7. Decides, pending completion of the draft Convention on Freedom of Information, to give priority at its
twenty-fourth session to the consideration and adoption
of the draft Declaration on Freedom of Information
so that it may serve as an inspiration and set a standard
for information media as well as Governments anywhere in the world.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.
2449 (XXDI). l..etlal aid
The General Assembly,
. Noting with appreciation resolution XIX on legal
aid adopted on 12 May 1968 by the International Conference on Human Rights'8 held at Teheran from 22
April to 13 May 1968,
Recalling that the Universal Declaration of Human
Righ~s proclaims that everyone has the right to an
effective r~mC?y by the competent national tribunals
for acts v1olatmg the fundamental rights granted him
by the constitution or by law,
Recalling further that article 14 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights provides in fjrt
tha~ everyone charged with a criminal offence shal be
ent!tled to de~end himself in person or through legal
assistance of his own choosing and to be informed if he
does not.have legal_ assistance! of this right and t~ have
!egal assista,:ice :1-ss1gned t~ him in any case where the
1f!ter~sts of Justice so re9u1re, and without payment by
him m any such case 1f he does not have sufficient
means to pay for it,
Believing that there are cases where the individual's
recourse to competent tribunals to which he has a
right of access is denied or hindered because of the
lack of financial resources to bear the expenses involved
Convinced that the provision of legal aid to thos;
who need it would strengthen the observance and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
l. Recommends Member States :
'
(a) To guarantee the progressive development of
~ol!lprehensive systems of legal aid to those who need
1t m order to protect their human rights and fundamental freedoms ;
( b) To devise stan~ards for_ granting, in appropriate
cases, legal or professional assistance ;
(c) To .consider y,ays a~d. means of defraying the
expen~s involved m prov1dmg such comprehensive
legal aid systems ;
( d) To consider taking all possible steps to simplify
legal procedures so as to reduce the burdens on the
financial and other resources of individuals who seek
legal redress ;
( ~) To ~ncoura~e co-operation among appropriate
bodies makmg available competent legal assistance to
those who need it;
2. Requests the Secretary-General in consultation
with the appropriate United Nations o~gans specialized
agencie~ and other intergovernmental organ; concerned,
to provide the necessary resources, within the limits of
the programme of advisory services in the field of
huJ?lan rights, to facilitate expert and other technical
ass1~taf!~e to Member States seeking to extend the
avatlab1hty of competent legal aid.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.
41 Ibid., p. 15.
