Genenl Assembly-Fortieth Session

246

Recognizing the need to view refugee-related development projects within local and national development
plans,
l. Takes note ofthe report ofthe United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on the implementation of resolution 39/108; 177
2. Commends the measures that the Govemment of
the Sudan is taking to provide material and humanitarian
assistance to refugees in spite of the drought and the serious economic situation it faces;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
the High Commissioner, donor countries and intergovemmental and non-govemmental organizations for their
efforts to assist the refugees in the Sudan;
4. Expresses grave concern at the shrinking resources
available for refugee programmes in the Sudan and the
serious consequences of this situation on the country's
ability to continue to act as host and provide assistance to
the increasing numbers of refugees;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in view ofthe massive and increasing presence of the refugees, shrinking
financia} resources, drought and the serious economic situation in the country, to send, in co-operation and co-ordination with the High Commissioner and relevant specialized agencies, a high-level inter-agency mission to assess
the needs and the magnitude of assistance required by the
programmes for refugees in the Sudan, as well as the
impact of the refugees on the economy and vital public
services, with a view to preparing a comprehensive programme of assistance to be submitted to the intemational
community;
6. A/so requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the
necessary financial and material assistance for the full
implementation of the projects submitted by the Govemment of the Sudan to the Second Intemational Conference
on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, 172 held at Geneva
from 9 to l l July l 984;
7. Appea/s to Member States, the appropriate organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations, intergovemmental and non-govemmental organizations and the
intemational financial institutions to provide the Govemment of the Sudan with the necessary resources for the
implementation of development assistance projects in
regions affected by the presence of refugees;
8. Requests the High Commissioner to continue coordination with the appropriate specialized agencies in
order to consolidate and ensure the continuation of essential services to the refugees in their settlements;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session, through the Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of the
present resolution.
116th p/enary meeting
13 December 1985

40/136.

Emergency assistance to returnees and displaced persons in Chad

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/ 106 of 14 December l 984,
Taking note of the report made by the United Nations
Disaster ReliefCo-ordinator on 26 November 1985 on the
situation of returnees in Chad, 17s
177 N40/589.
178 See Officia/ Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session, Third

Committee, 54th meeting, paras. 6-10.

Deeply concerned by the persistence of the drought,
which is compounding the already precarious food and
health situation in Chad,
Conscious that the large number of voluntary retumees
and displaced persons as a result of the war and the
drought in Chad poses a serious problem of integrating
them into society,
Considering that, in addition to being a land-locked
country and one of the least developed countries, Chad is
placed in a particularly difficult situation by reason of the
war and the drought,
Bearing in mind the many appeals made by the Govemment of Chad, in particular that made on 9 October 1985
to the General Assembly, 179 and by humanitarian organizations regarding the gravity of the food and health situation in Chad,
Reca/ling the urgent appeal made by the General
Assembly during its thirty-ninth session for international
emergency assistance to the voluntary returnees and displaced persons in Chad affl.icted by natural disasters,
l. Endorses the appeals made by the Govemment of
Chad and by humanitarian organizations concerning
emergency assistance to the voluntary retumees and displaced persons in Chad;
2. Reiterates its appeal to all States and intergovemmental and non-govemmental organizations to support by
generous contributions the efforts being made by the Govemment of Chad to assist and resettle the voluntary
retumees and displaced persons;
3. Takes note with satisfaction ofthe action undertaken
by the various bodies of the United Nations system and
the specialized agencies with a view to mobilizing emergency humanitarian assistance to the voluntary retumees
and displaced persons in Chad;
4. Again requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator to mobilize emergency humanitarian assistance to the voluntary retumees and displaced persons in
Chad;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to
report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
116th p/enary meeting
13 December 1985

40/137. Question of human rlghts and fundamental
freedoms in Afghanistan
The General Assembly,
Guided by the principies embodied in the Charter of the
United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 6 the lntemational Covenants on Human Rights 24
and the humanitarian rules set out in the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, 180
Aware of its responsibility to promote and encourage
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali
and resolved to remain vigilant with regard to violations
of human rights wherever they occur,
Emphasizing the obligation of all Govemments to
respect and protect human rights and to fulfi.l the responsibilities they have assumed under various intemational
instruments,
11 9 /bid., Plenary Meetings, 29th meeting. paras. 1-28.
l80 United Nations, Treaty Serie~. vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
