A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/210
17 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 101
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/611)]
49/210.

Need to adopt efficient international measures for the
prevention and eradication of the sale of children,
child prostitution and child pornography

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, 1/ adopted
by the World Conference on Human rights at Vienna in June 1993, which requires
effective measures against female infanticide, harmful child labour, the sale
of children and their organs, child prostitution, child pornography and other
forms of sexual abuse,
Recalling the Convention on the Rights of the Child, adopted by its
resolution 44/25 of 20 November 1989,
Recalling also the World Declaration on the Survival, Protection and
Development of Children 2/ and the Plan of Action for Implementing the World
Declaration on the Survival, Protection and Development of Children in the
1990s, 2/ adopted by the World Summit for Children in New York in September
1990,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 1992/74 of
5 March 1992, 3/ by which the Commission adopted the Programme of Action for
the Prevention of the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child
Pornography,

1/
Report of the World Conference on Human Rights, Vienna,
14-25 June 1993 (A/CONF.157/24 (Part I)), chap. III.
2/

See A/45/625, annex.

3/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1992,
Supplement No. 2 (E/1992/22), chap. II, sect. A.
95-76681

A/RES/49/210
Page 2

Recalling its resolution 48/156 of 20 December 1993,
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolution 1994/90 of
9 March 1994, 4/
Recognizing the enormous efforts made in this field by the United
Nations, particularly the United Nations Children’s Fund, the Committee on the
Rights of the Child and the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human
Rights on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography,
Deeply concerned by the persistence of the practice of the use of
children for prostitution, sexual abuse and other activities, which may also
often constitute exploitation of child labour,
Deeply disturbed by the persistence of the practice of the sale of
children and other practices, which may be linked to related disappearances,
illegal adoptions, abandonment, kidnapping and abductions for commercial
purposes,
Bearing in mind the different causes that influence the emergence and
persistence of these special circumstances, including in particular poverty,
unemployment, hunger, natural disaster, intolerance, exploitation of child
labour and armed conflicts, and their harmful effects on the rights of the
child,
Recognizing the existence of a market which encourages the increase of
such criminal practices against children,
Taking into account the necessity that the Special Rapporteur be
assisted by the cooperation of Governments and provided with information on
this matter,
Considering that it is necessary to redouble efforts at the national and
international levels to promote and protect the rights of children all over
the world,
1.
Welcomes the provisional report of the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights on the sale of children, child prostitution and
child pornography, 5/
2.
Expresses deep concern at the alarming increase in violations of
the rights of the child worldwide, in particular the growing number of
incidents related to the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography;
3.
Urges Governments to continue searching for solutions, as well as
ways and means of enhancing international cooperation to eradicate such
aberrant practices;
4.
Expresses its support for the work of the Special Rapporteur
appointed by the Commission on Human Rights to examine all over the world the
question of the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography,
and urges him to continue his efforts in the discharge of his mandate;
5.
Urges all Governments to collaborate with the Special Rapporteur
and to assist him by providing him with all the requested information;

4/

Ibid., 1994, Supplement No. 4 (E/1994/24), chap. II, sect. A.

5/

A/49/478.

A/RES/49/210
Page 3

6.
Calls upon those States that have not done so to become parties to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and calls upon the States parties
to the Convention to implement national measures aimed at fulfilling the
provisions of the Convention;
7.
Notes the establishment by the Economic and Social Council by its
resolution 1994/9 of 22 July 1994 of an open-ended working group of the
Commission on Human Rights responsible for elaborating, as a matter of
priority and in close cooperation with the Special Rapporteur and the
Committee on the Rights of the Child, guidelines for a possible draft optional
protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children,
child prostitution and child pornography, as well as establishing the basic
measures needed for the prevention and eradication of those abnormal
practices,
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the report of the
working group to Governments, the Special Rapporteur and the intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations concerned;
9.
Invites the Special Rapporteur, within the framework of his
mandate, to continue giving attention to the economic, social, legal and
cultural factors affecting these phenomena;
10.
Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit a provisional report to
the General Assembly at its fiftieth session;
11.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Centre for Human
Rights of the Secretariat is provided, within existing resources, with the
staff and other resources it requires to assist the Special Rapporteur and the
working group in the effective discharge of their mandates;
12.
Decides to consider this question at its fiftieth session under
the item entitled "Promotion and protection of the rights of children".
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
