United Nations

S/PV.9225

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9225th meeting
Monday, 19 December 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kamboj. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mrs. Aguiar Barboza
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Olmedo
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Ms. Kesse Antwi
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Sánchez Kiesslich
Ms. Syed
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Fourteenth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2022/912)
Letter dated 6 December 2022 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2022/919)
Letter dated 12 December 2022 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2022/937)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-75853 (E)
*2275853*

Non-proliferation

S/PV.9225

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. DiCarlo, Mr. Gonzato and Ambassador
Fergal Mythen, Permanent Representative of Ireland,
in his capacity as Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.

Non-proliferation

Ms. DiCarlo: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and
resolution 2231(2015).

Fourteenth report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2022/912)
Letter dated 6 December 2022 from
the Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2022/919)
Letter dated 12 December 2022 from
the Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2022/937)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representatives of Germany and the Islamic
Republic of Iran to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; and His Excellency Mr. Silvio
Gonzato, Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to the following documents: S/2022/912, which
contains the fourteenth report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015); S/2022/919, which contains
the text of a letter dated 6 December 2022 from the
Security Council Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of
the Security Council; and S/2022/937, which contains
the text of a letter dated 12 December 2022 from the
Security Council Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
2/22

19/12/2022

The agreement on the Plan and its endorsement by
the Council demonstrated a unity of purpose among its
participants. Both the Plan and the resolution support
our common objectives of nuclear non-proliferation
and regional security, in a manner that delivers tangible
economic benefits for the Iranian people. Back in June
(see S/PV.9085), I expressed to the Council the hope
that diplomacy would prevail. Unfortunately, despite
the tireless efforts of participants to the Plan and the
United States since April 2021 to resolve remaining
differences, the United States and the Islamic Republic
of Iran have yet to return to the full and effective
implementation of the Plan. Six months later, the space
for diplomacy appears to be shrinking rapidly.
Regrettably, since the Council last met on this issue,
the International Atomic Energy Agency has reported
on the intention of Iran to instal new centrifuges at
the Natanz fuel enrichment plant and to produce more
uranium enriched up to 60 per cent at the Fordow fuel
enrichment plant. While the Agency has not been able to
verify the stockpile of enriched uranium in the country,
it estimates that Iran has now a total enriched uranium
stockpile of more than 18 times the allowable amount
under the JCPOA. This includes worrying quantities of
uranium enriched to 20 and 60 per cent.
The Agency reiterated that Iran’s decision to
cease implementation of its JCPOA nuclear-related
commitments has seriously affected its safeguards
activities. Further, the Agency reported that the decision
of Iran to remove all of the Agency’s equipment for
surveillance and monitoring activities in relation to the
JCPOA has also had detrimental implications for the
Agency’s ability to provide assurance of the peaceful
nature of Iran’s nuclear programme.
Against that backdrop, we once again call upon on
Iran to reverse the steps it has taken since July 2019 that
are not consistent with its nuclear-related commitments
22-75853

19/12/2022

Non-proliferation

S/PV.9225

under the Plan. We also call on the United States to lift
or waive its sanctions as outlined in the Plan and to
extend the waivers regarding the trade in oil with Iran.
It is also important for Iran to address concerns raised
by participants in the Plan and by other Member States
in relation to annex B of resolution 2231 (2015).

manufacturer markings of August 2020 and June
and November 2021 on three of the five jet engines
examined. Finally, we identified the manufacturers of
several subcomponents, one of which informed us that
the two pressure sensors were exported in early 2020.
We continue to trace their complete supply chain.

I will now turn to the restrictive measures
set out in annex B, as outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s fourteenth report on resolution 2231 (2015)
(S/2022/912). First, on the nuclear-related provisions,
no new proposals were submitted to the procurement
channel in the last six months. However, the Council
received eight notifications submitted pursuant to
paragraph 2 of annex B for certain nuclear-related
activities consistent with the Plan.

In this reporting period, we also received letters
from Ukraine, France, Germany, the United Kingdom
and the United States concerning alleged transfers
of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) from Iran to the
Russian Federation in a manner inconsistent with
paragraph 4 of annex B. In their letters, the five
countries also asked that an inspection be conducted.

Secondly, regarding the ballistic-missile-related
provisions, France, Germany, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Israel, the Russian Federation, the United
Kingdom and the United States provided information
to the Secretary-General and the Security Council
concerning two flight tests of space-launch vehicles
conducted by Iran in June and November of this year.
We also received information about a new ballistic
missile unveiled by Iran in September of this year. The
information received reflects divergent views among
those Member States as to whether those launches and
other activities are inconsistent with the resolution.
Thirdly, we examined information related to
paragraph 4 of annex B. This paragraph pertains to
the supply, sale or transfer to or from Iran of all items,
materials, equipment, goods and technology set out in
Council document S/2015/546. This document includes
ballistic missiles, cruise missiles and other unmannedaerial-vehicle systems with a range of 300 kilometres
or more.
In the reporting period, we conducted a visit to the
United Kingdom, upon invitation of its authorities. We
examined cruise-missile parts seized in international
waters south of Iran by the British Royal Navy in early
2022 that were alleged to have been transferred in a
manner inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015). We
observed many similarities between these parts and
other parts examined previously that we had assessed
to be of Iranian origin. The latter include those parts
seen in the debris of cruise missiles used by the Houthis
against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates between 2019 and 2022, and those
seized by the United States in 2019. We also observed

The Permanent Representative of Iran denied that
his country had supplied UAVs for use in the conflict
in Ukraine; the Russian Federation also expressed its
serious concerns with regard to the requests of these
Member States. The Secretariat is examining the
available information, and any findings will be reported
to the Council, as appropriate, in due course.
Finally, on the assets freeze provisions, we received
information from Ukraine, France, Germany, the United
Kingdom and the United States alleging that some of
the UAVs transferred by Iran to the Russian Federation
were manufactured by an entity on the 2231 list and
therefore were transferred in a manner inconsistent
with the relevant provisions of annex B. The Secretariat
is also examining the available information and will
report back to the Council, as appropriate, in due course.
The Secretary-General remains convinced that
lasting peace and security for all Member States depend
on dialogue and cooperation. Restoring the JCPOA
remains crucial to assuring the international community
of the peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme and
to allowing Iran to reach its full economic potential. We
encourage all parties and the United States to resume
their efforts to resolve the outstanding issues, lest the
gains achieved by the Plan after years of painstaking
efforts be completely lost.
In closing, I would like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Fergal Mythen and his predecessor for their
leadership throughout their tenure as Facilitator for
resolution 2231 (2015) as well as the Coordinator of the
Procurement Working Group of the Joint Commission
for our continued cooperation.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Gonzato.

22-758533/22

S/PV.9225

Non-proliferation

Mr. Gonzato: It is again an honour to have an
opportunity to address the Security Council in this
meeting on behalf of the High Representative of the
European Union (EU) for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles, in his capacity
as Coordinator of the Joint Commission of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).
My first expression of gratitude goes to SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and to the Secretariat for their
work related to the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) and in particular the report on that subject
(S/2022/912) prepared for today’s discussion. I also
want to thank Ambassador Mythen in his role as the
Facilitator of resolution 2231 (2015) and for the work
done to keep members informed of the current state of
play. I would like also to underscore the important role
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
as the sole impartial and independent international
organization mandated by the Security Council to
monitor and verify the implementation of the nuclear
non-proliferation commitments under the JCPOA.
Last June, we described the intense negotiations
efforts to restore the JCPOA undertaken by all JCPOA
participants, together with the United States, since
April 2021 (see S/PV.9085). Following this process
and based on all the key positions of the participants
in negotiations, the EU High Representative was able
in early August to put forward a compromise text
that reflected his understanding of the most realistic
equilibrium in view of a deal. The text lays down the
necessary steps for the United States to return to the
JCPOA and for Iran to resume the full implementation
of all its JCPOA commitments. However, since then,
new developments have added significant layers of
complications that make it increasingly difficult to
reach a deal. Nevertheless, the Coordinator remains
in close contact with all JCPOA participants and the
Unites States on this issue.
Since the discussion on the previous report of
the United Nations Secretariat on the implementation
of the resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2022/490), the
IAEA documented thoroughly the alarming further
acceleration of Iran’s nuclear programme that
gravely departs from its JCPOA commitments. The
Director General’s reports of 10, 22 and 29 November
documented the expansion of Iran’s nuclear enrichment
operations and capacity. That includes more enrichment
4/22

19/12/2022

of uranium at the level of 60 per cent in two facilities
and more cascades of advanced centrifuges going into
operation while others are being installed.
Let me also recall that Iran’s unilateral decision
in June 2022 that all JCPOA-related surveillance and
monitoring equipment of the Agency be removed from
operation has further aggravated existing concerns that,
from 23 February 2021 onwards, the IAEA’s verification
and monitoring activities have been seriously affected
as a result of Iran’s decision to stop the implementation
of transparency measures as envisaged in the JCPOA,
including the Additional Protocol. Iran, which
conditioned a deal on the restoration of the JCPOA on
the settlement of the outstanding safeguards issues,
needs to cooperate fully with the International Atomic
Energy Agency.
We continue to recognize that Iran has faced and
continues to face very serious negative economic
consequences following the withdrawal of the United
States from the JCPOA and the reimposition of
previously lifted United States unilateral sanctions,
which we deeply regret. Since our most recent
discussion in June, the United States has imposed
additional nuclear-related sanctions against Iran,
including in the area of oil and petrochemicals. The
restoration of the JCPOA remains the only way for
Iran to reap the full benefits of the JCPOA and reach
its full economic potential, since the restoration of the
JCPOA will result in a comprehensive sanctions’ lifting
that will encourage greater cooperation by the entire
international community with Iran.
I recall in this context that the EU has lifted all its
nuclear-related economic and financial sanctions since
the JCPOA implementation day, and that remains the
case. Let me also clarify that EU measures relating to
the unacceptable repression of protests in Iran over the
past months and Iran’s military support to Russia are
outside the scope of the JCPOA.
In addition to the advancement of the nuclear
programme of Iran, the European Union is indeed
extremely worried about Iran’s military support to
Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine, including
through the deliveries of drones. The EU will continue
to respond to that, as necessary, not least as it also
affects the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
On 12 December, the Council of the European Union
recalled that any transfer of certain combat drones and
missiles to and from Iran without prior permission by
22-75853

19/12/2022

Non-proliferation

the Security Council is in violation of resolution 2231
(2015). On that occasion, the EU reaffirmed its support
to the ongoing work by the United Nations Secretariat
team responsible for monitoring the implementation of
the resolution. The EU also recalled that resolution 2231
(2015) calls upon Iran not to undertake any activity
related to ballistic missiles designed to be capable of
delivering nuclear weapons, including launches using
such ballistic technology.
The process to conclude a deal and bring the
JCPOA back on track has been seriously challenged by
the various developments over the past few months, as
described earlier. However, I shall be straightforward:
the High Representative does not see any sustainable
alternative. To echo the statement made by the SecretaryGeneral in his report, I reaffirm that diplomacy and
restoring the JCPOA’s full implementation is still
the best option for preventing Iran from developing a
nuclear weapon. That is also instrumental to the security
of the whole region and remains in our fundamental
common interest.
For almost two years, the Agency has been deprived
of an essential part of its knowledge of Iran’s activities
on the entirety of Iran’s nuclear fuel cycle. I recall
that the Additional Protocol to Iran’s Comprehensive
Safeguards
Agreement,
which
substantially
strengthened the legal capacities of the IAEA in terms
of verification, is only made applicable under a fully
implemented JCPOA. Moreover, while the Agreement
is in the shadows, Iran’s programme is proceeding
quickly with irreversible proliferation implications, in
particular in the field of research and development. The
combination of the continued nuclear progress by Iran
and the decreasing visibility of its programme raises
more concerns than ever.
The procurement channel, another benefit of the
JCPOA, continues to be fully operational. It remains a
vital transparency and confidence-building mechanism.
It gives assurances to member States and the private
sector that transfers of nuclear and dual-use goods and
services are fully in line with resolution 2231 (2015)
and the JCPOA.
For all those reasons, on 12 December, the Council
of the European Union reaffirmed its commitment
to and continued support for the full and effective
implementation of a restored JCPOA. It called
on all countries to support the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015). The EU also underscored that

S/PV.9225

the JCPOA is separate from Iran’s legally binding
obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, which are essential to the global
non-proliferation regime.
Drawing on the unambiguous support of the
Foreign Ministers of the 27 EU countries, the High
Representative is determined to continue working
with the international community towards the full and
effective implementation of a restored JCPOA. He joins
his voice to that of the Secretary-General to encourage
all parties to intensify diplomatic efforts to that end.
The President: I thank Mr. Gonzato for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Mythen.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): The fourteenth report (see
S/2022/937) of the Facilitator on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2231 (2015) was approved
by Council members on 12 December. I would like
to thank all Council members for their constructive
engagement in this process and for their spirit of
compromise and flexibility.
The report provides a factual account of the
activities that took place in the 2231 format of the
Security Council, covering the period from 24 June
to 12 December. It includes relevant communications,
summarized in my report, as well as key aspects of the
workings of the procurement channel. Council members
may refer to the report for details, but I wish to mention
three points in particular.
First, one meeting of the Council in the 2231 format
was held during this reporting period, on 12 December,
at which representatives of the Security Council
discussed the findings and recommendations contained
in the fourteenth report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/912) on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), prior to its public release. Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo already referred to some of those
points in her briefing.
The 2231 format also had a discussion on the ongoing
diplomatic efforts to restore the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) and other issues related to the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Secondly, a total of 18 notes were circulated
within the 2231 format during the reporting period.
I sent 12 official communications to Member States
and the Coordinator of the Procurement Working
Group of the Joint Commission. I received a total

22-758535/22

S/PV.9225

Non-proliferation

of 11 communications from Member States and the
Coordinator. Among the communications circulated
were the two regular quarterly reports issued by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), in
September and November, as well as eight updates.
The IAEA plays an important role in the verification
and monitoring of nuclear activities in the Islamic
Republic of Iran, as requested under resolution 2231
(2015). The IAEA’s work provides confidence for the
international community that the nuclear programme of
the Islamic Republic of Iran is for exclusively peaceful
purposes. The reports of the Director General play a
significant role in that regard.
Thirdly, again I have to report that no new proposals
were submitted to the Security Council through the
procurement channel during the reporting period. The
procurement channel represents a key transparency
and confidence-building mechanism under the JCPOA.
It remains operational and stands ready to review
proposals. I join the Secretary-General in encouraging
all participants to the JCPOA, Member States and the
private sector to fully support and utilize the channel.
I cannot stress enough the importance of the JCPOA
and the importance of its full restoration as soon as
possible. It is essential that all parties to the agreement
uphold it in both letter and spirit, avoid actions that
undermine the implementation of commitments, and
ensure its full and effective operation.
Finally, I would like to say a few words in a more
personal capacity. This is both my first and last time
briefing the Security Council as its Facilitator on
resolution 2231 (2015), taking over from my colleague
and predecessor Ambassador Byrne Nason. As the
Facilitator, we have done our utmost to support the
implementation of the JCPOA, working closely with
all Council members to ensure the full and effective
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and the
JCPOA, which it underpins. Ireland’s short time on the
Council has made clear to us that support for the JCPOA
remains undiminished. I have been impressed by the
dedication of all the parties to making the JCPOA work
as intended in order to reach agreement regarding the
possible return of the United States and to ensure the
fulfilment of all obligations by all the parties. It is a
matter of regret, however, that over the past two years
that work has not resulted in an agreement. The JCPOA
remains the best means for a peaceful resolution of the
issues it addresses. We hope that a restored agreement
6/22

19/12/2022

will also help to build confidence among the parties
that can lead to strengthened dialogue and cooperation.
We encourage all the parties and the United States to
redouble their efforts to achieve that end.
I acknowledge the work of the Facilitators who
preceded us, laying a strong foundation for Ireland’s
term. I thank all the Council members my delegation
has worked with over the past two years, as well as the
Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran for
its cooperation and the confidence it has placed in us.
I would also like to thank the staff of the Secretariat
for their invaluable advice and strong support over
that period. It has been a great honour to work with
everyone on this very important file.
The President: I thank Ambassador Mythen for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
Ambassadors Fergal Mythen and Silvio Gonzato for
their briefings.
Seven and a half years ago, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2231 (2015) as part of
the diplomacy that produced the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA). All the members of the Council
recognized the importance of keeping in place certain
critical restrictions, including prohibitions on the
transfer of certain nuclear and ballistic-missile-related
technology from Iran.
We are meeting at a time when Iran is taking
increasingly provocative steps to enhance its
nuclear programme’s capacity. The concerns of the
international community are increasing. The United
States is fully committed to resolving those concerns
through diplomacy. For months we have been engaged
in serious negotiations aimed at a mutual return to the
full implementation of the JCPOA. However, Iran’s
own actions and stances have been responsible for
preventing that outcome. In September, a deal was
within reach — one to which all the other participants
in the negotiations had agreed. Even Iran appeared to
be prepared to say yes until the last minute, when it
made new demands that were extraneous to the JCPOA
and that it knew could not be met. That was not the
first time Iran’s leaders had turned their backs on a deal
22-75853

19/12/2022

Non-proliferation

S/PV.9225

that was on the table and approved by all. But that last
instance dashed our collective hopes for a swift, mutual
return to the full implementation of the JCPOA.

could be crueller than seeking to turn out the lights, cut
off the heat and shut down the water for millions of
Ukrainian families?

We have made it clear that the door for diplomacy
remains open. Unfortunately, Iran’s actions suggest
that goal is not its priority. Its conduct since September,
notably its repeated and long-standing failure to
cooperate with the International Atomic Energy Agency,
as well as the expansion of its nuclear programme for
no legitimate civilian purpose, reinforce our scepticism
about Iran’s willingness and ability to reach a deal and
explains why there have been no active negotiations
since then. Given that context, the full and complete
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) remains
a priority. Yet we see a disturbing trend whereby the
Council is turning a blind eye to open violations of its
provisions. Tolerating those violations undermines the
authority of the Council and gravely harms our ability
to respond credibly to threats around the world.

Russia first started using Iranian drones toward the
end of last summer. Ukraine duly reported that violation
to the United Nations. Other countries, including the
United States, have since supplied the United Nations
with additional information and analysis regarding
that violation. We regret that the United Nations has
not moved to carry out a normal investigation of that
reported violation. For seven years, the United Nations
mandate to report on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) has been clear and unquestioned.
We are disappointed that the Secretariat, apparently
yielding to Russian threats, has not carried out the
investigatory mandate the Council has given it. We
were also discouraged by the lack of coverage of those
violations in the Facilitator’s report (see S/2022/937) on
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

We are grateful to the United Nations for its
analysis of and investigation into significant quantities
of arms and ammunition being sent from ports in Iran
to the Houthis in Yemen. Many of those, including
anti-materiel rifles, rocket-propelled grenade launchers
and anti-tank guided missiles, have been determined to
be likely of Iranian origin. Those shipments undermine
international efforts to support a durable resolution
to the conflict in Yemen and are a threat to regional
security — issues that we should all be taking seriously.
A few months ago, evidence emerged of even more
grave violations of resolution 2231 (2015) — violations
committed by a permanent member of the Council.
Ukraine reported evidence of drones of Iranian origin
being used by Russia to attack civilian infrastructure.
That report has been supported by ample evidence
from multiple public sources. Tehran has acknowledged
transferring unmanned aerial vehicles to Russia,
including in a public statement on 5 November by Iran’s
Foreign Minister. Let me state it clearly: paragraph 4
of Annex B of resolution 2231 (2015) prohibits all
countries — even permanent members of the Security
Council — from transferring those types of drones
from Iran without advance Security Council approval.
Russia’s open violation of resolution 2231 (2015) would
be of serious concern under any circumstances. But we
are exceptionally alarmed that Russia is using those
drones to attack Ukraine’s civilian infrastructure. What

Now, months after that initial reported violation,
we learned last week that Russia has resumed using
Iranian drones procured in violation of resolution 2231
(2015). On 14 December, Russia launched a swarm of
Iranian-made drones against Kyiv. In the light of those
new developments, we renew our call to the Secretariat
to document and analyse information related to that
violation. Given Iran’s increasing integration into
Russia’s defence sector, we fear that there will be more
violations in future. Russia may even be tempted to
further violate resolution 2231 (2015) by importing
complete ballistic missiles from Iran. That is not
acceptable. There must be some degree of accountability
for openly violating Council resolutions.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo and the representative of the European Union
for their briefings. I also thank Ambassador Mythen of
Ireland for his role as Facilitator of the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015).
The adoption on 14 July 2015 of the Vienna
agreement on the Iranian nuclear issue, endorsed by
resolution 2231 (2015), marked a decisive step in the fight
against nuclear proliferation. Significant progress had
been achieved in the implementation of that resolution
until the United States withdrew from the agreement
in 2018. Since then, the benefits of that landmark
agreement have been undermined, and the attempts to
bring all the parties back on board have unfortunately

22-758537/22

S/PV.9225

Non-proliferation

been unsuccessful. The fourteenth report of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/912) on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015) notes the
development that the Islamic Republic of Iran has
achieved the capacity to enrich uranium up to 60 per
cent. Moreover, it also notes the development of
“space-launch
vehicles
that
incorporate
technologies interchangeable with those used
in ballistic missiles designed to be capable of
delivering nuclear weapons” (S/2022/912, p.3).
All of that is occurring against a backdrop of
Iran’s decision to remove the International Atomic
Energy Agency’s (IAEA) monitoring equipment from
operation, thereby preventing it from continuing its
monitoring activities. If a new modus operandi is not
found as soon as possible, it is very likely that the gains
in the implementation of the agreement that were made
up until 2018 will be completely lost. There is therefore
an urgent need to resume negotiations with all parties
with a view to returning to the full implementation of
the resolution, which is highly important for security in
the region and the world.
The parties must demonstrate commitment,
flexibility and good faith. Indeed, maximalist demands on
both sides, insurmountable positions and conditions and
parallel initiatives by the parties serve only to undermine
the negotiations and the gains made since the adoption
of the Agreement and, ultimately, delay a political
outcome. It is essential that trust between the parties
be restored in order to establish to a climate conducive
to negotiations. That requires each side to take a step
towards the other. The commitment of all stakeholders is
necessary for the full implementation of the Agreement.
Demanding more guarantees without offering anything
in return is neither constructive nor a sustainable posture.
We recall that the lifting of the unilateral coercive
measures imposed on Iran lies at the heart of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), as one of the
foundational elements of the necessary confidence.
The parties must agree on the lifting of the sanctions,
which have a negative impact on the country’s economy,
have humanitarian consequences, contribute to a more
tense internal political climate and increase the security
risks. They are clearly counterproductive and tend to
undermine bilateral and multilateral efforts to resolve
the Iranian nuclear issue through political dialogue.
Similarly, we call for an interim agreement to allow the
IAEA to resume its monitoring and control activities in
an impartial manner.
8/22

19/12/2022

Any action that frustrates the dialogue is likely to
compromise the diplomatic outcome and contribute,
in turn, to a fait accompli situation, which would run
counter to the objectives of the JCPOA.
Here I wish to recall my country’s commitment
to the multilateral nuclear non-proliferation regime,
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons as its central pillar, and stress that the parties
must comply with their commitments under that Treaty.
More nuclear weapons will bring about neither more
peace nor more security, but will only increase the scale
of the potential threat. By entrenching the balance of
fear as a rule of the game, it would also encourage the
nuclear ambitions of other States. It is crucial that the
positive momentum achieved in implementation of the
Agreement before May 2018 is restored, as all parties
would benefit.
I would like to conclude by welcoming the key
role played by the European Union and encouraging its
efforts in coordinating the work of the Joint Commission
towards the reactivation of the JCPOA.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank you, Madam,
for giving me the floor to address the Council in my
national capacity.
Ireland welcomes the reports of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/912), the Facilitator for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 2231
(2015) (see S/2022/937) and the Joint Commission to
the Security Council on the status of the Procurement
Working Group’s decisions and on any implementation
issues (see S/2022/919), and has taken note of their
findings. I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Ambassador Gonzato for their
briefings today.
Ireland is strongly committed to preserving the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and to the full
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). We welcome
the diplomatic efforts under High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy Borrell Fontelles to try to reach an agreement.
A viable deal was put on the table earlier this year. We
are concerned that despite that, new issues continue to
be raised that threaten to undermine the process. It is
essential that we put the JCPOA back on track. As the
Secretary-General warns, the gains earned by restoring
the Plan continue to diminish as delays persist.
22-75853

19/12/2022

Non-proliferation

Iran’s actions regarding its nuclear-related
commitments under the JCPOA are deeply worrying.
Iran’s programme has never been as advanced as it
is now. The stocks of highly enriched uranium, the
uranium metalwork and the substantial expansion
and use of advanced centrifuges are well beyond any
plausible civilian justification. The irreversibility
of the knowledge gained, which is directly relevant
to a weapons programme, remains a matter of
deepest concern.
Ireland shares the grave concern expressed by
the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) that the Agency has not been
able to perform substantial parts of its verification
and monitoring activities for almost two years, as
well as regarding the removal of Agency surveillance
and monitoring equipment earlier this year. As the
Director General states, that has a significant impact
on the Agency’s ability to recover and re-establish the
necessary continuity of knowledge in the event of a
full resumption of the JCPOA. The longer the situation
persists, the greater the uncertainty regarding the
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme becomes.
The role of the IAEA under the JCPOA is
essential. It is only through the Agency’s verification
and monitoring, including under the JCPOA, that
the international community can have confidence
in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme and in the JCPOA itself. It is essential that
Iran cooperate fully with the IAEA in all aspects of
its safeguards obligations and commitments, including
the renewed application of the Additional Protocol.
The United States must equally take all necessary
steps to facilitate the full implementation of the
JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). It is important that
the Iranian people see tangible benefits from the full
implementation of the JCPOA.
We are also gravely concerned by Russia’s
acquisition of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) from
Iran in contravention of resolution 2231 (2015), annex
B, paragraph 4. We welcome Ukraine’s invitation to
the United Nations Secretariat to inspect recovered
UAVs. We believe this to be essential and welcome
the assurance that the Secretariat is ready to examine
any evidence provided by Ukraine in line with its
evidentiary standards and that any findings would
be reported to the Security Council as appropriate in

S/PV.9225

due course. The Council has greatly benefited from
the information that the Secretariat has been able to
provide on the basis of previous invitations.
We stand at a real turning point for the JCPOA.
The opportunity remains for the restoration of the
Agreement, which would bring real benefits for us
all, including Iran. However, the drift in talks and
activities that directly contravene the letter and spirit
of the Agreement risk undermining that opportunity.
It is essential that all of us work to restore and rebuild
confidence in the Agreement and ensure that it can
achieve its goals. The JCPOA came about by tackling
the most complex issues through persistent dialogue
and diplomacy. We urgently need to do so again.
Ms. Kesse Antwi (Ghana): At the outset, let me
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for presenting the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) (S/2022/912). We also thank Ambassador Silvio
Gonzato and Ambassador Fergal Mythen for their
respective comments.
It is indeed disheartening that the optimism of a
breakthrough being imminent in the talks to revive
Iran’s nuclear deal earlier this year was short-lived,
and that progress made through indirect talks between
the parties to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) in Vienna and through other mediators
has stalled once again. We maintain that the JCPOA
remains the best opportunity and most practical course
to address the Iranian nuclear issue. We believe that
the Plan of Action would not only further validate the
success of multilateralism, but would ultimately have a
positive impact on regional security. That is because the
JCPOA presents a balanced compromise that enables
Iran to benefit from peaceful uses of nuclear energy for
the country’s development purposes while ensuring the
imperatives for non-proliferation.
In that regard, it is crucial that the current lull in
the negotiations does not lead to a relapse, given that
the only course of action is to revive and forge ahead
with the JCPOA. We therefore urge all parties to refocus
interest on the general good and define the steps needed
to restore the JCPOA. Moving forward, it will be useful
for all concerned parties to work towards a common
understanding on the existing text and the requisites in
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). In that
regard, it is important that the unilateral sanctions
imposed against Iran are lifted, as they have a negative

22-758539/22

S/PV.9225

Non-proliferation

impact on the country’s economy and contribute to
tensions that increase security risks both within the
country and in the region. On the other hand, Iran must
also fully assume its commitments under the deal.
The right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy must
be exercised in conformity with obligations under the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as
well as other nuclear-related commitments, including
the Additional Protocol, and in compliance and
cooperation with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA).
We believe that the IAEA’s work is essential in
restoring trust and confidence in the region and within
the international community, in a manner that ensures
that Iran’s nuclear programme is for peaceful purposes.
In view of that, we welcome the continued efforts of the
Director General of the IAEA to maintain the Agency’s
monitoring and verification activities with regard to
Iran’s nuclear programme. Accordingly, we continue to
urge for unimpeded access for the IAEA to conduct its
verification and monitoring activities in the country.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call to the parties
to work constructively for a full return to the terms of
the JCPOA deal, while bearing in mind that time is of
the essence. The current international climate makes
the question of non-proliferation much more critical
to international peace and security. We therefore
continue to support, with keen interest, all diplomatic
efforts to resolve outstanding issues. We need those
efforts to reactivate the commitments of the parties
under the Plan of Action, in the hope that the next sixmonth report could coincide with a restored Iranian
nuclear agreement.
Mr. Sánchez Kiesslich (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
and the Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations for their
briefings. We also thank Ambassador Mythen for his
report (see S/2022/937) in his capacity as Facilitator
of the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). We
welcome the representatives of Iran and Germany to
today’s meeting.
Mexico has supported the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) since its adoption in 2015, as
we believe that it is a successful example of multilateral
diplomacy and a key component of the international
non-proliferation
architecture.
The
agreement
represented a major shift in the Security Council’s
10/22

19/12/2022

approach to addressing Iran’s nuclear programme,
moving away from a sanctions regime and opting
instead for a collaborative approach. Despite the
international community’s optimism and broad support
for the JCPOA, it is particularly worrying that there has
been a retreat from full compliance in the two years
of our term as an elected member of the Council. As
the Security Council awaits JCPOA participants’ full
return to the agreement, the respective reports of
the Secretary-General (S/2022/912) and the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) have described an increase in the enrichment
of uranium-235 of up to 60 per cent, the installation of
new and modernized centrifuge cascades beyond the
limits agreed to in the JCPOA, as well as research into
more advanced activities such as metal production.
In addition to those activities, for which there is
no clear civilian application, the IAEA does not have
the ongoing and permanent access required to monitor
and verify the status of Iran’s nuclear programme.
Transparency and cooperation are key elements of a
properly functioning JCPOA. It is important to restore
access for the IAEA without preconditions, and to
remove any doubts about possible actions by Iran that
have gone beyond the agreements reached in the JCPOA
or its declared reversibility. At the same time, we call on
the United States to lift its unilateral sanctions against
Iran, especially those imposed extraterritorially or on
third States. That would be a way to build trust and
bring about significant progress.
We understand the position of those who consider
it a priority to address the broader security dynamics
in the region, including with regard to missiles and the
transfer of weapons, which are clearly interconnected
issues. However, we believe that it would be better
to opt for separate agreements that do not make that
aspect conditional on a return to the JCPOA. Beyond
the opposing views about missile launches and the use
of space technologies, the fact is that the launches and
the responses to which they give rise take us further
and further away from the atmosphere and the trust that
are needed at this time. Incidentally, we have taken note
of the various letters that have been sent in connection
with the transfers mentioned in paragraph 4 of annex
B of resolution 2231 (2015), and we await information
from the Secretariat in that regard.
As this is the last time we will be making a
statement on Iran’s nuclear programme as an elected
member of the Security Council, Mexico calls on the
22-75853

19/12/2022

Non-proliferation

United States and Iran to return to full compliance with
resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA, and on all key
actors to redouble diplomatic efforts to that end. It is in
the interests of the entire international community and
critical to ensuring the peaceful development of Iran’s
nuclear programme while also promoting stability in
the Middle East. Mexico will continue to consistently
defend the right of all countries to benefit from the
peaceful use of nuclear energy. However, it is clear
that that right carries with it the obligation to comply
with the commitments and obligations set forth in the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
including full cooperation with the IAEA.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I thank
our briefers for their remarks and for their valuable
efforts under their respective mandates.
The United Arab Emirates recognizes nuclear
non-proliferation as a cornerstone of our collective
security. We have long supported international efforts,
including by the Council and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), to guarantee the peaceful
nature of national nuclear programmes. We have
also advocated for enabling developing countries to
have access to and benefit from the peaceful use of
nuclear technology. In 2020, the United Arab Emirates
became the first Arab country to launch and operate
a nuclear power plant, in accordance with the highest
international standards of nuclear safety, security and
non-proliferation.
We underline the importance of resuming the
full and timely implementation of all nuclear-related
commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA), including by reversing steps taken
that are contrary to that agreement. We also call for
continued dialogue between the Republic of Iran and
the IAEA in order to restore the Agency’s ability
to monitor Iran’s nuclear activities and therefore
provide the required assurances to the international
community on the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme.
The United Arab Emirates is concerned about the
findings in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/912),
which highlights that cruise-missile parts seized by
the United Kingdom in January and February had
many similarities to those in cruise missiles used by
the Houthis in their terrorist attacks on Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates. The acquisition of
missile and drone technology by non-State actors,

S/PV.9225

particularly terrorist groups, is a grave threat to regional
and international peace and security. It also destabilizes
the region and prolongs conflicts and the suffering of
millions of people. The Council must therefore do more
to counter that threat and prevent such weapons from
falling into the hands of terrorists.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its unwavering support for all genuine diplomatic efforts
aimed at advancing nuclear non-proliferation regionally
and globally. We also call on countries in our region and
beyond to focus on enhancing areas of convergence and
cooperation in order to achieve a safe, prosperous and
positive outlook for present and future generations.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Mr. Gonzato
and Ambassador Mythen for their briefings.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
endorsed by several Security Council resolutions, is
a major achievement of multilateral diplomacy. It is
a model for resolving disputes through dialogue and
negotiation, a key pillar of the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime and a buttress for peace and
stability in the Middle East. The previous United States
Administration’s unilateral withdrawal from the JCPOA
and launch of a maximum pressure campaign against Iran
triggered the Iranian nuclear crisis. Following the current
Administration’s decision to return to the agreement, the
parties conducted multiple rounds of negotiations, with
positive progress. Regrettably, however, since August,
the negotiations on a return to compliance have stalled
yet again, making the future of the Iranian nuclear
issue uncertain.
At a time when the global security situation
generally is complex and perilous, the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime is also facing challenges
and geopolitical factors are increasingly prominent.
China therefore calls on all the parties concerned to
demonstrate a greater sense of urgency, live up to their
responsibilities, intensify dialogue and engagement and
strive to reach an agreement on outstanding issues as
soon as possible, with a view to restoring the integrity
of the comprehensive agreement and ensuring its
effective implementation.
I would like to touch upon four points.
First, we must stay the charted course towards
political settlement. Dialogue and negotiation have
always remained the only correct approach to resolve

22-7585311/22

S/PV.9225

Non-proliferation

the Iranian nuclear issue. The parties concerned should
cherish the hard-won gains of the negotiations over the
past two years, demonstrate diplomatic wisdom, make
political decisions and remove obstacles on the way.
China welcomes Iran’s recent flexible position on the
outstanding issues and hopes that the United States and
the other relevant parties will seize that opportunity and
meet Iran halfway to move the negotiations forward.
Secondly, we must uphold the basic principles of
fairness and justice. As the party that caused the Iranian
nuclear crisis, the United States should be aware of
its own responsibilities and take the lead in adopting
concrete steps. China calls on the United States to
uphold its commitment under the agreement, lift all
unilateral sanctions, cease attempts to impose longdistance jurisdiction against Iran and third parties and
stop the threat of the use of force against Iran. China
also would like to emphasize that the relevant parties
to the JCPOA should fulfil their non-proliferation
responsibilities and avoid any nuclear cooperation that
contravenes the principles and purposes of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and leads
to the proliferation of weapons-grade nuclear materials.
That will serve as a guiding example for negotiations
and resuming compliance.
Thirdly, we must create an enabling atmosphere for
negotiations. Pushing for the adoption of a resolution
by the International Atomic Energy Agency Board of
Governors to put pressure on Iran will only exacerbate
differences, undermine mutual trust and cast a shadow
over the negotiations. The facts have demonstrated time
and again that exerting pressure on Iran is not helpful.
All parties should bear in mind long-term interests and
the big picture and avoid any action that could escalate
the situation and disrupt the negotiation process.
We hope that the parties concerned, including the
Secretariat, will accurately interpret Council resolutions
and documents, prudently handle issues such as Iran’s
space launch and so-called transfer of unmanned aerial
vehicle systems, and avoid influencing negotiations on
resuming compliance. Linking the Iranian nuclear issue
with others, such as the domestic situation in Iran, will
only lead to an impasse in negotiations and ultimately
undo the gains made through diplomatic efforts.
Fourthly, we must properly address regional
security issues. In April, President Xi Jinping of China
proposed a global security initiative advocating the
vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and
sustainable security and the building of a balanced,
12/22

19/12/2022

effective and sustainable security architecture. The
initiative provides useful inspiration for promoting
the resolution of hotspot issues in the Middle East,
including the Iranian nuclear issue. China encourages
the parties concerned to embrace the vision of common
security and build a platform for multilateral dialogue
in the Gulf region to de-escalate conflicts, build mutual
trust and jointly build security through dialogue.
Countries outside the region should play a constructive
role in de-escalating the situation, rather than creating
animosity or fuelling confrontation.
As a permanent member of the Security Council
and party to the JCPOA, China has always been
committed to upholding the validity of the agreement
and the authority of Security Council resolutions and
promoting the political and diplomatic resolution of
the Iranian nuclear issue. Since September, Chinese
President Xi Jinping has met with the Heads of State of
Iran and the United States, respectively, to work on the
Iranian nuclear issue. Our State Councilor and Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Wang Yi, has also remained closely
engaged with the relevant parties on the Iranian nuclear
issue. China will continue to maintain an objective
and impartial position and play a constructive role
in bringing the JCPOA back on track, advancing the
political and diplomatic settlement of the Iranian
nuclear issue, upholding the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime and maintaining peace and
stability in the Middle East.
Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General, the Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and the Chargé
d’Affaires ad interim of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations for their briefings.
France is extremely concerned. Iran is pursuing
its destabilizing activities in breach of its international
and regional nuclear and ballistic obligations.
First of all, with regard to the nuclear situation, as
detailed by the International Atomic Energy Agency,
Iran is pursuing its escalation at the risk of a full-scale
crisis. Several weeks ago, Iran announced that it intends
to significantly increase its enriched uranium production
capacity and its production of highly enriched uranium
at the Fordow site well beyond the limits set by the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). That decision
entails serious proliferation risks. It is not justified by
any credible civilian purpose. In taking those actions,
Iran is making irreversible knowledge gains and
22-75853

19/12/2022

Non-proliferation

further weakening the relevance of the provisions of
the JCPOA. Those actions are all the more concerning
since Iran has halted the implementation of all JCPOA
transparency measures, which undermines the ability
of the International Atomic Energy Agency to ensure
the exclusively peaceful purpose of Iran’s programme.
Through resolution 2231 (2015), the Security Council
conferred upon the Agency a mandate, which Iran’s
decisions no longer allow it to exercise.
The European coordinator proposed to Iran a plan
that represents the best possible way for it to return
to compliance with the JCPOA. It is regrettable that
Iran turned down that opportunity by maintaining
demands that it knows are unacceptable and exceed
the framework of the JCPOA. Iran’s actions undermine
the balance on which the proposed agreement, which
was negotiated over many months, is based and close
the door on a diplomatic solution. Negotiations on
the JCPOA cannot be used as a pretext to enable Iran
to shirk its obligations to implement its Safeguards
Agreement with the International Atomic Energy
Agency under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. To date, Iran has not engaged in
substantive cooperation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency to address the outstanding issues.
What I just said covered the nuclear issue. I would
like to mention three other activities by Iran that are
just as worrisome.
First, Iran continues to develop its arsenal of ballistic
missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons. We
see that in its space launches, which use technologies
that further the development of its intercontinental
ballistic capability.
Secondly, we condemn Iran’s transfers of weapons,
missiles and their components and means of production
to State and non-State actors in the region. Such
transfers contravene the relevant Security Council
resolutions and place Iran and its proxies in a position
to threaten international peace and security.
Thirdly — and more specifically — France
condemns the transfer of Iranian combat drones to
Russia, which is in violation of resolution 2231 (2015),
annex B, paragraph 4. Russia is using those drones to
systematically target the Ukrainian civilian population
and the country’s infrastructure, resulting in the death
of many civilians, which constitutes war crimes. Only
today, drone strikes against Kyiv have once again
caused damage.

S/PV.9225

We warn Iran against any further arms deliveries
to Russia, which would constitute a serious
escalation — in particular the transfer of shortrange ballistic missiles — and would have serious
consequences that could only lead to Iran’s isolation on
the international stage. We hope to soon be informed of
when the Secretariat will visit Ukraine to investigate
and report back to the Council, in accordance with
its mandate and in keeping with past practices in
other regions.
In conclusion, the solution must involve respect for
international law, dialogue and de-escalation. We call on
Iran to return to upholding its international obligations
and to end its dangerous and ill-fated headlong rush.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for the information provided and the
representative of Ireland for the report (see S/2022/919)
on his excellent work as Security Council Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I also
welcome the remarks by Ambassador Gonzato on the
efforts under way to reinstate the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA).
The JCPOA represents a landmark accord, the key to
ensuring that Iran’s nuclear programme is and remains
exclusively for peaceful purposes. Unfortunately, with
every passing day, it becomes increasingly clear that
this is true only on paper. Today it is at risk of being
transformed from historic to historical.
We are worried about the findings of the recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/912), which
indicates further uncontrolled nuclear proliferation
activities by the Iranian regime. It also reports a
total lack of cooperation from Tehran and continued
non-compliance with the Safeguards Agreement under
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and the Additional Protocol. We are particularly alarmed
about successive reports issued by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) indicating a worrisome
acceleration of Iran’s nuclear programme that gravely
departs from its JCPOA commitments.
The key facts alone are disturbing. Iran has
expanded its nuclear-enrichment capacity and has
increased production of highly enriched uranium. It is
the wrong course. It should stop, as there is less and less
evidence that the Iranian nuclear programme has any
basis for claiming it has civilian or peaceful purposes.

22-7585313/22

S/PV.9225

Non-proliferation

The shutdown for almost two years of the
monitoring cameras directly affects the implementation
of the JCPOA. By turning them off, the regime has
blinded the international community, which is no
longer duly informed and cannot independently verify
ongoing nuclear activities. This unchecked nuclear
trajectory is leading Iran towards a dangerous path. It
must be reversed, and the IAEA should be able to fully
monitor compliance. Ensuring the exclusively peaceful
character of the Iranian nuclear programme is a direct
investment in regional and global stability and security.
We are extremely worried about the findings of
the Secretary-General’s report about the inconsistent
activities undertaken by Iran that are in clear violation
of paragraphs 3 and 4 of annex B to resolution 2231
(2015). The report shows — and we just heard from
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo — that there are
similarities between cruise-missile parts seized by
the United Kingdom in international waters and the
parts found in the debris of the cruise missiles used
by the Houthi terrorists in their terrorist attacks
against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and United
Arab Emirates. Dry denials simply will not do; clear
responses are needed. But above all, international law
is unquestionably clear: any transfer of arms by Iran to
non-State actors — in Syria, Iraq, Yemen, Lebanon or
elsewhere — is in violation of resolution 2231 (2015). It
poses a clear and direct threat to regional stability.
Unfortunately, Iran’s unlawful activities are not
limited to the region. Its unlawful policies are now
affecting peace and security in Europe through the
use of a larger toolkit, including cyberattacks and, as
discovered lately — first denied and later admitted — the
illicit transfer of unmanned aerial vehicle systems
to Russia for attacking civilians and critical civilian
infrastructure in Ukraine. We recall again that any
transfer of combat drones and missiles to or from Iran
without the prior permission of the Security Council
is in violation of resolution 2231 (2015). We expect to
be duly and fully informed by the Secretariat on the
matter. The Council cannot become a spectator to
non-compliance with its decisions; it cannot be reduced
to a notary of impunity.
Albania commends the United States and the
European Union for their efforts to achieve a successful
outcome of the talks in Vienna for the restoration of
the JCPOA. Diplomacy needs all actors to engage in
good faith in the negotiations. Unreasonable demands
and obstructive steps are not conducive to diplomatic
14/22

19/12/2022

solutions to that issue. Now it is up to the Iranian
authorities to seize the opportunity, stop their threats
and provocations and work in full transparency with
those who have put on the table — as we understand
it — a comprehensive, meaningful, forward-looking
document that contributes to peace and security.
Multilateral diplomacy and solutions have many times
shown their unquestionable efficiency and advantage.
They are achieved through continued efforts, continued
goodwill and genuine commitment. JCPOA restoration
can be one such landmark exercise. It remains to
be proved.
Ms. Syed (Norway): I too want to thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo, the Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and the
European Union delegation for their valuable and
informative briefings.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s fourteenth
report (S/2022/912) on this issue. Norway fully supports
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and
echoes the Secretary-General’s stated view that it
remains the best available option to achieve the shared
commitment and objective of non-proliferation.
In my statement today, I want to make four points.
First, on the worrisome situation of Iran’s accelerated
nuclear escalation, as reported by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Iran’s decision to stop
the implementation of its nuclear-related commitments
under the JCPOA is highly regrettable. It has had a
detrimental impact on the Agency’s ability to provide
assurance of the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme. The continued work on enrichment
capacity, the stockpiling of enriched uranium, including
the production of uranium metal, and irreversible
enrichment research and development is concerning.
Some of those pursuits have no credible civilian
purpose, such as the enrichment and accumulation of
highly enriched uranium.
My second point is on the worrisome trend of Iran’s
continuing to advance its missile capabilities, including
activity related to ballistic missiles and launches using
ballistic-missile technology. That activity is inconsistent
with paragraph 4 of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015),
and it must stop immediately.
My third point concerns the transfer of unmanned
aerial vehicle systems (UAVs) from Iran to Russia, which
would constitute violations by both Russia and Iran of
22-75853

19/12/2022

Non-proliferation

S/PV.9225

the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). Russia has been
escalating its attacks on civilians and civilian objects
in Ukraine using UAVs. Intentional or indiscriminate
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure are
prohibited under international humanitarian law and
may constitute war crimes. Norway regrets that the
Secretariat has not yet visited Ukraine in order to
examine the evidence of UAV transfers.

increased the complexity of the task of agreeing on
a common path towards restoring the JCPOA. We
are concerned about increasingly frequent signs that
the window of opportunity for negotiations towards
that goal is closing. However, we remain hopeful that
dialogue and mutual understanding will prevail and
that all parties involved will demonstrate the flexibility
and constructive spirit necessary to achieve that goal.

My fourth and final point is that Norway still
hopes to see the JCPOA restored. At the adoption of
resolution 2231 (2015), more than seven years ago, the
Angolan representative commented that “[t]he people
of the region deserve more” (S/PV.7488, p. 11). That
still holds true today.

Pending the conclusion of ongoing negotiations,
we call upon all parties to refrain from any further
actions that may jeopardize a possible and necessary
agreement on the issue. As stated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, issues not related to the JCPOA should
be addressed without prejudice to preserving the Plan
and its accomplishments.

We urge Iran to demonstrate its political will by
delivering on its nuclear-related commitments under
the agreement, including full cooperation with the
IAEA in order to allow for verification of compliance.
The JCPOA marked a major achievement in nuclear
non-proliferation. We need to revive and rebuild
confidence in the agreement in order for it to achieve
its goals. The full implementation of the JCPOA would
serve our common interests and deliver benefits to the
Iranian people.
Mrs. Aguiar Barboza (Brazil): At the outset, I
would like to thank Ambassador Fergal Mythen for his
briefing, his report (see S/2022/937) and his work as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). The work of the Facilitator is a central element
in the process of monitoring the implementation of the
resolution, alongside the Secretary-General’s reporting
mechanism and the activities of the Procurement
Working Group of the Joint Commission. I would
also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo and Ambassador Gonzato for their briefings.
Brazil welcomes the reports of the Facilitator,
the Secretary-General (S/2022/912) and the Joint
Commission (see S/2022/919) and takes note of the
findings therein. Brazil reiterates its belief that the
Iranian nuclear issue can be resolved only through
peaceful and diplomatic means, in accordance
with international law. It is our understanding that
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
provides a suitable framework for dialogue among the
parties concerned.
Over the past four years, we have witnessed
many actions that put the sustainability of the JCPOA
in serious jeopardy. Such actions have also greatly

Brazil defends the central role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as the internationally
recognized authority responsible for monitoring
and verifying compliance with the non-proliferation
obligations of States under the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. In this regard, we regret that the Agency’s
verification and monitoring activities of nuclear-related
commitments under the JCPOA have been seriously
affected. The resumption of such activities is critical for
the successful restoration of full compliance with the
JCPOA. In parallel, Brazil welcomes the efforts of the
Director General of the IAEA to preserve the Agency’s
ability to fulfil its mandate in the implementation
of comprehensive safeguards in Iran and to clarify
outstanding issues.
Finally, with regard to the alleged transfers of
unmanned aerial vehicles from Iran to Russia in
possible violation of resolution 2231 (2015), Brazil
awaits an independent assessment of such allegations.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, the Chargé d’affaires
ad interim of the Delegation of the European Union,
Mr. Silvio Gonzato, and Mr. Fergal Mythen, the
Security Council Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), the Permanent Representative of
Ireland, for their briefings. We wish to note the efforts
undertaken by the Irish side to ensure operations of the
Council’s 2231 (2015) format.
The consensus-based adoption of the biannual
report of the Facilitator (see S/2022/937), as it appears,
was a worthy conclusion of the two-year term of Ireland
in this post. At the same time, we regret the fact that in

22-7585315/22

S/PV.9225

Non-proliferation

his statement the Facilitator failed to directly point to the
root cause known to all for the current issues plaguing
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
namely, the unilateral withdrawal of the United States
from the deal and the subsequent violations by the
United States of its provisions, including the imposition
of unilateral sanctions against Iran.
This major flaw has also been visible in the biannual
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2022/912). It appears as if,
based on the latter report, that the actions of the United
States and Iran are effectively equal in magnitude.
On the whole, one is left with the impression that the
Secretary-General and our Western colleagues are now
attempting, to the extent that it is possible, to obscure
the fact that Washington withdrew unilaterally from the
JCPOA in 2018. That generates a distorted picture, as if
the deal had begun to unravel on its own or — and this
is even more absurd — that the impasse is something
for which Tehran is to blame in the first place. Let us
recall that we need to talk not about waivers on the
restrictions, but a full lifting — on a consistent and
verifiable basis — of the illegitimate discriminatory
measures imposed by the United States against Iran,
in breach of resolution 2231 (2015). The report of
the Secretary-General may generate the misguided
perception that waivers alone would suffice.
It is not the first time that we have voiced our
concerns about the so-called investigations mentioned in
the report carried out by the United Nations Secretariat
in the context of implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). Both in our letters and during our statements
at Security Council meetings, we have repeatedly
emphasized the fact that these kinds of actions — as
well as encouragement to carry out these acts by certain
States, to which we have recently borne witness,
including today — constitute an egregious violation of
both the provisions of the note by the President of the
Security Council contained in document S/2016/44 of
16 January 2016, which explicitly sets out the mandate
for the Secretariat in relation to the aforementioned
resolution, and the United Nations Charter directly,
specifically Article 100 thereof.
The Russian Federation has already provided
a detailed legal analysis about this matter, and the
United Nations Secretariat should not bow to pressure
from Western countries and violate the United Nations
Charter. We wish to note once again that any results of
the pseudo-investigation into the 2231 (2015) cell are,
16/22

19/12/2022

from a legal standpoint, null and void, while references
to any alleged practice in the conduct of inspections
are irrelevant. Recurrence of violations cannot create
a precedent. At the same time, it is with satisfaction
that we note that the Secretary-General has voiced
his assessment of the JCPOA as the optimal tool
for strengthening the non-proliferation regime and
regional security. We also firmly believe that there
is no alternative to the Plan, and we believe that it is
of tremendous importance, in principle, to promptly
restore compliance in full therewith.
The JCPOA had become a reality thanks to the
professional, depoliticized and constructive approach
of participants in the process. The development of
the Plan was not only practical in nature, but it also
had an important political effect. Seven years ago, our
joint efforts demonstrated to the world that diplomacy
works and, in the presence of political will, allows for
results to be achieved despite existing divergences and
disagreements. However, subsequent events reflected
the fact that, unfortunately, not all parties are willing
to embrace the spirit of the JCPOA.
The actions of the United States have chipped away
at the basis of the deal. Given the counterproductive
nature of Washington’s steps, all of the subsequent
measures undertaken by Tehran were a mere reaction to
violations and pressure from the United States. At the
same time, we have regrettably seen no intentions from
our American colleagues to ease tensions and rejoin the
JCPOA. Doubts about the sincerity of assurances about
commitment to this goal have been stoked by public
statements that American officials allow themselves
to make. But, specifically, a restoration of the deal is
apparently not on the United States agenda.
We wish to separately touch upon another issue,
which has nothing to do with the restoration of the
JCPOA, but that Western colleagues are attempting
to drum up: the alleged deliveries of drones by Iran
to Russia for use in Ukraine. These allegations are
patently concocted and false. We are well aware of the
fact that representatives of Kyiv have still been unable
bilaterally to provide Tehran any documentation to
corroborate the use by Russian military personnel of
drones of Iranian origin. Despite that, the United States
and the European Union believe that it is possible on
the basis of their fabrications to attempt to baselessly
drag the United Nations Secretariat into this issue and
impose sanctions against both Iranian and Russian
legal and physical persons. It is noteworthy that attacks
22-75853

19/12/2022

Non-proliferation

against the Russian Federation and Iran around drones
were trotted out specifically when negotiations under
the Vienna format entered the final stage. This starkly
demonstrates who in fact is keen to diplomatically
resolve the situation, and who is simply politicizing the
discussion and continuously undercutting the JCPOA.
Russia maintains its continuous focus on
cooperation under the Vienna format to expeditiously
restore the JCPOA. We also share the view of the
Secretary-General that issues unrelated to the Plan
should not hinder its preservation and implementation.
Of late, we have occasionally heard conjecture that the
JCPOA is allegedly obsolete and fails to reflect the
existing balance of interests or that it can be replaced
with a better deal. This logic is both reckless and
dangerous. I urge Council members to consider if talks
about the restoration of the JCPOA have been ongoing
for nearly two years, then how much time will it take
to reach agreement on a hypothetical new deal? And
where are the assurances that it is achievable at all?
Work on restoring the JCPOA package is already
at a mature stage, and it is important not to reverse the
gains. We see no insurmountable problems preventing
the restoration of the JCPOA. However, we are at a
critical and precarious juncture. Attempts to exert
pressure on Iran, the unwarranted spiralling of tensions
around the JCPOA and far-fetched allegations whose
only purpose is to provoke other participants could
completely undermine the prospects for reviving the
agreement. Should that type of policy prevail, it would
be a woeful departure from the high standards of
diplomacy that once made it possible to reach agreement
on the JCPOA. We urge the parties to demonstrate
strategic restraint, adopt a pragmatic stance and focus
on reaching a compromise. We are convinced that in that
case, a mutually acceptable solution will be reached.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I would like to start by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing and the Secretariat
for its important role in supporting the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). I would also like to thank
Ambassador Mythen for his briefing and him and his
team for their work as Facilitator during the past two
years. And finally, I would like to thank Mr. Gonzato
for his briefing on behalf of the Coordinator of the Joint
Commission of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA).

S/PV.9225

Our colleagues are aware that in April 2021
negotiations began to return Iran to full JCPOA
compliance and the United States to the deal. As we have
heard, the JCPOA Coordinator submitted viable deals in
March and August that would have achieved that. Iran
refused both packages with unacceptable demands that
were beyond the scope of the JCPOA. Iran’s continued
nuclear escalation is a threat to international peace and
security. Today its total enriched-uranium stockpile
is at least 18 times larger than the JCPOA limits, and
Iran is continuing to produce highly enriched uranium,
which is unprecedented for a State without a nuclearweapon programme. Its nuclear actions have no credible
civilian justification.
Iran’s nuclear-breakout time has been reduced to
a matter of weeks, and the time required for Iran to
produce the fissile material for multiple nuclear weapons
is decreasing. Iran is testing technology with direct
application to intermediate- and intercontinental-range
ballistic missiles capable of carrying a nuclear payload.
Iran’s behaviour in the region and at home betrays its
claims to be a responsible international actor. As the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/912) confirms, Iran
has continued to provide increasingly complex weapon
systems to non-State actors, including the Houthis. It is
providing support to Russia’s war of aggression against
Ukraine with unmanned aerial vehicles that Russia is
using to target civilians and civilian infrastructure,
as it did once again today against Kyiv. And Iran is
responding to domestic protests in the most brutal
fashion. That behaviour makes progress on a nuclear
deal much more difficult.
Iran and Russia would try to have us believe that the
concerns I have expressed today are part of a Western
campaign to undermine the Iranian Government. That
is simply false. Iran’s actions should be a matter of
profound concern for us all. In a year that has seen
increased nuclear rhetoric, including from one of the
permanent five members of the Council, the Council’s
focus on Iran’s nuclear programme has never been
more critical. In the months ahead, it will be incumbent
on us to ensure that Iran is not able to develop a
nuclear weapon.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Ambassadors Gonzato and
Mythen for their briefings on their respective reports
regarding resolution 2231 (2015). I also recognize
the participation of the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Germany in this meeting.

22-7585317/22

S/PV.9225

Non-proliferation

Global nuclear disarmament and the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons constitute the core guarantee
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
and resolution 2231 (2015) are critical multilateral
achievements and mechanisms in that regard. It is
therefore concerning that this briefing is being held once
again against a backdrop of a lack of agreement and the
failure of the parties to return to the full implementation
of the Plan and the resolution.
Kenya commends the numerous efforts and
diplomatic engagements to ensure dialogue and
cooperation among all States involved in the JCPOA.
We also echo the Secretary-General’s call to Iran and the
United States to have an open dialogue and demonstrate
the flexibility needed to reach a compromise on the
last remaining issues and ensure that the negotiations
are conducted in good faith and without undue delay.
We believe that a successful outcome will not only
ensure the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme, but will also restore confidence in the
ability of such plans to contribute to non-proliferation
and disarmament efforts in line with the relevant
international treaties and instruments. A positive
outcome would also ensure the full operationalization
of the JCPOA, thereby strengthening regional security,
rebuilding trust and addressing other issues of mutual
concern to the parties. In our view, three aspects need
to be achieved as a matter of priority.
First, a clear and practical road map must be
established for a return to full compliance with the
JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015) and to ensure their
implementation. We note the progress indicated during
this briefing as well as the emerging challenges to
achieving that.
Secondly, there must be parameters to ensure that
the parties concerned adhere to their commitments,
including the lifting of additional sanctions and
the cessation of all non-retractable and retaliatory
measures and violations, including the installation of
centrifuges and the enrichment of uranium, which are
in violation of the parameters and procedures laid out
in the JCPOA and in the international disarmament
and non-proliferation treaties that the parties are
signatories to.
Thirdly, the equipment and important verification
and monitoring work of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) must be safeguarded and the Agency’s
18/22

19/12/2022

work must continue unhampered on the ground. We
encourage the Islamic Republic of Iran to implement its
Safeguards Agreement and voluntary transparency and
implementation measures with the IAEA, as agreed in
the Plan. That includes Iran taking ownership of the Plan
and strengthening its commitments to its provisions.
Kenya reaffirms its appreciation for the critical
role the IAEA plays in global nuclear safety and in
providing support to Member States in the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy in the areas of science, technology and
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals,
including tackling climate and environmental challenges.
My own country can attest to that. In that regard, we note
that the political and diplomatic efforts that went into the
establishment of the JCPOA were aimed at ensuring the
economic and technological development of Iran in the
area of peaceful nuclear activities, among other goals. We
therefore advocate for the Security Council’s engagement
with the non-proliferation agenda to go hand in hand with
promoting efforts to strengthen the peaceful application
of nuclear technology in industrial development projects,
for tangible benefits to the Iranian people and a holistic
political and economic stability in the subregion.
We also commend the significant role of the Joint
Commission in ensuring that political and technical
differences are addressed, including guaranteeing
that the principles of integrity, transparency and
confidence-building are upheld in matters pertaining
to resolution 2231 (2015), including the continuation
of trade with the Islamic Republic of Iran and relevant
transfers within the framework of the JCPOA.
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate
Ambassador Mythen and his team for Ireland’s
consultative approach and able facilitation of this
subsidiary format over the past two years.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of India.
Let me begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for presenting the fourteenth report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2022/912).
I also express my deep appreciation to Ambassador
Fergal Mythen and congratulate Ireland for its
leadership as the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I also thank
Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations
here in New York, for his briefing.
22-75853

19/12/2022

Non-proliferation

India supports the full and effective implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) and the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA). We encourage the parties
concerned to continue dialogue and diplomacy towards
an early resolution of differences and to return to the
full implementation of the JCPOA. India also values
the efforts of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) to implement the Agency’s verification and
monitoring mandate. We take note of the Agency’s
recent reports, which were also considered recently at
the meeting of the IAEA’s Board of Governors. We have
maintained that the way forward is to make progress
on engagement between the Agency and Iran in order
to clarify and resolve all outstanding safeguards
issues, thereby enabling the Agency to provide an
assurance of the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme.
I will conclude by extending my appreciation
to the resolution 2231 team of the Secretariat for
the cooperation and support it has extended to my
delegation during our tenure on the Council.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank India for convening today’s meeting. I also thank
the briefers for their briefings.
Today, as expected, the members of the Security
Council once again expressed their support for the
restoration of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) and called for its full implementation as the
only viable course of action. Obviously, the JCPOA can
be restored only by addressing the root causes of the
current situation, namely, the United States’ withdrawal
therefrom on 8 May 2018.
Since then, the United States has reimposed all
of its harsh and inhumane sanctions against Iran,
in flagrant violation of its explicit legal obligations
under resolution 2231 (2015). Moreover, it has pursued
its so-called maximum pressure policy against the
Iranian people, the aim of which was to starve the
Iranian people, as stated openly and shamelessly by
the former United States Secretary of State. In reality,
the United States has weaponized economic sanctions
in its long-standing hostile policy against the Iranian
people. Furthermore, as a permanent member of the

S/PV.9225

Council, the United States has brazenly forced all
other United Nations Member States to either violate
resolution 2231 (2015) or face punishment. That is
unprecedented in the history of the United Nations.
Despite the change of the United States
Administration in 2021, the country’s maximum
pressure policy has remained unchanged. Even
though it consistently admits to that policy’s failure,
the current Administration continues to implement it
more extensively and harshly. It should also be noted
that France, Germany and the United Kingdom (E3)
continue to fully support and enforce such United States
sanctions and policies. They, like the United States, are
failing to meet their obligations under the JCPOA.
Nevertheless, today the delegation of the United
States played the victim and acted as if it was Iran that
withdrew from the JCPOA and was responsible for the
current status of the JCPOA. It needs to stop fooling
the international community and stop the deception.
Its baseless allegations against Iran cannot change the
fact that only the United States is responsible for the
JCPOA’s current status.
Iran’s full compliance with all its nuclear-related
commitments under the JCPOA, even one year following
the United States withdrawal from the agreement, is well
documented. It has been verified by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and is reflected in 15
consecutive reports of its Director General.
However, we reacted to the United States withdrawal
from the JCPOA and its significant non-compliance
with its commitments under the deal, in addition to its
flagrant violation of resolution 2231 (2015) after only
one year of strategic patience. At the same time, the
acts we took were certain remedial measures based
on our rights, as plainly mentioned in paragraphs 26
and 27 of the JCPOA. Our objective was simple: to
restore some balance in the reciprocal commitments
and benefits under the agreement. That was important,
since the JCPOA is based on Iran’s nuclear-related
commitments in exchange for the lifting of all
United Nations, United States and European Union
sanctions against Iran, as well as the removal of all the
hurdles to Iran’s international economic, commercial
and financial cooperation.
Against that backdrop, today I will address four
issues: first, the ongoing political process for the
revival of the JCPOA; secondly, technical cooperation
between Iran and the IAEA; thirdly, our position on the

22-7585319/22

S/PV.9225

Non-proliferation

Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/912); and fourthly,
our response to the accusations against my country
made today by certain members of the Council.
The Vienna talks commenced with the United
States expressing its willingness to return to the JCPOA
and reverse its failing maximum pressure policy. Iran
had always shown good faith and taken a constructive
approach during the talks. The negotiations were going
well, and constant efforts were being made. Iran’s
negotiating team exercised maximum flexibility in
order to reach an agreement acceptable to all. To that
end, our team even introduced innovative solutions
to the remaining issues in order to break the impasse.
However, the United States’ unrealistic and rigid
approach has led to the current situation.
Contrary to the baseless assertion that Iran has
raised issues unrelated to the JCPOA, I can assure
the Council that Iran has not brought up any matters
outside of the framework of the Vienna talks and the
JCPOA. The other parties, especially the United States,
decided to withdraw from the negotiation table and
send contrasting, ambiguous and paradoxical messages
about negotiations. Instead, the United States and the
United Kingdom chose to focus on what they have
been doing for decades: interfering in Iran’s internal
affairs, including by supporting terrorist groups in
their villainous attempts to jeopardize the security of
the Iranian people. Let me make it clear — pressure,
intimidation and confrontation are not solutions and
will lead nowhere. If the United States genuinely wants
a revival of the JCPOA, it must rely on diplomacy only.
For its part, Iran reiterates its commitment to
dialogue and diplomacy. We are ready to resume the
Vienna talks, work cooperatively to reach an agreeable
solution and even arrange a ministerial meeting as soon
as possible to declare the restoration of the JCPOA.
That is achievable if the United States demonstrates
genuine political will, stands ready to work towards a
satisfying solution and agrees to fully comply with its
obligations. The United States now has the ball in its
court. It must show that it is honest, trustworthy and
capable of keeping its word. The time for action is now.
With regard to our technical cooperation with the
IAEA, I must stress that the issue is entirely outside
the purview of resolution 2231 (2015). However,
given that certain members of the Council have
made unsubstantiated allegations and accused Iran
of non-compliance, I would like to emphasize that all
20/22

19/12/2022

of our nuclear activities are peaceful and consistent
with our rights and obligations under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and our
Safeguards Agreement.
According to the IAEA, Iran’s peaceful nuclear
programme has been under the most robust and intrusive
nuclear verification, monitoring and transparency
measures ever conducted in a country in the IAEA’s
history. It has continued to uphold its commitments
and has cooperated fully with the Agency in order to
maintain its continuity of knowledge regarding Iran’s
peaceful nuclear activities. The joint statement by the
IAEA and the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran on
5 March 2022 is the latest example of such cooperation.
Iran’s current remedial measures, including in
connection to surveillance equipment beyond its
Safeguards Agreement and a robust verification
system, would be reversed only if the illegitimate
sanctions were lifted and current safeguards-related
issues addressed and terminated. The Agency’s
impartiality, independence and professionalism should
never be jeopardized or influenced by certain parties.
We consider the recent resolution of the IAEA Board
of Governors a political action. Iran has fulfilled its
responsibilities under its Safeguards Agreement. We
stand ready to engage with the Agency to resolve the
existing outstanding safeguards issues. We hope that
the IAEA team’s visit to Tehran will further contribute
to addressing such issues.
While our full observations on the report
of the Secretary-General the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2022/912) are contained in my
letter to him dated 15 December 2022 (S/2022/962), I
would like to make a few comments.
Contrary to the Secretariat’s assertion, the scope of
the report must include the resolution in its entirety, not
only its annex B. That is not Iran’s interpretation, but
the precise language of paragraph 7 of note S/2016/44 by
the Council’s President. Furthermore, the report covers
issues that have nothing to do with resolution 2231
(2015). Similarly, it has once again failed to address
the root cause of the current situation surrounding the
JCPOA, namely, the United States withdrawal from the
deal. The report is especially silent on the systematic
material breach by the United States and France,
Germany and the United Kingdom of their explicit
legal obligations under resolution 2231 (2015).
22-75853

19/12/2022

Non-proliferation

Moreover, the Secretariat’s engagement in the socalled investigation to purportedly examine the alleged
violations of the resolution is clearly beyond the mandate
entrusted to it by the Council through resolution 2231
(2015) and presidential note S/2016/44. According to
those two documents, the Secretariat has no mandate
whatsoever on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), other than providing administrative support to
the Security Council’s work. Therefore, such ultra vires
activities by the Secretariat are unacceptable and should
be avoided, and any possible findings or assessments
based on such activities are null and void.
I must once again reiterate our consistent position
that Iran’s space and missile programmes fall outside
the purview and competence of resolution 2231 (2015).
In conclusion, I would like to address the
unfounded allegations that Iran transferred unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) to Russia in alleged violation of
resolution 2231 (2015).
First, arms-related restrictions under resolution 2231
(2015) were terminated on 18 October 2020. Since then,
the transfer of arms to or from Iran is no longer covered
by resolution 2231 (2015).
Secondly, invoking paragraph 4 (a) of annex B to
resolution 2231 (2015) has no legal merit, as activities
under that paragraph require the Council’s prior approval
only if the exporting State determines that concerned
items, regardless of their inclusion in document
S/2015/546, could contribute to the development of
nuclear-weapon delivery systems. Iran has stated officially
and in unambiguous terms that it has never produced or
supplied, or does it intend to produce or supply, items
that it determines could contribute to the development
of nuclear-weapon delivery systems. Accordingly, Iran
has not transferred to Russia any item that is covered by
paragraph 4 (a) of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015). Any
claim to the contrary is unfounded and thereby rejected.
It is also worth noting that we have already engaged
in bilateral talks with Ukraine to clarify the existing
misunderstandings on the subject.
Moreover, a number of UAVs that were transferred
by Iran to Russia prior to the ongoing conflict in
Ukraine and which are not compatible with the
technical characteristics set out in paragraph 4 (a) of
annex B to resolution 2231 (2015) were not transferred
for use in the ongoing conflict in Ukraine. Therefore,
the misinformation campaign and baseless accusations
levelled against Iran must end. Those attempts serve no

S/PV.9225

purpose other than to divert attention from the Western
States’ transfer of massive amounts of advanced
sophisticated weaponry to Ukraine in order to prolong
the conflict.
Finally, we reject making artificial linkages
between regional issues and resolution 2231 (2015).
However, in response to certain claims about our
regional policy, I must reiterate that Iran’s foreign
policy is based on full respect for international law,
mutual respect, good-neighbourliness, cooperation and
dialogue, as well as maintaining regional peace and
security through the active participation of all States
in the region. As in the past, we stand ready to engage
actively and constructively with those States.
Let me reiterate once again that we are willing to
restart the Vienna talks as soon as possible and without
any conditions in order to finalize the existing text,
which will allow all parties to return to full compliance
with their obligations under the deal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): Let me first join others
in thanking our briefers for their contributions. I would
also like to thank Ireland for its work as Security Council
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) over the past two years. Finally, let me express our
appreciation for the key role played by the Secretariat in
supporting the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
In his fourteenth report, the Secretary-General
renewed his support for the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA) (S/2022/912). We fully agree that
Iran’s nuclear escalation must be stopped and reversed
by diplomatic means. We regret that Iran rejected viable
compromise proposals in March and again in August
and has stalled the Vienna talks. The prospects for a
sustainable diplomatic solution have unfortunately been
fading in recent months. Instead, Iran has chosen a path
that further diminish the prospects for the restoration
and full implementation of the JCPOA.
Since we last met in this format (see S/PV.9085),
we have been observing clear evidence of Iran’s
covert support for Russia’s brutal and unprovoked war
of aggression against Ukraine. Iran has transferred
hundreds of unmanned aerial vehicles to Russia. That is
a deeply concerning violation of resolution 2231 (2015),
and we encourage the Secretariat to accept Ukraine’s
repeated invitations to examine the evidence, in line
with its mandate. Iranian combat drones have given

22-7585321/22

S/PV.9225

Non-proliferation

Russia additional means to target civilian infrastructure
and terrorize Ukrainian civilians. Reports that Russia
is attempting to obtain even more weapons from Iran,
including ballistic missiles, are deeply alarming.
The Secretary-General reported that missile
parts seized by the United Kingdom in January
and February are consistent with cruise missiles
previously assessed to be of Iranian origin. That
provides important evidence of Iran’s misuse of its
missile programme. Iran’s development of its missile
capabilities and transfers to State and non-State
actors are in violation of resolution 2231 (2015)
and destabilize the region. Iraq is on the front line,
with Iran also using its missiles and drones against
its neighbours. Reports about threats against the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia are also worrisome. Iran’s
aggressive behaviour in the region is not acceptable.
Iran also continues to further escalate its nuclear
programme, thereby undermining essential aspects of
the global non-proliferation system. Iran’s accelerated
production of up to 60 per cent enriched uranium,
including at the Fordow fortified underground facility,
is unprecedented and lacks any plausible civilian
justification. Iran’s nuclear programme is more
advanced than ever before and is becoming a threat to
international peace and security. Iran has suspended
its implementation of JCPOA-related verification and
monitoring activities. If Iran’s nuclear activities were
purely benign, why would Iran continue to make it
harder, if not impossible, for the International Atomic
Enerby Agency (IAEA) to provide assurances of the
programme’s alleged peaceful nature?
Iran is further eroding trust by failing to
address concerns related to the implementation of its
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement, concluded

22/22

19/12/2022

under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. We reject Iran’s attempts to evade clear
safeguards obligations by linking them to JCPOA
negotiations. Iran’s refusal of substantive compromise
proposals, including sanctions relief, fuels doubts as
to its true intentions. That is just another example of
the Islamic Republic for Iran acting against the vital
interests of its own people.
Let me conclude by calling upon the Government
of Iran to reverse course. Iran must stop its nuclear
escalation. Iran must end its support for the Russian
war against Ukraine. Iran must stop destabilizing
regional activities, especially its proliferation of missile
technology. It must also stop the gross human rights
violations and repression of its own population.
The President: The representative of the United
States of America has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I extend
my apologies for taking the floor. I would like to make
a couple of points that need to be made, but I will be
very brief.
Others have pointed out all the various actions by
Iran that have an impact on international peace and
security, but let me just make a couple of points. We
all know that Iran’s extraneous demands are the reason
that there has not been a return to mutual compliance
with the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. That is a
fact. It has rejected all compromise proposals. That is
also a fact. Let me just simply say that the ball is not in
the United States’ court. On the contrary, the ball is in
Iran’s court.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

22-75853
