Resolution 703 (1991)

"There can be no doubt that the Security Council's
recommendation to the General Assembly advances and
underscores the Organization's goal of universality. I am
certain that, as new members of the Organization, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Republic
of Korea will contribute positively to efforts to enhance the
effe<.,1:iveness of the work of the United Nations and
strengthen respect for its purposes and principles.

or 9 A1111uat 1991
The Security Council,
Having examined the application of the Federated States of
Micronesia for admission to the United Nations, 2'-'3
Recommends to the General Assembly that the Federated
States of Micronesia be admitted to membership in the United
Nations.

"The admission of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea and the Republic of Korea will also reduce
tensions in the region, create a favourable atmosphere for
and facilitate the promotion of confidence-building
measures in their bilateral relations and provide them with
an appropriate forum in which to consider the many things
they have in common and to overcome the few remaining
obstacles to their unification.

Adopted without 11 vote at the j(l()2J1d

meeting.

Decision

"We have recently seen how countries that were once
adversaries have found the necessary strength to put aside
their differences in favour of their shared interest in
promoting the well-being of their peoples and of the world
in general. We are living in an age in which mank.ind
seems to be regaining its senses. We can begin the next
millennium in a more optimistic spirit. In the positive
atmosphere resulting from the end of the cold war, we
note with great satisfaction a new manifestation of constructive understanding: the recommendation, adopted by
the Se-eurity Council, that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea become Members
of the United Nations.

At the same meeting, following the adoption of Security
Council resolution 703 (1991), the President of the Council
made the following statement on behalf of the members: 200
"In my capacity as President of the Security Council
and on behalf of the members of the Council, l should like
to underscore the historic importance of the resolution
which we have just adopted recommending the admission
of the Federated States of Micronesia to membership in
the United Nations. This resolution is without a doubt the
logical follow-up to resolution 683 (1990), adopted hy the
Security Council on 22 December 1990, by which it
terminated the trusteeship arrangement for the territories
of Micronesia.

"I wish to conclude by saying that, in my capacity as
President of the Security Council and on behalf of all its
members, I am on this historic occasion deeply honoured
to address these words of congratulation to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and to the Republic ofKorea."

B.

"For the Security Council as well as for the Trusteeship Council, and for the United Nations as a whole, this
resolution marks the culmination of an effort sustained
over decades to enable the peoples of these territories to
take charge of their destiny and assume the place to which
they are entitled in the commw1ity of nations.
"The universality of the Organization is steadily
becoming a reality and gaining in significance as more and
more of the States which make up the world commm1ity
are admitted to membership.

Application of the Federated State,f of Micronesia

Decisions

"The founders of the Organization had precisely that
objective in mind. namely the formation of a single,
universal entity in which all States would share responsibility for the preseivation of international peace and security
without distinction as to level of economic development,
size of population, military might or any other factor.

At its 2999th meeting, on 6 August 1991, the Council,
following the adoption of its agenda, decided to refer the
application of the Federated States of Micronesia203 to the
Committee on the Admission of New Members tor examination
and report, as provided in rule 59 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

"The Federated States of Micronesia will make an
outstanding contribution to the United Nations by bringing
to it an innovative approach and a fresh perspective on
world affairs, in order to promote changes in established
practices, many of which, as all the Members of the
Organization are aware, are in need of renewal.

At its 3002nd meeting, on 9 August 1991, the Council
discussed the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members204 concerning the application of the Federated
States of Micronesia for admission to membe.rship in the
United Nations.

47
