S/PRST/2007/37

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 October 2007
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5757th meeting of the Security Council, held on 11 October 2007, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Myanmar”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the recent mission by the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Adviser to Myanmar Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, reaffirms its
strong and unwavering support for the Secretary-General’s good offices
mission as mandated by General Assembly resolution 61/232, and expresses
its appreciation for the personal engagement of the Secretary-General.
“The Security Council strongly deplores the use of violence against
peaceful demonstrations in Myanmar and welcomes Human Rights Council
resolution S-5/1 of 2 October 2007. The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of the early release of all political prisoners and remaining
detainees. It also calls on the Government of Myanmar and all other parties
concerned to work together towards a de-escalation of the situation and a
peaceful solution.
“The Security Council stresses the need for the Government of Myanmar
to create the necessary conditions for a genuine dialogue with Daw Aung San
Suu Kyi and all concerned parties and ethnic groups in order to achieve an
inclusive national reconciliation with the direct support of the United Nations.
The Security Council encourages the Government of Myanmar to consider
seriously Mr. Gambari’s recommendations and proposals. The Security
Council also calls on the Government of Myanmar to take all necessary
measures to address the political, economic, humanitarian, and human rights
issues that are the concern of its people and emphasizes that the future of
Myanmar lies in the hands of all of its people.
“The Security Council welcomes the Government of Myanmar’s public
commitment to work with the United Nations and the appointment of a liaison
officer with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. The Security Council stresses the
importance that such commitments are followed by action. It acknowledges
that the Government of Myanmar had invited Mr. Gambari to Myanmar. It
underscores its support for his return as early as possible, in order to facilitate
concrete actions and tangible results. The Security Council urges the
Government of Myanmar and all parties concerned to cooperate fully with
Mr. Gambari.
07-53830 (E) 111007

*0753830*

S/PRST/2007/37

“The Security Council welcomes the important role played by the
ASEAN countries in urging restraint, calling for a peaceful transition to
democracy, and supporting the good offices mission. It notes that the good
offices mission is a process, and encourages the sustained support and
engagement of the international community in helping Myanmar.
“The Security Council remains seized of the matter.”

2

07-53830
