VID.

RESOLtmONS ADOPTED ON THE BEPORTS OF THE
FIRST COMMITTEE

1 (1). ESTABLISHMENT 0F A COMMISSION TO

separate stages, the successful completion of each
of which will develop the necessary confidence of
the world before the next stage is undertaken.
The Commission shall not infringe upon the
responsibilities of any organ of the United Nations,
but should present recommendations for the consideration of those organs in the performance of
their tasks under the terms of the United Nations
Charter.
Seventeenth plenary meeting, 24 January 1946.

DEAL WITH THE PROBLEMS RAISED BY THE
DiSCOVERY 0F ATOMIC ENERGY

Resolved by the General Assembly of the United
Nations to establish a Commission, with the composition and competence set out hereunder, to deal
with the problerru raised by the discovery of atomic
energy and other rela ted ma tters :
l.

ESTABLISHMENT 0F THE CoMMISSION

A Commission is hereby established by the General Assembly with the terms of reference set out
under section 5 below.

2.

RELATIONS

0F THE CoMMISSION

WITH

2 (1) • RULES 0F PRoCEDURE CONCERNING
l.ANGUAGES

Resolved that the General Assembly:
(a) adopts rules of procedure concem~g
languages in conformity with the rules herew1th
pre sen ted ( annex) ;
( b) n·commends to the other organs of the
UnitPd Nations the adoption of language rules
in conforrnity with the rules hercwith presented;
(e) rt>commpnds that the Secretary-General
makes a thorou¡rh rnquiry into the question of
the installation of tckphonic systems of interpretation and, if possible, arranges far the establishment of such a srtem for the second part of
the first session.
Twenty-first plenar,, mutine, 1 February 1946.

THE

ÜRGANS 0F THE UNITED NATIONS

(a) The Commission shall submit its reports
and recommendations to the Security Council, and
such reports and recommendations shall be made
public unles, the Security Council, in the interest
of peace and security, otherwise directs. In the appropriate cases the Security Council should transmit these report~ to the General Assembly and the
Members of the United Nations, as well as to the
Econornic and Social Council and other organs
within the framework of the United Nations.
( b) In view of the Security Council's primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of intemational peace
and security, the Security Council shall issue directions to the Cornrnission in matters affecting security. On these mattcrs the Commission shall be accountable for its work to the Security Council.
3.

.A.NNEX
1. In ali the organs of thi- United Nations, other than

the Intrrnational Court of Justice, Chinese; French,
English, Russian and Spanish shall be the official languages, and English and French tht' working languages.
2. Spet"ches made in either of the working languages
shall be interprcted into the other working language ..
'l. Speeches made in any of the other three official
languag.-s sha II be interpreted into both working languages.
4. Any representative may make a speech in a language other than the official languages. In this case he
shall himself provide for interpretation into onr of the
working languages. Interpretation into the other working language by an interpreter of the Secretariat may he
based on the interpretation given in the first working
langua¡¡;e.
5. Verbatim records shall be drawn up in the working languages. A translation of the whole or part of any
verbatim record into any of the other official languages
shall be fumished if requested bv any delegation.
6. Summary records shall be drawn up as soon as
possible in the official languages.
7. The Tournal, of the orgam of the United Natiom
~hall hl" ismed in thr w0rking lan_guageg.
8. Ali resolutions and other important docurr.ents
shall be made available in the official lan¡¡;uages. Upon
the request of any representative, any other <locument
shall be made available in any or ali oí the official
languages.
9. Documents of the organs of the United Nations
shall, if those organs so decide, be pubfohed in anv languages other than the official languages.

CoMPOSITION 0F THE CoMMISSION

The Commission shall be composed of one represcnta ti vt> from t>ach of those States repreaented
on the Securrty Council, and Canada when that
State is not ,, nwmbcr of the Security Council.
Each rrprest'ntative on the Commission may have
such assistance as he mav desire.
4.

RULES 01' PROCEDURE

The Commission shall have wh,never staff it may
deem necessary, and shall make recommendations
for its rules of procedure to the Security Council,
which shall approve them as a procedural matter.
5.

TERMS 01' REFERENCE 0F TIIE CoMMISSION

The Commission shall proe~d with the utmost
despatch and enquire into ali phases of the problem, and make such recommendations from time
to time with respect to them as it finds possible. In
particular, the Commission shall make specific proposals:

(a) for extending between ali nations the exch,mge of basic scientific informatíon for peacefol ends;
( b) for control of atomic energy to the extent
necessary to ensure its use only for peaceful
purposes;
(e) for the elimination from national armaments of atomic weapons and of ali other major
weapons adaptable to mass destruction;

3 (1). EXTRADITION AND PuNISHMENT OF
WAR CRIMmALS

(d) for cffective safeguards by way of inspection and other means to protect complying
States agairut the hazards of violations and
evasions.

The General Asumbly:
takin~ note of the Moscow Declaration of
1 November 1943 by Presiden! Roosevelt, Marshal
Stalin and Prime Minister Churchill concerning
enemy atrocities in the course of the war, and of

The work of thP Cmwn,,,,,;iur. shnul<l proceed by

9
