United Nations

A/RES/70/296

General Assembly

Distr.: General
5 August 2016

Seventieth session
Agenda item 175

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 25 July 2016
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/70/L.57)]

70/296. Agreement concerning the Relationship between the
United Nations and the International Organization
for Migration
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 70/263 of 27 April 2016, in which it invited the
Secretary-General to take steps to conclude an agreement concerning the relationship
between the United Nations and the International Organization for Migration and to
submit the negotiated draft agreement to the General Assembly for approval,
Taking note of resolution No. 1317 of 30 June 2016 of the Council of the
International Organization for Migration, by which the Council approved the draft
Agreement concerning the Relationship between the United Nations and the
International Organization for Migration,
Having considered the negotiated draft Agreement concerning the Relationship
between the United Nations and the International Organization for Migration, 1
1.
Approves the draft Agreement concerning the Relationship between the
United Nations and the International Organization for Migration, the text of which
is contained in the annex to the present resolution;
2.
Notes article 12 of the Agreement, which provides that expenses resulting
from any cooperation or provision of services pursuant to the Agreement shall be
subject to separate arrangements between the United Nations and the International
Organization for Migration;
3.
Calls upon the Secretary-General to invite the Director General of the
International Organization for Migration to sign the Agreement with him at the one day high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on addressing large
movements of refugees and migrants, to be held on 19 September 2016.
112th plenary meeting
25 July 2016

_______________
1

A/70/976, annex I.

15-17050 (E)

*1517050*

Please recycle

Agreement concerning the Relationship between the United
Nations and the International Organization for Migration

A/RES/70/296

Annex
Agreement concerning the Relationship between the United Nations
and the International Organization for Migration
The United Nations and the International Organization for Migration,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and of the Constitution of the International Organization for Migration,
Recognizing the need to take into account migration and human mobility in the
activities of the two Organizations and for close cooperation among all relevant
organizations to strengthen their efforts in coordinating their respective activities
related to migration and human mobility,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 47/4 of 16 October 1992 inviting the
International Organization for Migration to participate in the sessions and the work
of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer,
Recalling also the Cooperation Agreement between the United Nations and t he
International Organization for Migration of 25 June 1996,
Recalling further General Assembly resolution 51/148 of 13 December 1996
on the cooperation between the United Nations and the International Organization
for Migration,
Recalling the Memorandum of Understanding between the United Nations and
the International Organization for Migration regarding a Global Safety and Security
Management Partnership of 25 June 2013,
Desiring to establish a mutually beneficial relationship whereby the discharge
of respective responsibilities of the United Nations and the International
Organization for Migration may be facilitated,
Taking note of the International Organization for Migration Council Resolution
No. 1309 of 24 November 2015, which, inter alia, requested the Director General of
the International Organization for Migration to develop with the United Nations a
way in which the legal basis of the relationship between the International
Organization for Migration and the United Nations could b e improved,
Taking note of General Assembly resolution 70/263 of 27 April 2016 which,
inter alia, recognized the need to establish a closer relationship between the United
Nations and the International Organization for Migration and invited the Secretary General to take steps to conclude an agreement concerning the relationship between
the United Nations and the International Organization for Migration and to submit
the negotiated draft agreement to the General Assembly for approval,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
Purpose of the Agreement
The present Agreement defines the terms on which the United Nations and the
International Organization for Migration shall be brought into relationship with each
other in order to strengthen their cooperation and enhance their ability to fulfil their
respective mandates in the interest of migrants and their Member States.

2/8

Agreement concerning the Relationship between the United
Nations and the International Organization for Migration

A/RES/70/296

Article 2
Principles
1.
The United Nations recognizes the International Organization for Migration as
an organization with a global leading role in the field of migration. The United
Nations recognizes that the Member States of the International Organization for
Migration regard it, as per the International Organization for Migration Council
Resolution No. 1309, as the global lead agency on migration. The foregoing shall be
without prejudice to the mandates and activities of the United Nations, its Offices,
Funds and Programmes in the field of migration.
2.
The United Nations recognizes the International Organization for Migration as
an essential contributor in the field of human mobility, in the protection of migrants,
in operational activities related to migrants, displaced peopl e and migration-affected
communities, including in the areas of resettlement and returns, and in
mainstreaming migration in development plans.
3.
The United Nations recognizes that the International Organization for
Migration, by virtue of its Constitution, shall function as an independent,
autonomous and non-normative international organization in the working
relationship with the United Nations established by this Agreement, noting its
essential elements and attributes defined by the Council of the Intern ational
Organization for Migration as per its Council Resolution No. 1309.
4.
The International Organization for Migration recognizes the responsibilities of
the United Nations under its Charter and the mandates and responsibilities of other
United Nations organizations and subsidiary organs and agencies, including in the
field of migration.
5.
The International Organization for Migration undertakes to conduct its
activities in accordance with the Purposes and Principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and with due regard to the policies of the United Nations furthering
those Purposes and Principles and to other relevant instruments in the international
migration, refugee and human rights fields.
6.
The United Nations and the International Organization for Migration will
cooperate and conduct their activities without prejudice to the rights and
responsibilities of one another under their respective constituent instruments.
Article 3
Cooperation and coordination
1.
The United Nations and the International Organization for Migration,
recognizing the need to work jointly to achieve mutual objectives, and with a view
to facilitating the effective exercise of their responsibilities, agree to cooperate
closely within their respective mandates and to consult on matters of mutual interest
and concern. To that end, the United Nations and the International Organization for
Migration shall cooperate with each other in accordance with the provisions of their
respective constituent instruments.
2.
The International Organization for Migration agrees to participate in, and to
cooperate with, any body or bodies that have been established or may be established
by the United Nations for the purpose of facilitating such cooperation and
coordination at the global, regional or country level, in particular through
membership in:
(a) The United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination and
its subsidiary bodies (the High-level Committee on Programmes, the High-level
3/8

Agreement concerning the Relationship between the United
Nations and the International Organization for Migration

A/RES/70/296

Committee on Management (including the Inter-Agency Security Management
Network), and the United Nations Development Group and its regional and
country teams);
(b)

The Inter-Agency Standing Committee;

(c)

The Executive Committee on Humanitarian Affairs;

(d)

The Global Migration Group;

(e)

Country-level security management teams.

The International Organization for Migration agrees to participate in such
bodies in accordance with their established rules of procedures and to contribute to
their cost-shared budgets, as per established cost-sharing arrangements.
3.
The International Organization for Migration may also consult with
appropriate bodies established by the United Nations on matters within their
competence and on which the International Organization for Migration requires
expert advice. The United Nations, on its part, agrees to take such action as may be
necessary to facilitate such consultation.
4.
The United Nations bodies referred to above may also consult with the
International Organization for Migration on all matters within it s competence and on
which they require expert advice. The International Organization for Migration, on
its part, agrees to take such action as may be necessary to facilitate such
consultation.
5.
The United Nations and the International Organization for Mi gration, within
their respective competencies and in accordance with the provisions of their
respective constituent instruments, shall cooperate by providing each other, upon
request, with such information and assistance as either organization may require in
the exercise of its responsibilities.
6.
The United Nations and the International Organization for Migration recognize
the desirability of cooperation in the statistical field within the framework of their
respective mandates.
7.
The United Nations and the International Organization for Migration recognize
the necessity of achieving, where applicable, effective coordination of the activities
and services of the United Nations and the International Organization for Migration
with a view to avoiding duplication of their activities and services.
Article 4
Reports to the United Nations
The International Organization for Migration may, if it decides it to be
appropriate, submit reports on its activities to the General Assembly through the
Secretary-General.
Article 5
Reciprocal representation
1.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall be entitled to attend and to
participate in relation to matters of common interest, without vote and in accordance
with the relevant rules of procedure, in sessions of the Council of the International
Organization for Migration. The Secretary-General shall also be invited, as
4/8

Agreement concerning the Relationship between the United
Nations and the International Organization for Migration

A/RES/70/296

appropriate, to attend and participate without vote in such other meetings as the
International Organization for Migration may convene at which matters of interest
to the United Nations are under consideration. The Secretary-General may, for the
purposes of this paragraph, designate any person as his or her representative.
2.
The Director General of the International Organization for Migration shall be
entitled to attend plenary meetings of the General Assembly of the United Nations
for the purposes of consultations. The Director General shall be entitled to attend
and participate without vote in meetings of the Committees of the General Assembly
and meetings of the Economic and Social Council, and, as appropriate and in
accordance with the relevant rules of procedure, meetings of subsidiary organs of
the Assembly and the Council. The Director General may, at the invitation of the
Security Council, attend its meetings to supply it with information or give it other
assistance with regard to matters within the competence of the International
Organization for Migration. The Director General may, for the purposes of this
paragraph, designate any person as his or her representative.
3.
Written statements presented by the United Nations to the International
Organization for Migration for distribution shall be distributed by the
Administration of the International Organization for Migr ation to all members of the
appropriate organ or organs of the International Organization for Migration. Written
statements presented by the International Organization for Migration to the United
Nations for distribution shall be distributed by the Secretariat of the United Nations
to all members of the appropriate organ or organs of the United Nations.
Article 6
Proposal of agenda items
1.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations may propose agenda items for
consideration by the International Organization for Migration. In such cases, the
United Nations shall notify the Director General of the agenda item or items
concerned, and the Director General shall, in accordance with his or her authority and
the relevant rules of procedure, bring any such agenda item or items to the attention of
the appropriate governing body of the International Organization for Migration.
2.
The Director General of the International Organization for Migration may
propose agenda items for consideration by the United Nations. In such cases, the
International Organization for Migration shall notify the Secretary -General of the
agenda item or items concerned, and the Secretary-General shall, in accordance with
his or her authority and the relevant rules of procedure, bring any such item or items
to the attention of the relevant principal organ of the United Nations or such other
organ or organs of the United Nations as may be appropriate.
Article 7
Exchange of information and documents
1.
The United Nations and the International Organization for Migration shall
arrange for the exchange of information, publications and documents of mutual
interest.
2.
The International Organization for Migration shall, to the extent practicable,
furnish the United Nations, upon its request, with special studies or information
relating to matters within the competence of the United Nations.

5/8

Agreement concerning the Relationship between the United
Nations and the International Organization for Migration

A/RES/70/296

3.
The United Nations shall likewise, to the extent practicable, furnish the
International Organization for Migration, upon its request, with special studies or
information relating to matters within the competence of the International
Organization for Migration.
4.
The United Nations and the International Organization for Migration shall
make every effort to achieve maximum cooperation with a view to avoiding
duplication in the collection, analysis, publication and dissemination of information
related to matters of mutual interest. They shall strive, where appropriate, to
combine their efforts to secure the greatest possible usefulness and utilization of
such information.
Article 8
Administrative cooperation
The United Nations and the International Organization for Migration shall
consult, whenever required, concerning the most efficient use of facilities, staff and
services with a view to avoiding the establishment and operation of overlapping
facilities and services. They shall also consult to explore the possibility of
establishing common facilities or services in specific areas, with due regard to cost
savings.
Article 9
Cooperation between the secretariats
The Secretariat of the United Nations and the Administration of the
International Organization for Migration shall maintain a close working relationship
in accordance with such arrangements as may be agreed upon from time to time
between the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Director General of
the International Organization for Migration. Similar close working relationships
between the secretariats of the other organizations within the United Nations system
shall also be maintained in accordance with arrangements between the International
Organization for Migration and the organizations concerned.
Article 10
Personnel arrangements
The United Nations and the International Organization for Migration agree to
consult whenever necessary concerning matters of common interest relating to the
terms and conditions of employment of staff as well as to cooperate regarding the
exchange of personnel based on conditions contained in supplementary
arrangements concluded pursuant to Article 14 of this Agreemen t.
Article 11
United Nations laissez-passer
Members of the staff of the International Organization for Migration shall be
entitled, in accordance with such administrative arrangements as may be concluded
between the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Director General of
the International Organization for Migration, to use the laissez -passer of the United
Nations as a valid travel document where such use is recognized by States in
agreements defining the privileges and immunities of the Inter national Organization
for Migration.

6/8

Agreement concerning the Relationship between the United
Nations and the International Organization for Migration

A/RES/70/296

Article 12
Expenses
Expenses resulting from any cooperation or provision of services pursuant to
this Agreement shall be subject to separate arrangements between the United
Nations and the International Organization for Migration.
Article 13
Protection of confidentiality
1.
Nothing in this Agreement shall be so construed as to require either the United
Nations or the International Organization for Migration to furnish any material, data
and information the disclosure of which could, in its judgement, violate its
obligation under its constituent instrument or policies on confidentiality to protect
such material, data and information.
2.
In case confidential material, data or information is provided, the United
Nations and the International Organization for Migration shall ensur e the
appropriate protection of such material, data and information, in accordance with
their constituent instruments and policies on confidentiality or in accordance with
such supplementary arrangements as may be concluded between them for this
purpose in accordance with Article 14 of this Agreement.
Article 14
Supplementary arrangements for the implementation of the present Agreement
The Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Director General of the
International Organization for Migration may, for the purpose of implementing the
present Agreement, make such supplementary arrangements as may be found
appropriate.
Article 15
Amendments
The present Agreement may be amended by agreement between the United
Nations and the International Organization for Migration. Any such amendment
shall be approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations and by the
Council of the International Organization for Migration. The United Nations and the
International Organization for Migration shall notify each other in writing of the
date of such approval, and the Agreement shall enter into force on the date of the
later of the said approvals.
Article 16
Entry into force
1.
The present Agreement shall be approved by the General Assembly of the
United Nations and by the Council of the International Organization for Migration.
The United Nations and the International Organization for Migration shall notify
each other in writing of the date of such approval. The Agreement shall thereafter
enter into force upon signature.
2.
Upon its entry into force, this Agreement supersedes and replaces the
Cooperation Agreement between the United Nations and the International
Organization for Migration of 25 June 1996.

7/8

Agreement concerning the Relationship between the United
Nations and the International Organization for Migration

A/RES/70/296

In witness thereof, the undersigned have signed the present Agreement.
Signed this xxth day of xx 2016 at xxx in two originals in t he English
language.

8/8

For the United Nations:

For the International Organization for Migration:

Ban Ki-Moon
Secretary-General

William Lacy Swing
Director General
