178
Cyprus
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany, Federal Republic of
Greece
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Liechtenstein
Luxembourg
Malta

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session
Monaco
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern
Ireland
United States of America

C. LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION II, PARAGRAPH 4 (c)

Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala

Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Saint Christopher and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela

D. LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION II, PARAGRAPH 4 (d)

Albania
Bulgaria
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Czechoslovakia
German Democratic Republic
Hungary

Poland
Romania
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics

39/235. World industrial restructuring and redeploy­
ment
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Lima Declaration and Plan of Action on
Industrial Development and Co-operation, 222 in which
were laid down the main measures and principles for
industrial development and co-operation within the
framework of the establishment of the new international
economic order, and the New Delhi Declaration and Plan
of Action on Industrialization of Developing Countries
and International Co-operation for their Industrial Devel­
opment,223 in which a strategy was spelt out for the further
industrialization of developing countries,
Recalling that the Lima Declaration and Plan of Action
on Industrial Development and Co-operation elaborated a
framework for global industrial restructuring and rede­
ployment and established a target for the developing
countries' share of world industrial production,
Reaffirming that the attainment of the targets contained
in the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade,224 aimed at, inter
alia, raising the share of the developing countries in world
industrial production in accordance with the Lima Decla­
ration and Plan of Action, calls for far-reaching changes in
the structure of world production,
222 See A/10112, chap. IV.
223 ID/CONF.4/22 and Corr. I, chap. VI.
224 Resolution 35/56, annex.
225 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Devel­
opment, Sixth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations publica­
llon, Sales No. E.83.11.D.6), part one, sect. A.

Further reaffirming that policies that maintain interna­
tionally less competitive industries through subsidies and
other protective measures should be avoided, thus facilita­
ting redeployment of such industries from developed to
developing countries,
Bearing in mind that new technological advances and
the current global economic situation require innovative
approaches to world industrial restructuring,
Stressing the importance of redeployment of industry
from industrialized to developing countries on the princi­
ple of dynamic comparative advantage, in conjunction
with structural adjustment, and reaffirming that restruc­
turing and redeployment should be carried out in accord­
ance with the national policies and priorities of Member
States, in particular of the developing countries,
Affirming that industrial restructuring as a long-term
process should encompass not only the establishment of
manufacturing capacities in the developing countries but
also the capacity to manage, expand, adapt and direct
industrial development as part of their national develop­
ment process,
Recalling resolution 159 (VI) of 2 July 1983 of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Develop­
ment, 225 in which it stressed the importance of access to
international markets for products of developing
countries,
Bearing in mind the importance of economic and social
effects of restructuring and redeployment,
Recalling that the System of Consultations, as an impor­
tant and established activity of the United Nations Indus­
trial Development Organization, is, inter alia, a valuable
framework for identifying problems associated with the
industrialization of developing countries, for considering
ways and means at the national, regional and international
levels to accelerate their industrialization and for fostering
closer industrial co-operation among member countries, in
accordance with the Lima Declaration and Plan of Action,
as well as other relevant conclusions, decisions and resolu­
tions agreed upon in the past by the United Nations,
Convinced that industrial financing is a key factor in this
context in each case,
Stressing that the appraisal of the System of Consulta­
tions initiated by the Industrial Development Board at its
eighteenth session226 should result in the improving of the
System and in making it more result-oriented in order to
achieve its fundamental objectives as laid down in the
Lima Declaration and Plan of Action, and in the princi­
ples, objectives and characteristics of the System of Con­
sultations, 227
Affirming that the System of Consultations should pro­
vide avenues for the exchange of information and views
and therefrom, inter alia, to the identification of specific
areas and forms of co-operation, and would also permit
negotiations among interested parties, at their request, at
the same time as or after the Consultations,
Recognizing the increasing interdependence of all
countries of the world as a base of international economic
co-operation,
1. Invites developing countries to co-ordinate their
efforts and policies in order to facilitate world industrial
restructuring and redeployment;
226 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session,
Sufflement No. 16 (A/39/16), para. 84.
•· 7 See Pl/84, part I.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committet>

2. Calls upon developing countries to promote their
own regional multinational enterprises for the implemen­
tation of industrial projects of common interest;
3. Urges developed countries to pursue appropriate
positive adjustment policies and measures that facilitate
world industrial restructuring with minimal disruptions,
which policies should seek to avoid negative effects on the
industrial development of developing countries;
4. Invites the developed countries to fulfil their com­
mitments to halt protectionism by fully implementing and
strictly adhering to the stand-still provisions they have
accepted, in particular concerning imports from develop­
ing countries, and to work systematically towards reducing
and eliminating quantitative restrictions and measures
having similar effect and to support efforts by developing
countries to attain full utilization of industrial capacity,
with importance being attached by interested countries to
the promotion of foreign and domestic investment
through an adequate and mutually beneficial framework
for investment;
5. Requests the United Nations Industrial Develop­
ment Organization:
(a) To strengthen its activities in the fields of technical
assistance, feasibility studies, advisory services, analysis of
opportunities, assistance in the formulation of national
development programmes and investment promotion in
sectors in which industrial restructuring is taking place, in
order to facilitate industrial restructuring and redeploy­
ment;
(b) To improve its ability to respond adequately and
promptly to requests from Member States for information
relating to industrial restructuring and related policies and,
for this purpose, to maintain close collaboration with the
relevant United Nations bodies and organizations working
in this field, as well as with relevant economic research
institutes;
(c) To continue, in accordance with its mandate, to
work in close co-operation and collaboration with the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
and relevant international organizations in industrial
restructuring and redeployment;
(d) To continue to prepare case studies on social and
economic implications of industrial restructuring and
redeployment in developing countries;
6. Recommends that the System of Consultations
should:
(a) Cover industrial sectors of particular interest to
developing countries;
(b) Hold more regional consultation meetings, in par­
ticular in relation to the Industrial Development Decade
for Africa, within the agreed framework for the System;
(c) Seek to identify specific areas and forms of co­
operation;
(d) Explore means and practical measures for the pro­
motion of industrial co-operation at subregional, regional
and international levels;
7. Recommends strengthening the Investment Promo­
tion Services of the United Nations Industrial Develop­
ment Organization by continuing, where appropriate, to
build a network of national promotion centres in devel­
oped and developing countries; that these services should
actively mobilize outside resources for identified invest­
ment projects, especially those related to the implementa­
tion of the Industrial Development Decade for Africa,
maintain close co-ordination with developing countries'
industrial development programmes and promote projects

179

falling within the national objectives and priorities of
developing countries.
104th plenary meeting
I 8 Deqmber 1984

39/248. Consumer protection
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 198 1/
62 of 23 July 198 1, in which the Council requested the
Secretary-General to continue consultations on consumer
protection with a view to elaborating a set of general
guidelines for consumer protection, taking particularly
into account the needs of the developing countries,
Recalling further General Assembly resolution 38/ 147
of 19 December 1983,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1984/63 of 26 July 1984.
I . Decides to adopt the guidelines for consumer protec­
tion annexed to the present resolution;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to disseminate the
guidelines to Governments and other interested parties;
3. Requests all organizations of the United Nations
system that elaborate guidelines and related documents on
specific areas relevant to consumer protection to distribute
them to the appropriate bodies of individual States.
106th plenary meeting
9 April 1985
ANNEX
Guidelines for consumer protection
I. OBJECTIVES
1. Taking into account the interests and needs of consumers in all
countries, particularly those in developing countries; recognizing that con­
sumers often face imbalances in economic terms, educational levels, and
bargaining power; and bearing in mind that consumers should have the
right of access to non-hazardous products, as well as the importance of pro­
moting just, equitable and sustainable economic and social development,
these guidelines for consumer protection have the following objectives:
(a) To assist countries in achieving or maintaining adequate protection
for their population as consumers;
(b) To facilitate production and distribution patterns responsive to the
needs and desires of consumers;
(c) To encourage high levels of ethical conduct for those engaged in the
production and distribution of goods and services to consumers;
(d) To assist countries in curbing abusive business practices by all
enterprises at the national and international levels which adversely affect
consumers;
(e) To facilitate the development of independent consumer groups;
(/J To further international co-operation in the field of consumer pro­
tection;
(g) To encourage the development of market conditions which provide
consumers with greater choice at lower prices.
II. GENERAL PRINCIPLES
2. Governments should develop, strengthen or maintain a strong con­
sumer protection policy, taking into account the guidelines set out below.
In so doing, each Government must set its own priorities for the protection
of consumers in accordance with the economic and social circumstances of
the country. and the needs of its population. and bearing in mind the costs
and benefits of proposed measures.
3. The legitimate needs which the guidelines are intended to meet are
the following:
(a) The protection of consumers from hazards to their health and safety;
(b) The promotion and protection of the economic interests of
consumers;
(c) Access of consumers to adequate information to enable them to
make informed choices according to indivi4ual wishes and needs;
