UNITED NATIONS

. SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

2222na

MEETING:

20 MAY 1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2222)

.. .. .. .. .... .. ... .. .. ... ... ... .. .. ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*..............................

1.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 16 May 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Jdrdan to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13941) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2222

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oficial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative.
on that date.

2222nd MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 20 May 1980, at 12 noon.
President:

Mr. Id6 OUMAROU (Niger).

“I have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation to the Permanent
Observer for the Palestine Liberation Organization
to participate in the consideration of the item entitled
‘The situation in the occupied Arab territories’, in
accordance with the Council’s usual practice.”

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

3. The proposal by the representative of Tunisia is
not made pirsuantto rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, but, if approved by the
Council, the invitation to participate in the debate
would confer on the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) the same rights of participation as those
enjoyed by a Member State when invited to participate
under rule 37.

agenda (S/Agenda/2222)

1. Adoption of the agenda

2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 16 May 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13941)
The meeting

4. Does any member of the Council wish to speak on
this proposal?
5. Mr. vanden HEUVEL (United States of America):
The United States delegation has repeatedly made
clear our view that it is inappropriate for the Council
to invite the Palestine Liberation Organization to
participate in the debate on terms that some seek to
interpret as conferring rights of participation as if it
were a Member State. For this reason, we will vote
against the manner in which this invitation is phrased.

was called to order at 12.15 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 16 May 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13941)

6. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
If no other member of the Council wishes to speak at
this stage, I shall take it that the Council is ready to
vote on the proposal of Tunisia.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French):
I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives
of Israel and Jordan, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Bangladesh, China, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Philippines,
Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia
Against:

United States of America

Abstaining:
France, Norway, Portugal, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Nuseibeh
(Jordan) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Blum
(Israel) took the place reserved for him at the side of
the Council chamber.

The proposal
4 abstentions.

was adopted

by 10 votes to I, with

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization)
took a place at the
Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have received a letter, dated 16 May, from the
representative of Tunisia [S/13950], which reads as
follows:

7. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French):
I should also like to inform members of the Council
1

that I have received a letter dated 16 May from the
representative
of Tunisia [S/13942], which reads as
follows:

and deportation,
in the bleak darkness of one hour
after midnight,
of the Mayor’ of Al-Khalil,
Fahd
Qawasma, the Mayor of Halhoul, Mohamed Milhem,
and Sheikh Rajab Bayyoud Attamimi,
from their
homes and homeland.

“I have the honour to request that the Security
Council invite Mr. Fahd Qawasma, Mayor of AlKhalil, Mr. Mohamed Milhem,
Mayor of Halhoul
and Mr. Rajab Attamimi, Sharia Judge of Al-Khalil,
to participate in the Council’s consideration of the
item entitled ‘The situation in the occupied Arab
territories’, in accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.”

14. The Council has been seized of a proliferation of
items which are neither disparate nor, indeed, allembracing. They are symptomatic and an embodiment
of a fiendish design being unravelled day in, day out,
to achieve the total national obliteration
of the Arab
people of Palestine and to supplant them by an alien
Zionist presence.

Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to this request.

15. The deportation
of the three Palestinian
personages, in flagrant violation of all norms of international law and conventions, and in audacious defiance
of a categorical Council decision adopted a mere
12 days ago, has made it more imperative than ever
before that the Council should take stock of the full
dimensions of a Zionist ideology and onslaught which
are unquestionably
unique in the post-war world and
unparalleled since the inception of the United Nations.

It was so decided.
8. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The Security Council is meeting today in response
to the letter dated 16 May from the representative of
Jordan addressed to the President of the Council,
which was circulated as document S/13941.

16. The question is not, the deportation
of three
Palestinian Arab leaders in the occupied West Bank
and Gaza, grave as that is, for 1,600 other leaders
had already been deported, including the Mayor of
Arab Jerusalem, Mr. Rouhi Al-Khatib, as a prelude to
the annexation of the Holy City of Jerusalem. They
were ail deported across uninhabited wastes at Wadi
Araba in Jordan to face an encounter with death
through thirst, hunger and exhaustion; or across the
rugged mountains of our sister country Lebanon and,
significantly,
through the strip controlled
by the
renegade henchman and quisling of the Zionist entity,
Haddad, in the earnest hope that some bullets or
mines could achieve the murder of the deportees.
I was told yesterday that, in the operation rooms from
which all the violence in southern Lebanon erupts,
Hebrew is the only language spoken, while that
renegade Saad Haddad claims that he is fighting for
the integrity of Lebanon. The deportees were also
sent across the River Jordan, where their Jordanian
brethren could and would only be expected to give
then the tender embrace befitting their nearest kin.

9. Members of the Council have before them document S/13938, which contains the text of the report
by the Secretary-General
under Council resolution 468
(1980). Members also have before them document
S/13949, which contains the text of a draft resolution
that has been prepared in the course of consultations.
10. The first speaker is the representative
on whom I call.

of Jordan,

11. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): Mr. President, I wish
to take this occasion of speaking before the Council
this month to express my sincere congratulations
to
you, the Ambassador of the friendly country of the
Niger, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. Your wisdom, statesmanship and dedication
are widely acknowledged.
12. It is my privilege also to commend in the highest
terms Ambassador Muiioz Ledo of the friendly country of Mexico for the exemplary manner in which he
had presided over the work of the Council during the
month of April.

17. And, at the grass-roots level, almost 300,000
people from both the Gaza Strip and the West Bank
are, as a result of intimidation,
force and the use of
loudspeakers
booming threats of genocide against
anyone who remained home, at present displaced
persons in the East Bank awaiting the implementation
of United Nations resolutions which since 1967 have
called for their return to their homes.

13. Over the past two months the Council has been
seized of grave issues pertaining to the question of
Palestine
and the inextricably
related problems,
tragedies and aggressions arising therefrom:
the
relentless, massive and ongoing devouring of the
remnants of the Palestinian
people’s national and
ancestral homeland; the recurring aggressions similarly ongoing and destructive against the independent
and sovereign State of Lebanon, our sister country;
the non-restoration
of the inalienable
rights of the
Palestinian people, flagrantly usurped-a
wrong unredressed after more than three decades; and, lastly, in
an act of indiscriminate
Zionist lawlessness and
defiance, the brutal and hate-mongering
abduction

18. Last, but not least, there are the tens of thousands
of boys and girls in the prime of their youth who have
passed through the grim ordeal of the Zionist-Nazi
torture chambers and tiny windowless ceils, too small
for a victim to stand upright or to stretch his legs.
Thousands continue to languish thus and waste away
unseen, and many of them have done so for 13 years.
2

19. This is what human rights are all about in the
dehumanized
Zionist world of beasts and wolves
masquerading
in transparent
cloaks of assumed
humanity.

accomplished
their criminal feat by drenching their
path with the innocent blood of unarmed Palestinians
and destroying or confiscating the lands, farms, homes,
towns and belongings of their victims.

20. Arab Jerusalem and the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip are a dwarfed one fifth of what has been for
6,000 to 7,000 years of recorded history the inalienable
homeland of the Palestinian
people, who founded
Jerusalem/Urusalema/Al-Quds
(the Holy),
Jtia,
Haifa, Al-Khalil,
Ramleh,
Lydda, Asqalan, Gaza,
Nazareth, Bethlehem, Acre, Jericho and the countless
other towns and villages, recurring conquests and
intrusions, including the intrusions of the Hebrew
tribes, notwithstanding.
For this hallowed soil of milk
and honey, of prophets, of venerable men and women,
of culture and civilization-indeed,
one of the great
cradles of civilization-as
the heartland and soul of
Syriac civilization,
had always had the fortitude and
breadth to absorb all in its great amalgam.

24. The acid test came in 1949 at the Lausanne
Conference, which could have ended the entire conflict
more than three decades ago and done so on the
basis of General Assembly resolutions 181 (II) and
194 (III) on the repatriation of the Palestinian people
to their homes and homeland. All the Arab parties
directly involved initialled the agreement, as did the
Israelis at first, tactically, in order to gain admission
to the United Nations-only
subsequently to renege,
having fulfilled their aim.
25. Today, a brainwashed world calls a Palestinian
a deadly extremist or terrorist for simply asking for
his natural right of return to his home and for the
reconstruction
of his shattered homeland,
a right
sanctified by the United Nations itself, quite apart from
elemental justice.

2 1. It is the first time in these accumulated millennia
that the Palestinian
people have been massively
uprooted, first in 1947-1948 and then after 1967, that
they are being systematically
uprooted and cannibalized. The monolithic,
fanatical, racist Zionists find
it inconceivable
to coexist and amalgamate
with
what they regard as impure gentiles, even though their
own scripts and history spell out elaborately to them
who the Palestinian people are and how the ancient
Hebrews obtained their short-lived
presence and
tutoring, including their religious experiences, at the
hands and on the soil of their present-day Palestinian
victims. Even the term Zion, which the racist Zionists
have transformed
into an instrument
of savage
persecution, is a name adopted from the Jebusite Arab
inhabitants of Jerusalem, who had used the name for
the Nabi Daoud Hill, where the prophet David had
located his military garrison from which he temporarily
subdued the indigenous founders and inhabitants of
Jerusalem.

26. A similar fait accompli
has been diligently
created over the past 13 years in Arab Jerusalem,
which is now unrecognizable,
as well as in the West
Bank of Jordan and the Gaza Strip. Colonization
has
reached 35 per cent of the total area of the occupied
territories.
Water resources have been sequestrated
and put at the service of the Zionist colonizers and a
wave of intensified violence and atrocities is being
ruthlessly dashed against the unarmed inhabitants of
the occupied territories.
Schools and colleges have
been paralysed; curfews and collective punishment
are being sadistically practised. Economic strangulation is being imposed-they
even resorted to a
poisonous defoliation
of Arab land just before the
crops matured-to
induce our people to migrate. The
50,000 inhabitants
of Al-Khalil
(Hebron)
were
imprisoned in their homes, with a one- to two-hour
period to obtain water and food. Yesterday, after
16 days, the day curfew was lifted, while the curfew
from dusk to dawn has remained in effect. Halhoul
suffered a similar fate last year. Palestinian refugee
camps in Lebanon as well as Lebanese towns and
villages are being devastated on an almost daily basis
from the sea, land and air. That has become such an
accepted routine that even the media accord it the
scantiest coverage, even though it involves the widespread destruction of ancient Phoenician towns and
villages like Sidon and Sur (Tyre), with an accompanying loss of innocent civilian lives.

22. The illegitimate
deportation
of the Mayors of
Al-Khalil
and Halhoul and the Sharia Judge of AlKhalil is the latest, but by no means the last, manifestation of the Zionist overall genocidal design against
the Palestinian people.
23. In 1947-1948, the massive Zionist
military
machine was unleashed, a mere few days after the
General Assembly had adopted resolution 181 (II) on
the partition of Palestine. Under the Delep Plan-and
I do not have to refer to any plans because I saw
what was happening with my own eyes-the
Israeli
objective was to preempt the implementation
of the
resolution and to uproot the vast majority of the
Palestinian people from four fifths of Palestine, while
deceitfully paying lip-service to accepting the resolution. When the British Mandate came to an end, the
Israelis were prevented from seizing the remaining one
fifth of Palestine by the timely Arab intervention
to
thwart the Zionists’ continued onslaught. The latter

27. Notwithstanding
our prolonged adversity, we
shall never be cowed or subdued. It is simply against
our nature. At the moment, the Palestinian people are
the target and the Israelis wish to apply the coup de
gr&e to them. But the threshold of endurance of their
victims, whether at home or in exile, is unbounded.
The British are cognizant of this fact, as the Arabs of
Palestine some 45 years ago were among the first in
the third world, if not the first, to rise in an armed
3

i

-A

rebellion for three full years and in a six-month total
strike against the then super-Power of the world, on
whose dominions the sun never set. It is ironical that
the first liberation movement by armed struggle
remains almost the only unredeemed cause.

masses of our sprawling world will in the not too
distant future be harnessed to redress. an intolerable
wrong and an impossible situation. If justice is eternal,
so is the cause of the Palestinian Arab people; ”
32. If the Security Council is given an audacious
slap in the face by a lawless, recalcitrant and ungrateful
Member State, to which it owes its very birth, over
the return of three Palestinian leaders unlawfully
deported, what should the world think when it comes
to redeeming a whole aggrieved people?

28. The Palestinians seem to stand alone, but that is
highly deceptive. More and more, the masses of our
vast region recognize that any of them could be the
next target when the national genocide of the Palestinians is completed. The real target, whether of
conquest or economic imperialism, is the whole Arab
world and the greater Islamic area of civilization. Our
peoples in the region know that all too well. It is little
wonder that the 40 Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
Conference of Islamic States, currently meeting at
Islamabad, have decided to establish a collective
security agreement primarily to confront, in concert,
Zionist expansionism and its misled supporters, foremost among which is a misguided United States.
I was gratified to see a bright ray of light when I read
in The New York Times today an advertisement
signed by SO American personages who condemned
the brutal Israeli act of deporting our distinguished
Mayors and the Sharia Judge of Hebron.

33. There can be no neutrality in cases of flagrant
injustice. One is either for justice or acquiesces in
injustice and forgets about habeas corpus, the Geneva
Conventions and everything relating to international
law. It can only mean a deliberate incapacitation of
the Security Council and, hence, the whole United
Nations system. The child given birth to over three
decades ago has grown into a deadly dragon posing
the most serious threat to world peace and security.
34. It is hardly recognized-at least publicly, or by
more than a few-that the Zionist enterprise of endless
aggression is directly and indirectly responsible for
the serious economic ills which affIict the economies
of the world, both developed and developing, directly
and indirectly, in a chain reaction which started with
the closure of the Suez Canal in 1967--arid I know how
many tens of billions have been lost by the Western
world and everybody else using that Canal because of
that closurennd the Israeli refusal to withdraw from
the occupied territories, which led to the 1973 war
and its economic consequences. And the end is by no
means in sight. The tens of millions of unemployed
throughout the world, the stunted growth of the
developing world and the disastrous inflation which
has deeply affected the lives of hundreds of millions of
people are but part of the price which the world is
made to pay in consequence of insatiable Zionist
expansion. But what do the Israelis care, so long as
they are assured that assistance to any other quarter
will be cut off across the board, except the billions
which flow every year to sustain their aggressive
policies and the huge arsenals of destruction-they
are really assembly plants provided to them by a
super-Power-given generously to them to continue
the pursuit of such policies? The price to all is
devastating, and yet-what else can I say-timidity
and mysticism are the only explanations for the lack
of what should normally and rationally be a firm stand
in defence of not only the aggrieved Palestinians but
also humanity in its entirety.

29. Indeed, the Knesset’s process of lenitimizinn the
annexation of Arab Jerusalem, which-has already
begun, strikes at the very roots of the region’s
spiritual values and legacy. The conversion of the
1,400-year-old Mosque of Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi Holy
Sanctuary into a synagogue, leaving a cranny of a few
square metres for Moslem worshippers-and we have
here the Sharia Judge to tell you what has happened
.to this 1,400-year-old holy sanctuary-portends the
true nature of Zionist plans for all Holy Places,
Moslem and Christian alike-for the Israelis have
played havoc with Christian places of worship as well.
If the Jews had any reverence for this holy sanctuary,
they would not have been dancing the debka within
its halls, in addition to committing acts of unspeakable
licence that are more proper to night clubs and
cabarets. A decent people behaves decently when
visiting an historic monument or museum, let alone a
place of worship, a mosque going back 1,400 years.
But what should anyone expect of an entity, which
has declared and celebrated as its national hero a
professional killer and human-hunter, Eli Hazeev,
whose notorious record of criminality encompasses
his acts in Viet Nam, the United ,States and our
hallowed occupied lands?
30. We do not count events in days, months or years.
Those are fleeting moments in history. But, for all
who are concerned with world peace, security and the
rule of law, the future will bear me out when I state
that those who are depending on temporary disarrays
and petty bickerings in our region are only deluding
themselves in their myopic policy decisions.

35. The Sharia Judge of Al-Khalil (Hebron), the
distinguished Mayor of Al-Khalil and the distinguished
Mayor of Halhoul are right here amongst us and have
come all the way to plead for the implementation of
their right to return, as mandated by the Council
12 days ago. It is only just that they should narrate
firsthand their ordeal and that of their fellow citizens.

31. The vast material resources, manpower, dedication and, above all, growing determination of all the
4

36. I wish to express the most earnest hope of my
Government that the Council will not allow itself to
be foiled once again, with impunity for the aggressor
and justice denied to the aggrieved.

Samaria and the Gaza district, does not react to many
ominous threats to international peace and security
throughout the globe. One such glaring example was
the bloody suppression two weeks ago of student
demonstrations throughout Afghanistan. Those
demonstrations began with protest marches by highschool girls. They spread to the university campus at
Kabul and were ruthlessly put down by the Soviet
occupation forces, which strafed the demonstrators
with helicopter fire and killed up to 200 students in the
process. If the way the Council acts with regard to
Judea and Samaria is any yardstick, one might
reasonably have expected the Council to have reacted
with some alacrity to this latest manifestation of
Soviet brutality in Afghanistan. But, of course, such
reasonable expectations are out of place, given the
Council’s totally eclectic vision.

37. The PRESIDENT (interpreturion from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Israel.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
38. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Some 12 days ago the Council was summoned to play out its part in the first act
of the latest charade being staged in the Council by
Israel’s enemies. The ground was then carefully laid
for the second act; and today the Council is dutifully
falling into line-1 almost said the chorus line-as per
the script which has been prepared for it.
39. “All the world’s a stage”-perhaps. But surely
the Security Council, with its primary responsibility
for the preservation of international peace and security,
was never meant to be a stage for a repetitive repertoire
developed by those who have declared war on peace
in our region.

45. As I said in my statement to the Council on 8 May
[2221st meeting], the Mayors of Hebron and Halhoul
and the Qadi of Hebron, over the last three months,
on instructions from the PLO and the Arab rejectionist
States, have been actively and systematically engaged
in inciting the local Arab population to acts of violence
and subversion against Israel and Israelis alike. In so
doing, they have abused their public offices and even
received and used PLO funds for these purposes.
They have thus substantially contributed to the
deterioration of public order in the Hebron region,
which culminated in the abominable outrage of 2 May.

40. The Council continues to be guided by a selective
conscience and to be hampered-by eclectic vision.
In the process it is undermining the basis of what is
still left of its moral authority.
41. When terrorists shed innocent blood, the Council
does not see it. This is patently so when it is Jewish
blood being shed by a gang of terrorists bent on
destroying a Member State of the Organization.

46. The three individuals concerned have made no
secret of their views. They have made inflammatory
statements at public gatherings and, in the case of
the Qadi of Hebron, from the pulpit. They encouraged
violent acts of protest and repeatedly called for what
they termed “the translation of words into deeds”.
If anyone still entertains any doubts about their aims,
he need only examine their statements and actions
over the last two weeks.

42. Take, for example, what happened in the Council
about a month ago. The Council adopted a totally
unbalanced resolution at the conclusion of a debate
which came in the wake of the despicable outrage
perpetrated at Kibbutz Misgav Am by PLO terrorists
on 7 April. But the resolution in question, resolution 467 (1980), did not note, let alone comment on,
the fact that babies had been taken hostage and one of
them had been murdered. Instead, it preferred for the
most part to take Israel to task and to place blame
on it.

47. Immediately on their arrival in Beirut, the three
individuals concerned were given a hero’s welcome
by Yasser Arafat. Ever since then they have made
highly incriminating statements to the press. In a
vehement interview with the correspondent of the
Saudi newspaper Al-Riyad, all three called for violent
armed action against Israel. The Mayor of Halhoul,
having proclaimed that they would struggle to the bitter
end for the establishment of a Palestinian State,
declared that, “We will not live in coexistence with
the Jews”.

43. Similarly, some 12 days ago a resolution was
adopted in the wake of the brutal and cowardly murder
of six Jews and the wounding of 16 others in Hebron.
None the .less, the resolution in question, resolution 468 (1980), made no mention whatsoever of that
ugly and unforgivable outrage. Any reader of that
resolution, unaware of the background of the events
to which it refers, might be forgiven for coming to the
wholly erroneous conclusion that one bright day in
May the Israel Administration arbitrarily and irrationally decided to deport three Arab officials from
Hebron and HalhouI. As everyone knows, nothing
could be further from the truth.

48. A day later, the three gave a similar interview to
the Kuwaiti News Agency, and announced that “the
liberation of Palestine would be achieved by guns, not
from New York and not from Washington”.
49. The next day, on 13 May, the three met with
members of the National Advisory Council of Jordan.
The Mayor of Hebron, as reported in the Jordanian
press on 14 May, reiterated this position. He called,

44. The Council, which, with a view to assailing
Israel, monitors in such detail every event in Judea,
5

inter alia,

for the massing of Arab forces against
Israel, while the Qadi of Hebron called on the Arab
and Moslem States to prepare for the day of battle
and triumph and to use the oil weapon against the
United States and Israel.

prohibited political activities such as membership in
the Communist party, without being involved in
incitement to violence as in the case of the Mayors
of Hebron and Halhoul. I should like to cite several
examples.

50. Let us not delude ourselves about what the three
individuals concerned mean when they talk about the
struggle and war against Israel. As I pointed out in my
statement before the Council on 8 May, they have made
no secret in recent months of what they mean.

55. In 1955, Fuad Nasser, a leading Communist
under the Jordanian occupation, was forcibly deported
to Al-Jaafar, deep in the wilderness east of the Jordan
River and then, in July 1956, he was expelled to
Syria. On 9 October 1957, the Armenian Archbishop,
Dir-an Narsuyan, was expelled to Lebanon for his
political activities. Not only did this practice continue
until the last days of the Jordanian occupation of
Judea and Samaria, but there have also been expulsions
from the East Bank in recent years. Thus, for example,
in June 1971-some months after the “Black September” of 1970, when the Jordanians ruthlessly
destroyed the PLO presence on their territory-the
Jordanian authorities again began expelling those
PLO terrorists who still remained in Jordan. On
21 August 1971, the then Prime Minister of Jordan,
Wasfi Tal, disclosed that 2,500 PLO terrorists had
been expelled from the areas of Jerash and Ajlun. In
the midst of that operation, on 22 July 1971, another
47 terrorists were taken out of Jordanian prisons and
expelled to Syria. Incidentally, it will be recalled that
PLO terrorists subsequently assassinated Wasfi Ta1
and in an open display of their depravity they even
drank his blood. And then, to give further examples,
on 4 May 1976, two Palestinian Arabs, called Ibrahim
Bakr and Izzat Al-Khattab, were expelled to Syria.
The reason for their expulsion was not disclosed,
but in all probability it was for subversive activity
against the Kingdom of Jordan.

,51. For example, at a meeting on 24 March, the Qadi
of Hebron called for a Jihad--a holy war--“in order
to purge Palestine of foreign Jews and to restore
all of Palestine to the army of Islam”. The Qadi was
very explicit about what he meant by “all of Palestine”,
and he went on to say that the Jews would have
to vacate Jaffa, Haifa, Akko and Palestine as a whole.
In other words, we are dealing here with a call for the
destruction of the State of Israel. There is absolutely
no other construction that can reasonably be put on
the words and actions of the three individuals concerned, either while they were at their posts in Hebron
and Halhoul or since their deportation on 3 May.
52. The Israel Administration repeatedly warned the
three individuals concerned against persisting in their
agitation and subversive activities. In deporting them
after their words and actions had led to an extreme act
of violence in Hebron, the Administration was acting
within its legal authority and the deportations were
carried out in accordance with the law. The deportations were based on the Defence (Emergency) Regulations of 1945, issued by the British Mandatory authorities. Article 112 authorizes deportation on grounds of
certain activities against security. These regulations
were in force in Judea and Samaria under the Jordanian
Administration prior to 4 June 1967and have remained
in force since that date in accordance with the principles of article 43 of the Regulations annexed to The
Hague Convention of 1907’ and the first paragraph of
article 64 of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12August 1949*-arid that without prejudice to Israel’s
well-known position of principle with regard to the
non-applicability of the Geneva Convention in the
present context.

56. I am not aware of any Security Council meeting
ever having been convened to discuss these and
similar expulsions.
57. In its resolution 468 (1980), the Council recalls
“the Geneva Convention of 1949”. Presumably this
refers to the fourth Red Cross Convention of 12August
1949, and not to the Geneva Convention on road
traffic of the same year. While Israel, as is well known,
does not recognize the formal application of the fourth
Geneva Convention2 in the administered areas, it
nevertheless does apply, on a de facto basis, the
humanitarian provisions of that Convention. That
includes the principle enunciated in article 64, paragraph 1, which stresses the necessity to maintain the
existing local penal law.

53.. According to article 112, paragraph 1, of the
Defence Regulations, the area commander shall have
power to make an order under his hand for the deportation of any person. Article 108 provides that a military
commander may issue a deportation order if he is of
the opinion that it is necessary or expedient for securing
the public safety.

58. Those who seek to invoke in the present case
article 49 of the fourth Geneva Convention choose to
ignore the fact that, even if for some reason the
Convention were to apply, the situation here under
consideration is fundamentally different from the one
envisaged by article 49. This difference is clearly
attested to by the authoritative commentaries on that
article, including the commentary by Pictet under the
auspices of the International Committee of the Red

54. The Jordanian occupation authorities did not
hesitate between 1948and 1967to invoke these regulations and to act under them both for the purposes of
expulsion, exile and individual and mass forcible
transfer of persons who were often merely engaged in
6

Cross. We have stated on more than one occasion the
reasons for the irrelevance of article 49 in the present
context, and I shall thus refrain from setting them out
in detail once again.

was a highly pertinent fact. As members also know,
the Israel courts and the Israel judicial system have
established for themselves an enviable reputation.
They certainly can match and in many cases are better
than the courts in most of the countries represented
in this Organization-including
some
on the
Council.

59. But even those who wish to hold Israel to The
Hague Regulations of 1907 with regard to its administration of Judea and Samaria must be aware that
regulation 43 enables the administration
to take all
measures-and
I stress: all measures-to
restore and
assure public order and safety. Israel would thus have
been fully within its legal rights had it limited freedom
of speech, assembly, expression and other basic
freedoms. Despite severe provocation
from within
Judea and Samaria, and increasingly bellicose noises,
particularly from Israel’s Arab neighbours to the east,
Israel has preferred to maintain a liberal administration
in Judea and Samaria and the Gaza district. It has
allowed free elections to be held in which mayors have
been elected despite their open hostility to the State
of Israel.

64. Thus, those who have insisted on this meeting
of the Council today have again demonstrated that it is
not considerations of law, justice and good faith that
guide them, but rather their well-known fixations,
which they translate into a constant political manipu-.
lation of this Organization.
But then, of course, the
Council does not require that those appearing before
it come with clean hands.
65. Since February the. Council has been engaged
almost continuously in debates concerning one or other
aspect of the Arab-Israel conflict, invariably abstracted
from its full and proper context. All of us know that,
over and beyond whatever merits the Arab adversaries
of peace may see in this tactic, the object has been
-as I said at the beginning of my remarks-to
prevent
the Council from dealing with the major threats
endangering international
peace and security throughout the world today, and this tactic has been particularly convenient to the Soviet Union, which has
encouraged it in order to divert attention from that
country’s ongoing aggression against and occupation
of Afghanistan.

60. The Mayors of Hebron and Halhoul and the Qadi
of Hebron were public officials entrusted to fulfil
functions which include an essential element of
responsibility
for maintaining
public order and peace
within their respective municipal
or religious communities. That element is not a pious desideratum,
but a legal requirement
laid down in the Jordanian
Municipal Council Law, No. 29 of 1955, which stresses
the obligation of a mayor to act for the municipal good
and public order.

66. What the Council is doing today fits into the
pattern of what has become an almost weekly exercise,
motivated by the pathological
obsession of Israel’s
enemies. All of us who have listened today to the
statement made by the representative of the Palestinian
Arab State of Jordan have again been reminded of the
chronic and pathological
nature of this obsession,
which in his particular case manifests itself also in an
utter inability
to come to terms with truth, both
historical and contemporary.
Many Members of the
Organization, including members of the Council, have
long recognized that obsession for what it is, but
for various reasons, such as battle fatigue and the vain
hope that the Arab oil gods may be supplicated, they
have chosen not to stand up to what amounts to a
constant harassment of the Council by the Arab petrohegemonists.

61. It goes without saying that when a mayor or a
religious functionary deliberately goes out of his way
to do the exact opposite, and incites his respective
community
to commit
acts of violence,
rioting,
disorder and terror, he subverts the very source of the
authority to fulfil various public functions. In the face
of incitement to violence and terror, the administering
authority-and
this applies to any administration-is
obliged to act within the frame of the existing law to
put an end to such activities.
62. Israel took no such action against the three
individuals
concerned until their activities led to a
blatant and bloody disrup:ion of the public order. Only
then did Israel move to restore and maintain public
order, among other things with a view to preventing
any recurrence of the kind of outrage which was
perpetrated in Hebron on 2 May of this year.

67. Indeed, only yesterday, The New York Times
reported that Yasser Arafat had again threatened
Western Europe that its interests would be gravely
affected by any non-compliance
with his demands.

63. As members of the Council know, proceedings
have been initiated in the Israel Supreme Court on
behalf of the Mayors of Hebron and Halhoul and
the Qadi of Hebron with regard to their deportations.
Today. the Sunreme Court of Israel, sitting as a High
Court of Justice, decided to grant the petition a
hearing. Members of the Council know this full well,
but they have deliberately chosen to ignore it, even
though one would think that the institution
of legal
proceedings on behalf of the three persons concerned

68. The Mayor of Hebron and his two colleagues
have been speaking in exacdy the same terms for
some time. On 12 May, these three individuals, in the
interview which I have already mentioned with the
Kuwait News Agency, made an explicit call for an oil
boycott against the United States. A day later, in their
meeting with the members of the National Advisory
7

Council of Jordan, the Mayor of Hebron repeated this
call for the use of the oil weapon against the United
States, as reported in the Jordanian press on 14 May.

unrealistic and unfounded. This only serves to highlight even further the hypocrisy inherent in the
Council’s treatment of the matter on its agenda.

69. The Council knows full well that it is being
constantly harassed and manipulated. It therefore has
resorted with increasing frequency to the strange
technique of hastily adopting resolutions dictated from
outside and lacking formal sponsorship-and, if at all
possible, without any debate.

71. In these circumstances, resolutions born out of
hypocrisy, a selective conscience and eclectic vision
can only be treated for what they are-the products
of hypocrisy, a selective conscience and eclectic
vision.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

70. One would have hoped that the purpose of such
expeditious treatment of secondary and tertiary
aspects of the Arab-Israel conflict is aimed at clearing
the way for the Council’s early consideration of such
real threats to international peace and security as
Afghanistan, Iran, Cambodia, the two Yemens, the
conflagrations all over Africa, including the Horn of
Africa, Chad and the Western Sahara, or the Cuban
refugees and international terrorism. But all of us
know, of course, that such expectations are completely

NOTES

1 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, The Hague Conof 1899 and 1907. New York. Oxford
University Press.1915. 2United Nations,Treaty Series, vol. 75, p. 287.

ventions and Declarations

8

HOW TO OBTAIN UMTED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UMES

Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dans Ieslibrairies et les agencesdepositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous auprb de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Cientve.
KAK
IIOJIYWiTb
K3AAHKII
OPrAHZiBAI~lfN
OD%EfiHHEHHhIX
HAHHH
H~~ann~‘Opramr3aunzi
O~Z~.~HH~HHE.IX
HaqnB
YIOSK(HO xymi~b
a KHHX(H~IX
maraannax H areH=crsax 80 acex pafionax aaupa. HaBogwTe
cnpaam
06 HwtaAHIlx
B
aame~ KH~~KHOMrdarasune &m&i ~H~JHT~ no anpecy: OpraHN3asrnR O6%ennRentiblx
HatruB. C~KUHR nonpo~lance~1na~~R,Hb~)-~op~~1~~3KeHeEa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas esdn en Yenta en lib&as y casas disttibuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

83-61462-September 1986-2.050
