llO

General Assembly

1O. Recommends that all Governments intensify
their efforts in the specialized ag~ncies and other org~nizations within the United N at1ons system of wh1ch
they are members in order to ensure. the full and
effective implementation of the Declara~10n and other
relevant resolutions of the United Nat1ons;
11. Recommends that, in order to facilita~e .implementation of paragraph_ 1q abov~, ~he speciah_zed
agencies and other orgamzations_ w1thm . the Umted
N ations system should request their. executive h~ads. to
present to their ~espective govern~ng and leg1slat1ve
organs, in a spec1fic and systematlc manner, recommendations on decolonization adopted by competent
United Nations bodies, together with a full analysis of
the issues and problems involved, if any, and concrete
suggestions for the implementation of these recommendations;
12. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of
the policies and activities of the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the Unit~d Nations
system in implementing the relevant resolut10ns of the
General Assembly;
13. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare for submission to the relevant b?dies
concerned with related aspects of the present 1tem,
with the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system,
a report on the action taken since the circulation of
his comprehensive report, 46 or envisaged by those organizations in implementation of the relevant United
Nations resolutions, including the present resolution;
( b) To continue to assist the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the present resolution and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session;
14. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the question and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2875 (XXVI). United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Mrica

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2349 (XXII) of 19 December 1967, whereby it established an inte_g~ated
educational and training programme for N am1bians,
South Africans, Southern Rhodesians and persons from
Territories under Portuguese administration,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa, 47
Recalling its decision, contained in paragraph 7 of
resolution 2349 (XXII), that the Programme should
be financed from a trust fund made up of voluntary
contributions,
Further recalling that, by paragraph 8 of resolution 2349 (XXII), it authorized the SecretaryGeneral to appeal to States Members of the United
Nations or members of specialized agencies for funds
46 A/8314 and Add.1-6.
47 A/8485 and Add.1 and 2.

Twenty-sixth Session

to achieve a target of $US 3 million in the period
from 1968 to 1970,
Noting that the voluntary contributions received in
the four-year period from 1968 to 1971 have fallen
far short of the original three-year target,
Noting further that such funds as have been m~de
available have been expended annually to prov1de
assistance in the form of individual awards to persons
from the Territories concerned to further their education and that, consequently, addi~iona~ funds .are
required if the Programme is to contmue m operat10n,
Expressing its firm conviction that the provision of
assistance for the education and training of persons
from the Territories concerned is as essential as ever
and should not only continue, but also be expanded,
1. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
made voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa since its inception;
2. Urgently appeals to ali States, organizations and
individuals to make generous contributions to the trust
fund for the Programme so that it might not only be
continued, but also strengthened and expanded;
3. Decides that, as a further transitional measure,
provision shall be made, under section 12 of the regular
budget of the United Nations for the financia} year
1972, for an amount of $100,000 to ensure continuity
of the Programme pending the receipt of adequate voluntary contributions;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral and to the members of the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa, established in pursuance of paragraph 2 of General Assembly resolution 2431 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968, for the
work they have accomplished during the period under
review in connexion with the Programme;
5. Takes note with approval of the efforts made
during the period under review to strengthen cooperation between the Programme and the Uni~ed
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the spec1alized agencies and the Organization of African Unity,
and hopes that these efforts will be continued with a
view to further co-ordination of their activities in the
field of education and training for persons from the
Territories concerned;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session on the
progress of the Programme.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2876 (XXVI). O:ffers by Memher States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2705 (XXV) of 14 December 1970,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, 48 prepared under the terms of General Assembly
resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954,
48 A/8530.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Foorth Committee

Recalling further all previous resolutions concerning
the question of Southern Rhodesia adopted by the General Assembly and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also its resolution 2769 (XXVI) of 22 November 1971, in particular paragraphs 1 and 2 thereof,
Gravely concerned at the "proposals far a settlement"
which, if implemented, will entrench the rule of the
racist minority régime in Southern Rhodesia and will
perpetuate the enslavement of the African people of
Zimbabwe,
Deeply conscious that the "proposals for a settlement" were agreed upon without the participation of
the representatives of the African people of Zimbabwe,
l. Rejects the "proposals far a settlement" agreed
upan by the Government of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the racist
minority régime in Salisbury as constituting a flagrant
viol~tion of the inalienable right of the African people
of Z1_mbabwe_ to self-determination and independence as
prov1ded for m GeneralAssembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Reafjirms that no settlement which does not
conform strictly to the principie of "no independence
befare !llajority rule" on the basis of one man, one
vote, w1ll be acceptable;
3. Invites the Security Council, when examining the
question of Southern Rhodesia, to consider taking appropriate measures, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, in
arder to enable the people of Zimbabwe to exercise
freely and without further delay their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence;
4. Welcomes the decision by the Security Council
on 2 December 1971 52 to invite Mr. Joshua Nkomo
and the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole, the respective
leaders of the Zimbabwe African People's Union and
the Zimbabwe African National Union, to appear befare the Council to express their views concerning the
future status of the Territory, and calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom, as the administering
Power, to comply with that decision;
5. Calls upon all States to adhere strictly to the
relevant provisions of the resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council on the question
of Southern Rhodesia, and in particular to observe the
resolutions of the Council imposing sanctions against
the racist minority régime.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

Bearing in mind the need to provide increased educational and training facilities, at all levels, far the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made scholarships available to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make generous offers of
study and training facilities to inhabitants of Non-SelfGoverning Territories;
4. Requests those States offering scholarships and
those which might subsequently do so to inform the
Secretary-General of the details of the offers made
under this programme and, whenever possible, to provide travel funds to prospective students;
5. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
give widespread publicity in Territories under their
administration to offers of study and training facilities
~ade by States and to provide all the necessary facilities to enable students to avail themselves of such
offers;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
~eneral Ass~mbly at its twenty-seventh session on the
1mplementat1on of the present resolution;
7. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2877 (XXVI). Question of Southern Rhodesia49

The General Assembly,
Having heard the statement by the representative of
the Govemment of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern lreland 50 concerning the "proposals for a settlement" agreed upon between that Government and the racist minority régime in Salisbury, 51
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,' containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
49 See also resolutions 2765 (XXVI), 2769 (XXVI) and
2796 (XXVI).
50 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentysixth Session, Fourth Committee, 1956th meeting.
51 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1971
document S/10405.
'

*

111

52 fbid.,

*

Twenty-sixth Year, 1604th meeting.

*

Other decisions
lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples
(Item 23)

At its 2028th pl~nary meeting, on 20 December 1971, the General Assembly,
on the reco~mendatron of the Fourth Committee, 53 adopted the fallowing text
as representmg the consensus of the members of the Assembly:
63 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda
item 23, document A/8616, para. 24.
