United Nations

A/RES/61/192

General Assembly

Distr.: General
6 February 2007

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 53 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2006
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/61/422/Add.1 and Corr.1)]

61/192. International Year of Sanitation, 2008
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 1 Agenda 21, 2
the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 3 the Johannesburg
Declaration on Sustainable Development 4 and the Plan of Implementation of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 5
as well as the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing
for Development, 6
Reaffirming the commitment to implement Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,
including the time-bound goals and targets, and the other internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 7
Reaffirming the need to assist the efforts of developing countries to prepare
integrated water resources management and water efficiency plans as part of their
national development strategies and to provide access to safe drinking water and basic
sanitation in accordance with the United Nations Millennium Declaration 8 and the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, including halving by 2015 the proportion of
people who are unable to reach or afford safe drinking water and who do not have
access to basic sanitation,
_______________
1
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro 3-14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa
26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 1, annex.
5
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
6
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18-22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
7
See resolution 60/1.
8
See resolution 55/2.

06-50595

A/RES/61/192

Also reaffirming the necessity to take into account sanitation in
complementarity with water, in conjunction with the International Decade for
Action, “Water for Life”, 2005–2015,
Appreciating the ongoing work in the United Nations system and the work of
other intergovernmental organizations on sanitation,
Taking note with appreciation of the contribution made by the Advisory Board
on Water and Sanitation and its work on the Hashimoto Action Plan, a compendium
of water-related actions which relevant actors should consider, as appropriate,
Deeply concerned by the slow and insufficient progress in providing access to
basic sanitation services, and conscious of the impact of the lack of sanitation on
people’s health, poverty reduction and economic and social development, and on the
environment, in particular water resources,
Convinced that progress can be achieved through active commitment and
action by all States, including at the national and local levels, as well as United
Nations agencies, regional and international organizations, civil society
organizations and other relevant stakeholders,
1.

Decides to declare 2008 the International Year of Sanitation;

2.
Requests the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the
Secretariat to serve as the focal point for the Year and to develop, in a timely
manner, relevant proposals on possible activities at all levels, including possible
sources of funding;
Calls upon States as well as subregional, regional and international
3.
organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including the private sector and civil
society, to make voluntary contributions;
Encourages all States, as well as the United Nations system and all other
4.
relevant stakeholders, to take advantage of the Year to increase awareness of the
importance of sanitation and to promote action at all levels, taking into account,
inter alia, the policy recommendations adopted by the Commission on Sustainable
Development at its thirteenth session as well as, where appropriate, the relevant
recommendations made in the Hashimoto Action Plan;
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
5.
sixty-fourth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 2006

2
