S/2020/1234

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 December 2020
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolution 2334 (2016)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the sixteenth quarterly report on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2334 (2016). The reporting period is from 21 September
to 10 December 2020.

II. Settlement activities
2.
In resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council reaffirmed that the
establishment by Israel of settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967,
including East Jerusalem, had no legal validity and constituted a flagrant violation
under international law and a major obstacle to the achievement of the two -State
solution and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. In the same resolution, the
Council reiterated its demand that Israel immediately and completely cease all
settlement activities in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
and that it fully respect all of its legal obligations in that regard. No suc h steps were
taken during the reporting period.
3.
On 14 and 15 October, in one of the largest collective advancements in recent
years, the Israeli authorities approved construction plans for some 5,000 housing units
in Area C, approximately 80 per cent of which are planned in settlements in outlying
locations, deep inside the occupied West Bank, in areas further impeding the
contiguity of a future Palestinian State.
4.
The plans include the retroactive legalization, under Israeli law, of the Tapuach
West outpost (133 units) near the Kfar Tapuach settlement south of Nablus, and the
Pnei Kedem outpost (120 units) near the Metzad settlement north -east of Hebron; the
approval of 629 units in Eli, including the retroactive legalization, under Israeli law,
of 61 illegally constructed units; and the approval of 560 units in Har Gilo, which will
further sever the territorial contiguity between Bethlehem and the village of al -Walaja
to its north-west.
5.
On 15 November, the Israeli authorities opened the bidding proc ess for the
construction of 1,200 housing units in the Givat Hamatos settlement in East
Jerusalem. If completed, this project would further consolidate a ring of settlements
along the southern perimeter of Jerusalem, separating East Jerusalem from Bethlehe m

20-17248 (E)

211220

*2017248*

S/2020/1234

and the southern West Bank, significantly damaging prospects for a future contiguous
Palestinian State.
6.
On 23 November, the Jerusalem District Planning Committee advanced a plan
for the construction of some 540 housing units in the East Jerusalem sett lement of
Har Homa.
7.
On 29 November, the High Court of Justice of Israel upheld the declaration of
areas in and around the Palestinian neighbourhood of Kafr Aqab, including the land
on which the Kochav Ya’akov settlement is built, as State land.
8.
At the beginning of October, an Israeli outpost was reportedly established in the
Beit Dajan area, west of Nablus, and another was reportedly erected on a hill 4.5 km
east of the Shiloh settlement, where a military base was previously located.
9.
During the reporting period, demolitions and seizures of Palestinian -owned
structures continued across the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Citing
the absence of Israeli-issued building permits, which remain almost impossible for
Palestinians to obtain, the Israeli authorities demolished, forced people to demolish
or seized 290 structures, resulting in the displacement of 251 people, including 128
children and 63 women, with some 2,500 others also adversely affected.
10. At least 56 of the structures targeted were dismantled and seized without prior
notice based on military regulations allowing the summary requisition of “newly
installed” structures defined as “movable” or suspected to be used to commit a
criminal offence. A total of 38 structures were demolished on the basis of military
order No. 1797, which authorizes an expedited process that gives owners only 96
hours to demonstrate that they possess a valid building permit. Another 8 structures
were demolished by their respective owners following receipt of demolition orders.
A total of 73 structures demolished or seized were donor-funded.
11. According to the United Nations Children’s Fund, 52 schools in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, face pending “stop work” or demolition orders,
which, if implemented, would affect some 5,200 students.
12. In 2020, demolitions and seizures by the Israeli authorities of Palestinian -owned
property in Area C rose by 72 per cent compared with 2019. In East Jerusalem, while
an 18 per cent decline in demolitions was observed, there was a 47 per cent increase
in the number of structures demolished by their respective owners following receipt
of demolition orders compared with 2019.
13. On 28 October, the Israeli authorities cut a donor-funded pipe supplying water
to 14 herding communities in the Masafer Yatta area of Hebron, home to about 1,400
people, including over 600 children.
14. On 2 November, the Israeli Government informed the High Court of Justice that
it would not demolish the Bedouin village of Khan al-Ahmar in the next four months.
In its explanation, the Government cited restrictions related to coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) and “additional considerations” as the reasons for the delay and said that
it would use the additional time to exhaust efforts to reach an agreement with the
residents.
15. On 3 November, the Israeli authorities carried out the most extensive demolition
in the occupied West Bank of the past decade, destroying over 80 structures, including
homes, in the Bedouin community of Humsa Al Bqai’a, in Area C. Seventy-three
people were displaced, including 41 children. Decade-long petitions and appeals
against the demolitions were rejected by the High Court of Justice.
16. On 23 November, the Jerusalem District Court rejected an appeal by a
Palestinian family, ruling that they must vacate their home in Batan al -Hawa, in the
2/12

20-17248

S/2020/1234

neighbourhood of Silwan, in favour of settlers. The 26 family members have lived in
the home since before 1967.

III. Violence against civilians, including acts of terror
17. In resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called for immediate steps to
prevent all acts of violence against civilians, including acts of terror, as well as all
acts of provocation and destruction, and called for accountability in that regard and
for compliance with obligations under international law for the strengthening of
ongoing efforts to combat terrorism, including through existing security coordination,
and to clearly condemn all acts of terrorism.
18. The reporting period was characterized by daily acts of violence throughout the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including clashes between Palestinians and Israeli
security forces, settler-related violence, stabbing attacks or alleged attempted attacks,
the throwing of rocks and Molotov cocktails by Palestinians, the firing of rockets by
Palestinian militants from Gaza towards Israel, retaliatory Israeli airstrikes against
militant targets in Gaza and the use of lethal force by Israeli security forces against
Palestinians.
19. Overall, five Palestinians, including two children, were killed by Israeli security
forces during demonstrations, clashes, security operations and other incidents across
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, and 428 Palestinians, including 2 women and 41
children, were injured, including 36 by live ammunition. Eleven members of the
Israeli security forces and 15 Israeli civilians, including two women, were injured by
Palestinians in clashes, rock and Molotov cocktail throwing and other incidents.
20. In Gaza, while a relative calm largely prevailed, Palestinian militants launched
eight rockets and seven incendiary balloons from Gaza into Israel. In response, the
Israel Defense Forces fired 33 shells and missiles into Gaza, striking Hamas positions,
observation posts and other military infrastructure, as well as open areas. No injuries
were reported.
21. On 1 October, the Israel Defense Forces arrested two Palestinian men who had
crossed into Israel through the Gaza security fence, carrying a home-made bomb. On
at least 76 occasions, Israeli security forces opened warning fire towards Gaza in the
areas adjacent to the perimeter fence, with no injuries recorded. On 42 occasions,
Israeli forces opened fire on Palestinians fishing off the coast of Gaza, injuring one.
22. On 20 October, the Israel Defense Forces announced that they had located a
Hamas tunnel entering Israeli territory from the southern Gaza Strip. Palestinian
militants responded by firing a rocket from Gaza towards Israel, which was
intercepted by the Iron Dome system. The Israel Defense Forces responded by
striking an underground structure in an agricultural field in Gaza. No injuries were
reported.
23. On 15 November, Palestinian militants fired two rockets towards Israel from
Gaza. One rocket fell into the sea near the city of Ashdod and the other landed in an
open area inside Israel, east of Ashdod. No injuries or damages were reported. In
retaliation, the Israel Defense Forces fired three shells an d two missiles at Hamas
underground infrastructure and military posts in Gaza. No injuries were reported.
24. On 21 November, Palestinian militants fired a rocket towards Israel from Gaza,
which landed on an empty factory warehouse in Ashkelon, causing dam age. An Israeli
woman was injured while seeking shelter. In retaliation, the Israel Defense Forces
fired a shell targeting a military observation post in Gaza. A few hours later, on

20-17248

3/12

S/2020/1234

22 November, the Israel Defense Forces fired 16 missiles targeting Hamas m ilitary
sites. No injuries were reported.
25. Meanwhile, in the West Bank, on 22 September, during a security operation in
Hebron, Palestinian Authority police used live fire and physical force against
Palestinian civilians, namely one adult and three children, one aged 14 and two aged
16. The three children were seriously injured, two by live ammunition. Despite court
orders to release the injured children, the four were detained until 7 October, when
they were released without charge.
26. On 4 October, Israeli security forces shot and injured a 16-year-old Palestinian
child during clashes in Beit Ummar village, north of Hebron.
27. On the same day, in the town of Hizma, north-east of Jerusalem, Israeli security
forces shot and injured a 15-year-old boy in the head with live ammunition.
28. Also on 4 October, a Palestinian armed with a knife attempted to stab an Israeli
security forces officer near Hebron. The attacker was arrested and no injuries were
reported.
29. On 5 October, Israeli security forces shot and killed a Palestinian man and
injured two others at a checkpoint south-east of Tulkarm. Israeli security forces stated
that the three were throwing Molotov cocktails at passing vehicles.
30. On 9 October, Israeli security forces injured two Palestinians with live bullets
during clashes in the Old City of Hebron (H2 zone).
31. On 11 October, during a search operation in al-Am‘ari refugee camp in
Ramallah, Israeli security forces shot and injured 10 Palestinians with live
ammunition and a further 13 with rubber-coated metal bullets. One member of the
Israeli security forces was injured by a stone thrown by Palestinians.
32. On 14 October, two Israel Defense Forces soldiers were injured by an explosive
device thrown at them during an arrest operation in the Balata camp for Palestine
refugees, in Nablus.
33. On 25 October, a 17-year-old Palestinian boy died during an encounter with
Israeli security forces near the occupied West Bank village of Turmus‘ayya, near
Nablus. There are conflicting claims about the circumstances and the cause of death.
34. On 27 October, nine Palestinians, including two brothers of a Palestinian
Legislative Council member reportedly affiliated with the Fatah Democratic Reform
Bloc, were arrested by the Palestinian Security Forces in al-Am‘ari refugee camp,
following clashes with camp residents.
35. On 30 October, Israeli soldiers opened fire on a Palestinian vehicle travelling
near Jenin, injuring three children. The circumstances surrounding the incident
remain disputed, with the Israel Defense Forces claiming that the vehicle posed a
threat.
36. On 31 October, a leader of the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade died and four
Palestinians were injured during clashes between police and local residents in the
Balata refugee camp. The Palestinian Security Forces reportedly intervened to
disperse a family dispute. According to the Palestinian police, the individual died
from a self-inflicted injury, an account disputed by the victim’s family.
37. On 4 November, an off-duty officer in the Palestinian Security Forces, who
according to the Israel Defense Forces shot towards Israeli soldiers, was shot dead
near Huwwara, south of Nablus.

4/12

20-17248

S/2020/1234

38. On 8 November, a Palestinian man who reportedly attempted to carry out a
stabbing attack near Hebron was shot and injured by Israeli security forces, who
subsequently arrested him.
39. On 11 November, Israeli security forces injured a 16-year-old Palestinian with
two live bullets, near the village of Azun Attmet, in Qalqilya, while the child was
attempting to cross the barrier into Israel for work.
40. On 13 November, Israeli security forces shot and injured a Palestinian with live
ammunition and shot and injured two others with rubber-coated metal bullets during
security operations conducted in several neighbourhoods of Ramallah.
41. On 17 November, a 15-year-old boy returning from school lost his right eye
after being hit by ricochet ammunition in Qalandia refugee camp as clashes were
taking place between Israeli security forces and residents of the camp. The boy was
not involved in the clashes.
42. On 23 November, an Israeli driver lost control of his vehicle after it was hit by
stones thrown by Palestinians near Yitzhar junction, south of Nablus, causing an
accident with a truck that injured four Israeli civilians.
43. On 25 November, Israeli security forces shot and killed a Palestinian man near
a checkpoint east of Jerusalem after he accelerated his car while his documents were
being checked. One Israeli soldier was slightly injured after being hit by the car.
44. On 27 November, during protests in Kafr Qaddum, west of Nablus, Israeli
security forces shot a 16-year-old in the head with a rubber-coated metal bullet.
45. On 28 November, in Silwad, north of Ramallah, Israeli security forces shot and
seriously wounded a 16-year-old with live ammunition to the chest. According to
eyewitnesses, the boy was attempting to cross the street, where Israeli security forces
had been responding to stone throwing. In a similar incident on 29 November, Israeli
security forces shot another 16-year-old boy with live ammunition to the chest,
reportedly without warning, in the context of a stone-throwing incident. Both boys
were admitted to intensive care with serious injuries; one remains hospitalized and
the other is under medical supervision.
46. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
during the reporting period, Israeli security forces conducted 994 search -and-arrest
operations, resulting in the arrest of 847 people, including 29 children, and the injury
of 79 during subsequent clashes.
47. At least 56 of those operations, including house raids and arrests, took place in
the volatile neighbourhood of Al-Issawiyah in East Jerusalem, where tensions remain
high. Combined with recurring clashes between Israeli security forces and
Palestinians, some 109 people, including at least 13 children, were arrested, and one
person was injured.
48. During the reporting period, arrests of Palestinians, including children,
increased once again. As at 30 September, 4,184 Palestinians, including 157 children,
were in Israeli custody. Of those, 376, including two children, were being held in
administrative detention without charge or trial.
49. Settler-related violence in the occupied West Bank continued. OCHA recorded
78 attacks by Israeli settlers and others against Palestinians, resulting in 42 injuries
and damage to Palestinian-owned properties. Palestinians perpetrated 83 attacks
against Israeli settlers and other civilians in the occupie d West Bank, resulting in 15
injuries and damage to property, according to Israeli sources.
50. Many settler-related incidents were also recorded in relation to the annual olive
harvest. Since the start of the harvest season on 7 October, 26 harvesters hav e been
20-17248

5/12

S/2020/1234

injured, over 1,700 olive trees have been burned or otherwise damaged and large
amounts of produce have been stolen by Israeli settlers. In a few incidents, Israeli
security forces intervened in clashes between Palestinians and settlers, including b y
shooting tear gas canisters and rubber bullets, injuring olive harvesters and forcing
them to leave the groves. Some Palestinian farmers also face daunting challenges to
access olive groves located behind the separation barrier or in the vicinity of
settlements, which requires special permits or prior coordination from the Israeli
authorities. Despite the easing of some procedures in the context of COVID -19,
access to those areas continued to be impeded.
51. On 22 October and 1 November, respectively, Israeli security forces raided a
non-governmental organization in Beit Hanina and a youth centre in the Shuafat area
of East Jerusalem. The directors of both entities were briefly detained and, in the case
of the Elia Association for Development and Volunteerism in Beit Hanina, its offices
were closed for a week.
52. The Israeli authorities continued to summon, arrest and issue bans, including
travel bans, to Palestinian Authority and Fatah affiliates, including the Palestinian
Authority Governor of Jerusalem, Adnan Geith, and Fatah Secretary in Jerusalem,
Shadi Mtour.
53. Human rights defenders and peace activists also continued to be targeted for
arrest by authorities on all sides. During the reporting period, Israeli security forces
detained five Palestinian human rights defenders and activists, all of whom except
one remained in detention as at 10 December. In addition, one female journalist was
placed under administrative detention. The Palestinian Authority detained a journalist
for one month; shortly after being released on bail on 27 October, he was arrested by
Israeli security forces and he remains in detention. On 26 October, a military court in
Gaza convicted and eventually released three activists who had been detained in April
2020 for having organized a “normalization activity” with Israeli youth.
54. During the reporting period, Hamas-controlled courts in Gaza handed down
eight new death sentences, three of which were ordered by military courts against
civilians convicted of collaboration with Israel.
55. On 21 October, the Ministry of Justice of Israel announced that a border police
officer might stand trial for reckless homicide, pending a hearing, for killing Eyad
Hallaq, a Palestinian man with disabilities, on 30 May in East Jerusalem. On
28 October, the Supreme Court of Israel reduced the sentence from 15 to 11 years of
an Israeli citizen convicted of manslaughter for the killing of a Palestinian on
27 September 2004.

IV. Incitement, provocations and inflammatory rhetoric
56. In resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called upon both parties to act
on the basis of international law, including international humanitarian law, and their
previous agreements and obligations, to observe calm and restraint and to refrain from
provocative actions, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric, with the aim, inter alia, of
de-escalating the situation on the ground, rebuilding trust and confidence,
demonstrating through policies and actions a genuine commitment to the two-State
solution and creating the conditions necessary for promoting peace.
57. During the reporting period, some Palestinian officials continued to use
inflammatory and provocative rhetoric. An animated video shown on the official
television channel of Hamas in Gaza portrayed and glorified Palestinians shooting
and stabbing Israeli civilians and security forces in Jerusalem.

6/12

20-17248

S/2020/1234

58. Israeli officials also made provocative and inflammatory statements. Some
continued to reject the prospect of Palestinian statehood, calling for settlement
expansion and praising demolitions of Palestinian-owned structures in the occupied
West Bank. An Israeli politician called Saeb Erekat an “anti-Semite” and a “supporter
of terror”, and criticized other Israelis who expressed their condolences following his
death from COVID-19.

V. Affirmative steps to reverse negative trends
59. In resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called for affirmative steps to
be taken immediately to reverse the negative trends on the ground that were
imperilling the two-State solution. While there were some positive developments
during the reporting period, a number of negative trends overshadowed them.
60. Beginning in early September, Fatah and Hamas embarked on a series of
discussions to agree on a programme of reconciliation and the holding of the first
Palestinian general elections since 2005. From 22 to 24 September, Fatah and Hamas
held bilateral discussions in Istanbul, Turkey. Fatah subsequently announced that it
had reached a series of understandings with Hamas, including an agreement to hold
legislative and presidential elections under a proportional representation system. On
1 October, the Fatah Central Committee formally endorsed the understandings. From
16 to 18 November, Egypt hosted delegations from Hamas and Fatah to assist the
parties with resolving outstanding differences. On 22 November, a senior Fatah
official stated that the talks had not succeeded in securing an endorsement of the
Istanbul understandings owing to disagreements over the timing of elections. Both
sides have pledged to continue talks.
61. On 17 November, the Palestinian leadership announced its decision to resume
security and civilian coordination with Israel and accept the clearance revenues Israel
collects on its behalf, which amounted to some $900 million.
62. Palestinians and Israelis faced immense socioeconomic impacts from
COVID-19, with rising infection numbers continuing to pose grave risks to both
populations. The situation remained particularly worrisome in Gaza, where the
capacity of the health-care system is limited. The shortage of medical supplies in the
health system in Gaza remains critical. In October, some 45 per cent of essential
medicines were at zero stock, while the lack of oxygen generators at the European
Gaza Hospital hindered the provision of health care to persons with COVID-19.
63. Health partners indicated that COVID-19 also had a negative impact on access
to essential care, especially for remote communities in Area C of the occupied West
Bank. Humanitarian partners continued to support the Palestinian Authority’s
response, including through the procurement and delivery of testing kits and other
laboratory and medical supplies. Prior to the resumption of coordination between the
Israeli and Palestinian authorities, the United Nations had assumed emerg ency
responsibilities to facilitate humanitarian imports and patient transfers from Gaza.
With coordination having resumed, United Nations agencies rapidly began
transferring those responsibilities back to the appropriate Palestinian and Israeli
authorities.
64. While the mortality rate from COVID-19 in the Occupied Palestinian Territory
remained relatively low by global standards, the necessary measures taken to contain
the pandemic – recurrent lockdowns and travel restrictions, school closures, the
reduction of commercial activities and mandatory quarantines and isolation periods –
have severely undermined living conditions. On 9 October, initial findings from a

20-17248

7/12

S/2020/1234

survey implemented in partnership with the United Nations country team indicated
that the pandemic had led to large declines in monthly household incomes.
65. About 42 per cent of Palestinian households reported earning less than half of
their regular monthly income from March to May. Households also reported urgent
need for cash support and job creation, while economic stresses translated into
deteriorating social conditions. The Women’s Affairs Centre in Gaza and other
gender-based violence service providers across the Occupied Palestinian Territory
reported an increase in gender-based violence and significant challenges in delivering
services in response. As at September, OCHA had reported 24 femicide cases in 2020,
equal to the total for 2019. Suicides and attempted suicides in Gaza also rose over the
same period, with 24 people, including four women and five children, reportedly
having taken their own lives, as compared with 22 for all of 2019.
66. On 10 November, the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
issued a socioeconomic report that introduced several proposals to build conf idence
among the parties and address more effectively the pandemic and its socioeconomic
impacts. The report included recommendations to both sides, the United Nations and
its partners. The Special Coordinator encouraged Israel to take steps towards
improving and backstopping the finances of the Palestinian Authority for the duration
of the emergency; to grant permits to some 10,000 workers from Gaza to work in
Israel and the occupied West Bank once adequate health precautions were in place; to
stimulate economic growth by easing dual-use restrictions for imports into the Gaza
Strip; and to grant construction permits in Area C of the occupied West Bank.
67. The Special Coordinator urged the Palestinian Government to pay deferred
government salaries, repay loans issued by the Palestinian financial sector and align
its expenditures with the recommendations made by the World Bank and the Office
of the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process in June, including for a
single basic income support scheme. In addition, the Special Coordinator
recommended that the Palestinian Government accelerate its trade procedures,
especially with respect to the Gaza Strip, and take steps to increase commerce and
trade exiting Gaza.
68. With respect to the United Nations and its international partners, the Special
Coordinator indicated the need to focus support on the inter-agency humanitarian
response plan, as well as the socioeconomic response plans of the United Nations
country team and the Palestinian Authority. The report highlighted other initiatives
that could be implemented with significant donor support, including the provision of
20,000 jobs in Gaza for 12 months, the acceleration of critical infrastructure projects
in the water, sanitation, energy and health sectors, and support for small- and mediumsized enterprises.
69. Reconstruction and repair of damage incurred during the 2014 conflict in Gaza
continued at a slow pace owing to the pandemic and a lack of funding. To date, 9,566
of the 11,000 totally destroyed houses have been rebuilt, including 157 during the
reporting period. The reconstruction of an additional 639 houses is under way. There
remains a funding gap of $32 million to complete the reconstruction of 638 destroyed
houses and $75 million for the repair of 56,000 partially damaged homes. Over 760
families (4,000 individuals) have been internally displaced for more than five years.
70. On 27 September, 2 November and 24 November, the Egyptian authorities
exceptionally opened the Rafah crossing in both directions for a total of 10 days,
allowing 8,526 people to exit Gaza and 3,876 to return. All departing individuals were
subject to a COVID-19 test as per the instructions of the Gaza Ministry of Health.

8/12

20-17248

S/2020/1234

VI. Efforts by the parties and the international community to
advance the peace process and other relevant developments
71. In resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called upon all States to
distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel and
the territories occupied since 1967.
72. On 28 October, the Governments of Israel and the United States of America
announced that they had amended three bilateral science, agriculture a nd technology
agreements, allowing United States funds to be directed for the first time to Israeli
research projects in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the
occupied Syrian Golan.
73. On 19 November, the United States announced new guidelines requiring all
products exported to the United States from Area C of the occupied West Bank to be
labelled as “Made in Israel”.
74. Also in resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called upon all parties to
continue, in the interest of the promotion of peace and security, to exert collective
efforts to launch credible negotiations on all final status issues in the Middle East
peace process and urged in that regard the intensification and ac celeration of
international and regional diplomatic efforts and support aimed at achieving, without
delay, a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, in cluding the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map, and
an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967. The Council underlined that it
would not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with re gard to
Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties through negotiations.
75. On 24 September, the ministers for foreign affairs of Jordan, Egypt, France and
Germany met in Amman. They urged Israel and the Palestinians to engage in “credible
dialogue” to restore “hope” to the peace process and stressed “the urgency of the
resumption of serious, meaningful and effective negotiations on the basis of
international law and agreed parameters directly between the parties or under the
United Nations umbrella”.
76. On 25 September, in his statement to the General Assembly, the Palestinian
President, Mahmoud Abbas, called for the convening of an international conference
in early 2021 to “engage in a genuine peace process, based on international law,
United Nations resolutions and the relevant terms of reference, leading to an end to
the occupation and the achievement by the Palestinian people of their freedom and
independence within their State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, on the 1967
borders.”
77. On 29 September, 19 October and 19 November, the Envoys of the Middle East
Quartet met virtually to discuss the latest developments on the ground and agreed to
remain engaged on the matter and to chart a way forward.
78. On 18 October, Israel and Bahrain established formal diplomatic relations,
signing eight bilateral agreements, including a joint communiqué on the
establishment of diplomatic, peaceful and friendly relations. The communiqué
affirmed that the two parties would “continue their efforts to achieve a just,
comprehensive and enduring resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.”
79. On 23 October, the leaders of the United States, Israel and the Sudan announced
that the Governments of Israel and the Sudan had agreed to end the state of
belligerence between their countries and normalize relations.

20-17248

9/12

S/2020/1234

VII. Observations
80. I remain deeply troubled by continued Israeli settlement expansion in the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, which further undermines the right of
the Palestinian people to self-determination, continues to encroach on Palestinian land
and natural resources, hampers the free movement of the Palestinian population and
increases the risks of violent confrontation. Over the past year, the Israeli authorities
have advanced controversial settlement plans that had been frozen or delayed for
years. These planned construction projects are located in areas crucial for the
contiguity of a future Palestinian State. In total, some 50 per cent of the units
advanced over the past year were located in outlying areas, deep in the occupied West
Bank.
81. Overall, since the adoption of Security Council resolution 2334 (2016),
settlement planning and construction have continued. Over the past four years, plans
for more than 28,000 units were advanced or approved in Area C and East Jerusalem
settlements and tenders were announced for some 12,000 units. On the ground, the
construction of more than 6,000 new units began in Area C during the same period.
82. Despite an eight-month pause in settlement advancements in Area C during
2020, recent steps brought the total number of housing units advanced since the
beginning of the year to close to 2019 levels. While advancements in A rea C declined
by 1,400 units in 2020, tender announcements more than doubled to 1,700. In
addition, plans for some 3,500 units in the strategic location of E1 were opened for
public objections, a step which had been delayed for eight years and which bring s
construction at the sensitive site closer to implementation. If implemented, the E1
plan would sever the connection between the northern and southern West Bank,
significantly undermining the chances for establishing a viable and contiguous
Palestinian State as part of a negotiated two-State solution.
83. In East Jerusalem, while the number of units advanced decreased from 1,000
housing units in 2019 to 700 in 2020, the number of units tendered rose from 600 in
2019 to some 1,700 in 2020. This included a tender for some 1,200 units establishing
a new settlement in Givat Hamatos, which, if built, would further disconnect East
Jerusalem from Bethlehem and the southern West Bank.
84. I reiterate that Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank, including Eas t
Jerusalem, have no legal validity and constitute a flagrant violation of United Nations
resolutions and international law. Settlements entrench the Israeli occupation and
undermine the prospect of achieving a two-State solution by systematically eroding
the possibility of establishing a contiguous, independent and viable sovereign
Palestinian State. I urge the Government of Israel to cease the advancement of all
settlement activity immediately.
85. I remain deeply concerned by the continued demolitions an d seizures of
Palestinian structures, which have included internationally funded humanitarian
projects, including schools. I call on the Israeli authorities to end the demolition of
Palestinian property and the displacement and eviction of Palestinians and to approve
plans that would enable these communities to build legally and address their
development needs.
86. I remain gravely concerned about the continuing violence, attacks against Israeli
and Palestinian civilians and incitement to violence that exac erbate mistrust between
Israelis and Palestinians and that drive us further from a peaceful resolution of the
conflict. The violence must stop and all perpetrators of violence must be held
accountable.

10/12

20-17248

S/2020/1234

87. I am particularly appalled that children continue to be victims of violence. I
reiterate that children should not be the target of violence or put in harm’s way. They
should be afforded special protection from any form of violence and only detained as
a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time.
88. I reiterate that security forces must exercise maximum restraint and use lethal
force only when strictly unavoidable in order to protect life. The Israeli and
Palestinian authorities must carry out thorough, independent, impartial and prompt
investigations into all instances of possible excessive use of force.
89. I am deeply concerned by the indiscriminate launching of rockets and mortars
towards Israeli civilian population centres by Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jiha d or
others, which is prohibited under international humanitarian law. Palestinian militants
must cease this practice immediately.
90. I am deeply concerned at the continued settler-related violence in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. I reiterate the 5 November call by United
Nations agencies and international non-governmental organizations operating in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory for the Israeli authorities to abide by the obligations
of Israel under international law to protect Palestinians from violence by Israeli
settlers and to ensure that farmers can access their land freely and safely.
91. I would like to reiterate that the fate of two Israeli civilians who suffer from
mental illness and the bodies of two Israel Defense Forces soldiers held by Hamas in
Gaza remains an important humanitarian concern. I call upon Hamas to release them,
as required by international humanitarian law.
92. I also remain deeply concerned at the continued Israeli practice of holding the
bodies of killed Palestinians and call on Israel to return withheld bodies to their
families, in line with its obligations under international humanitarian law.
93. I am alarmed by the continued arrest of human rights defenders and peace
activists. The Israeli and Palestinian authorities have an obligation to respect freedom
of expression, association and assembly, and to facilitate and promote an enabling
environment for civil society to function in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
without discrimination.
94. I also express concern that courts in Gaza continue to hand down death
sentences in violation of Palestinian law and the international obligations of the State
of Palestine, and call upon Hamas in Gaza to impose an immediate moratorium on
executions and to cease the use of military tribunals to try civilians.
95. The financial situation of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) remains a serious concern. UNRWA
is not only a lifeline for millions of Palestine refugees, but also critical for regional
stability. Sufficient funding is essential for the Agency’s continuity.
96. The Palestinian Authority’s decision to restart civilian and security coordination
with Israel and to resume receipt of its clearance revenues an d the confirmation by
Israel that existing bilateral agreements continue to govern relations between both
parties are welcome developments. It would be important to use the transfer of six
months of accumulated clearance revenues to provide critical stimul us to the
economy, through the payment of partially deferred salaries and an increase in support
to households and enterprises, and to allow the Palestinian Authority to address the
COVID-19 emergency more effectively.
97. A comprehensive basic income support scheme developed by the Palestinian
Authority would allow Palestinians to protect their institutions and banking sector
and to address the COVID-19 crisis more effectively, which is urgently needed.

20-17248

11/12

S/2020/1234

98. I encourage Israelis and Palestinians to re-envisage their economic and
administrative relationships going forward, in line with United Nations
recommendations. A revised model would not only have humanitarian, economic and
developmental benefits, but would also further the prospect of resumed negotiatio ns
to help build a sustainable peace. In the absence of an active peace process, bilateral
talks have proven fruitful in the past and could be restarted. I call on the Israeli and
Palestinian leadership to engage in such discussions.
99. I remain seriously concerned about the fragile situation in Gaza and the
immense suffering of its people. The risk of a major escalation remains. I reiterate
that no amount of humanitarian or economic support on its own will address the
challenges in Gaza. These ultimately require political solutions and the political will
to pursue them.
100. Taking into consideration its legitimate security concerns, I urge Israel to ease
the restrictions on the movement of goods and people to and from Gaza, with the goal
of ultimately lifting them. Only by fully lifting the debilitating closures, in line with
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009), can we hope to sustainably resolve the
humanitarian crisis. I also call on Hamas and other militant factions to end the military
build-up, including the construction of tunnels into Israel, and to cease the
indiscriminate launching of rockets and mortars towards Israeli civilian population
centres, which is prohibited under international humanitarian law.
101. It is regrettable that agreement has not yet been reached on the holding of longoverdue Palestinian presidential and legislative elections. I encourage the parties to
continue efforts to overcome outstanding differences in line with Egyptian -led
intra-Palestinian reconciliation efforts.
102. I urge Israelis, Palestinians, regional States and the broader international
community to take practical steps to enable the parties to re -engage. The Special
Coordinator is actively engaged in advancing these efforts. Such steps must also be
accompanied by concrete actions to restore a legitimate political horizon to end the
conflict. The Middle East Quartet, key Arab partners and Israeli and Palestinian
leaders must work together to return to the path of meaningful negotiations.
103. I hope that recent developments will encourage Palestinian and Israeli leaders
to re-engage in meaningful negotiations, with the support of the international
community, and will create opportunities for regional cooperation. As we have seen
in statements from around the world, the commitment to the two-State solution, in
line with United Nations resolutions and international law, continues to be affirmed
by broad regional and international consensus.
104. I remain committed to supporting Palestinians and Israelis to resolve the conflict
and end the occupation in line with relevant United Nations resolutions, international
law and bilateral agreements in pursuit of achieving the vision of two States – Israel
and an independent, democratic, contiguous, viable and sovereign Palestinian State –
living side by side in peace and security within secure and recognized borders, on the
basis of the pre-1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States.
105. I express my deep appreciation to my Special Coordinator, Nickolay Mladenov,
for his outstanding service in what remains a challenging context. I also pay tribute
to all staff working under difficult circumstances in the service of the United Nations.

12/12

20-17248
