S/PRST/2002/24

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 August 2002
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4602nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 August 2002, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation to the Foreign Ministers
of South Africa and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to the Special
Envoy of the President of Rwanda, who participated in its meeting on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on 8 August 2002.
“The Security Council welcomes the Peace Agreement of 30 July 2002
between the Governments of the Republic of Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Implementation Programme for the withdrawal
of Rwandan Troops from the territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the dismantling of the ex-FAR and Interahamwe Forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2002/914). The Council commends the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda for
engaging in direct dialogue on their mutual security concerns and urges them
to continue this dialogue.
“The Security Council expresses its full support for the implementation
of the Peace Agreement. In this regard, the Council looks forward to
considering as soon as possible the recommendations of the Secretary-General
on how the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUC), and through MONUC’s coordination all relevant
United Nations agencies, can assist the parties in their responsibilities to
implement the Peace Agreement.
“The Security Council commends the Government of the Republic of
South Africa for its facilitation of the Peace Agreement, and for its further
role, together with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, regarding the
Peace Agreement.
“The Security Council stresses in particular the responsibilities of the
two parties set out in the Peace Agreement and Implementation Plan and calls
upon the international community to assist and expedite the carrying out of
these responsibilities.
“The Security Council reiterates its support for the mandate of MONUC,
as established by its resolution 1417 (2002) of 14 June 2002, in particular in
02-52534 (E)

150802

*0252534*

S/PRST/2002/24

the area of voluntary disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration (DDRRR).
“The Security Council expresses the importance of close consultations
and cooperation between the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and the Republic of South Africa, as well as MONUC, and
through MONUC’s coordination, all relevant United Nations agencies, on
measures that can help implement this Agreement and facilitate voluntary
DDRRR.
“The Security Council welcomes the commitments of both the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda under the
Peace Agreement to cooperate in the identification, disarmament and
repatriation of ex-FAR and Interahamwe. The Council urges the parties to the
Peace Agreement to make every effort to fully comply with all their
obligations in conformity with Security Council resolution 1341 (2001) of
22 February 2001 and the programme of implementation of the Peace
Agreement. The Council also welcomes the commitment of the Government of
Rwanda, under the Peace Agreement, regarding the withdrawal of its troops
from the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and, in this regard,
notes Rwanda’s submission of its initial troop withdrawal plan to the “Third
Party”.
“The Security Council will remain seized of these matters.”

2
