206

General Assembly

is disseminated as widely as possible. and to strengthen
information activities in this field:
15. Requests the Secretary-General to rnbmit to the
General Assembly, at its forty-first session, a report on the
measures taken to implement the present resolution:
16. Decides to include in the proviswn;il agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled"·( 'rim,· r•revention and
criminal justice".
<J6th plenary meeting
29 N,,1•cmher !Qfi5

40/33.

United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for
the Administration of Juvenile .Justice (Tht>
Beijing Rules)

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 6 the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights 7 and the International Covenant on Economic
Social and Cultural Rights,' as well as other international
human rights instruments pertaining to the rights of young
persons,
Also bearing in mind that 1985 was designated the Inter
national Youth Year: Participation. Development, Peace
and that the international community has placed 1mpor
tance on the protection and promotion of the rights of the
young, as witnessed by the significance ;cittacht'd t,) th,
Declaration of the Rights of the Child."-'
Recalling resolution 4 adopted by the Sixth United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders," 1 which called for the develop
ment of standard minimum rules for thf" administration ot
juvenile justice and the care of juveniles which could serv1
as a model for Member States.
Recalling also Economic and Social Council decision
1984/153 of 25 May 1984, b) which the draft rules were
forwarded to the Seventh United Nations ( 'ongress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders. held
at Milan, Italy, from 26 August to 6 September 1985
through the Interregional Preparaton Meeting ht'ld at
Beijing from 14to 18 May 1984, 64
Recognizing that the young, owing to their early stage of
human development, require particular care and assistance with regard to physical, mental and social development, and require legal protection in conditions of peace
freedom, dignity and secunty,
Considering that existing national legislation, policies
and practices may well require review and amendment in
view of the standards contained in the rules,
Considering further that, although such standards ma)
seem difficult to achieve at present, m view of existing
social, economic, cultural, political and legal conditions
they are nevertheless intended to be attainable as a poliC\
minimum,
1. Notes with appreciation the work carried out by the
Committee on Crime Prevention and Control, the Secre
tary-General, the United Nations Asia and Far East Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders and other United Nations institutes in the
development of the United Nations Standard Minimum
Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice;
2. Takes note with apprecia/lnn of the report ,if th1·
Secretary-General on the draft l nited Nations Standan \
62 Resolution 1386 (XIV)
63 See Sixth United Nations Congress on the l'rcver11<or1 of Cnme and th,

Treatment of Offenders, Caracas, 25 August 'Septemher /C/80 report pr,•
pared by the Secretarial IUnited Nations r,nh!,cat,,,,, \ale, No F ~ I IV,,
chap. I, sect R

fortieth Session

\.1mimum Rules for thf" Administration of Juvenile Jus1 I( 1.•:"'

t ·ommends the Interregional Preparatory Meeting
t1eld at Beijing fo, having finalized the text of the rules
,ubmitted to the Seventh United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders for
Pnsideration and final action:
..i
Adopts the United Nations Standard Minimum
Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice recom
mended by the Seventh Congress, contained in the annex
1:0 !he present resolution, and approves the recommendauon of the Seventh Congress that the Rules should be
known as "the Beijing Rules";
', Invites Member States to adapt, wherever this i~
necessary, their national legislation, policies and practices.
particularly in traming juvenile justice personnel, to the
lk,jing Rules and Teo bring the Rules to the attention ofrel,·vant authorities and the public in general;
n. Calls upon the Committee on Crime Prevention and
Control to formulate measures for the effective implementat10n of the BeiJing Rules, with the assistance of the
United Nations institutes on the prevention of crime and
the treatment of offenders;
Invites Member States to inform the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Beijing Rules and to
report regularly to the Committee on Crime Prevention
and Control on the results achieved;
t1. Requests Member States and the Secretary-General
to undertake research and to develop a data base with
respect to effective policies and practices in the adminisltation of juvenile Justice;
'i. Requests the Secretary-General and invites Member
States to ensure the widest possible dissemination of the
text of the Beijing Rules in all of the official languages of
the United Nations, including the intensification of information activities 1n the field of juvenile justice;
l 0. Requests rhe Secretary-General to develop pilot
projects on the implementation of the Beijing Rules;
I I. Requests the Secretary-General and Member States
to provide the necessary resources to ensure the successful
,mplementation of the Beijing Rules, in particular in the
areas of recruitment, training and exchange of personnel,
research and evaluation, and the development of new
alternatives to institutionalization;
12. Requests the Eighth United Nations Congress on
the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders
to review the progress made in the implementation of the
Beijing Rules and of the recommendations contained in
the present resolution, under a separate agenda item on
,uvenile justice;
13. Urges all relevant bodies of the United Nations
~)'stem, in particular the regional commissions and specialized agencies, the United Nations institutes for the prewntion of crime and the treatment of offenders, other
mtergovemmental organizations and non-governmental
organizations to collaborate with the Secretariat and to
take the necessary measures to ensure a concerted and sustamed effort, within their respective fields of technical
competence, to implement the principles contained in the
tkijing Rules.

96th plenary meeting
29 November 1985
o4 See "Report of the Interregional Preparatory Meeting for the Seventh
l lmted Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
"ffenden; on topic IV youth, crime and justi~" (NCONF 121 'IPM/I ).
"· 1 Af\)NF11114 1ndror,I

207

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third CommittN·

-----

·-----------------···

2.3

ANNEX
United Nations Standard Minimum Roles for the Administration
of J ovenlle J ostice (The Beljln11 Roles)
Part one. G,urol pritu:iplu

I. Fundamental perspectives
Member States shall seek. in conformity with their respective
general interests, to further the well-being of the ju vemle and her
or his family.
1.2 Member States shall endeavour to develop conditions that will
ensure for the juvenile a meaningful life in the community,
which, during that period in life when she or he is most susceptible to deviant behaviour, will foster a process of personal development and education that is as free from crime and delinquency
as possible.
1.3 Sufficient attention shall be given to positive measures that
involve the full mobilization of all possible resources, including
the family, volunteers and other community groups, as well as
schools and other community institutions, for the purpose of
promoting the well-being of the juvenile, with a view to reducing
the need for intervention under the law, and of effectively, fairly
and humanely dealing with the juvenile in conflict with the law.
1.4 Juvenile justice shall be conceived as an integral part of the
national development process of each country, within a comprehensive framework of social justice for all juveniles, thus, at the
same time, contributing to the protection of the young and the
maintenance of a peaceful order in society.
1.5 These Rules shall be implemented in the context of economic,
social and cultural conditions prevailing in each Member State.
1.6 Juvenile justice services shall be systematically developed and
co-ordinated with a view to improving and sustaining the competence of personnel involved in the services. including their
methods, approaches and attitudes.
Commentary
These broad fundamental perspectives refer to comprehensive social
policy in general and aim at promoting juvenile welfare to the greatest possible extent, which will minimize the necessity of intervention by the juve11ile justice system, and in tum, will reduce the harm that may be caused by
any intervention. Such care measures for the young. before the onset of
delinquency, are basic policy requisites designed to obviate the need for the
application of the Rules.
1.1

Rules I.I to 1.3 point to the important role that a constructive social
policy for juveniles will play. inter alia, in the prevention of juvenile crime
and delinquency. Rule 1.4 defines juvenile justice as an integral part of
social justice for juveniles, while rule 1.6 refers to the necessity of constantly improving juvenile justice, without falling behind the development
of progressive social policy for juveniles in general and bearing in mind the
need for consistent improvement of staff services.
Rule 1.5 seeks to take account of existing conditions in Member States
which would cause the manner of implementation of particular rules nec:es-sarily to be different from the manner adopted in other States.
2.1

2.2

2. Scope of the Rules and definitions used
The following Standard Minimum Rules shall be apphed to Juve-nile offenders impartially, without distinction of any kind, for
example as to race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or
other opinions, national or social origin, property, birth or other
status.
For purposes of these Rules, the following definitions shall be
applied by Member States in a manner which is compatible with
their respective legal systems and concepts:
(a) A juvenile is a child or young person who, under the respective legal systems, may be dealt with for an offence in a manner which is different from an adult;
(b) An offence is any behaviour (act or omission) that is punishable by law under the respective legal systems;
(c) A juvenile offender is a child or young person who is alleged
to have committed or who has been found to have committed an offence.

66 Resolution 1386 (XIV). See also the Convention on the Elimination of
All Fo~s of Discrimination against Women (resolution 34/ l 80, annex): the
Declaration of the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrim-•
ination (Report of the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, Geneva, 14-25 August 1978 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.79.XIV.2), chap. II); the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms

Efforts shall be made 10 establish. in each national Jurisdiction, a
set oflaws, rules and provisions specifically applicable to juvenile
offenders and institutions and bodies entrusted with lhl' fun,·twns of the administration of Juvenile justice and designed:
(ul To meet the vaf)1ng needs of1uvenile oflenders, while pro
tecting their baM•,: nghts;
(bl To meet the needs of society:
(d To implement the following rule, thoroughly and fairly

Commentary
The Standard Minimum Rules are deliberately formulated so as to h<~
applicable within different legal systems and, at the same time. to set some
minimum standards for the handling of juvenile offenders under any delinition of a juvenile and under an v system of dealing with juvenile offenders.
The Rules are always to be app:,ed impartially and without distinction nf
any kind.
Rule 2.1 therefore stresses the importance of the Rules always ocing
applied impartially and without distinction of any kind. The rule follows
the formulation of principle ; nf the Dt'claratton of the Rights of tl:,•
Child. 66
Rule 2.2 defines ""juvenile" and ",)ffence" as the components of the
notion of the "juvenile offendeo···, who is the main subject of these Standard Minimum Rules (see. however, also rules 3 and 4). It should be noted
that age limits will depend on, and are explicitly made dependent on. cafh
respective legal system. thus fully respecting the economic, so,·ial, political.
cultural and legal systems of Member States. This makes for a wide variety
of ages coming under the defin,tion of "juvenile". ranging from 7 years 10
18 years or above. Such a varietv seems inevitable in view of the different
national legal systems and does not diminish the impact of these Stanctard
Minimum Rules.
Rule 2.3 is addressed to the necessity of SJ)C('ific national legislallnn for
the optimal implementation ,,f these Standard Minimum Rules, holh
legally and practically.

3. Fx1en.rn>n of tJr,, Rules
\. I The relevant provisions of the Rules shall be applted not only to
Juvenile offenders but also 10 juveniles who ma} be proceeded
against for any specifi, och:wiour I hat would not be punishable if
committed by an adtilt
\ 2 Flforts shall be mactc :,, ,·xtend the prinuples embodied in the
Rules to all Juveniles who are dealt with m welfar~ and ,an· prnceedings.
l J Efforts shall also be made to extend the principles emhnd1e,1 ,n
the Rules to voung adult offende"
Commentary

Rule 3 extends the protection afforded by the Standard Mmimum Rules
for the Administration of Juvenile Justice to co,er·
(a) The so-called ··status offences·· prescribed in various national legal
systems where the range of behaviour considered to be an offence is w1<ler
for iuvemles than it is for adults (for example, truancy, S<.'h,.x,I and fannly
disobedience, public drunkenness. etc) (ruk 1. 1:
(b) Juvenile welfare and ea,,. proceedings (iule LI);
(c) Proceedings dealing witt, voung aduh offenders. depending nf u>urse
on each given age limit (rule 3 1 ).
The extension of the Rules , , cover these three dreas seems to he justified. Rule J. I provides minimun1 guarantees in those fields, and ruk 3 l is
considered a desirable step in the direc·tion of more fan. equitable and
humane justice for all juvenil~s 111 ,·onH1ct with 1tw law
4. Age o/ ,·rimwal rc.,po11si/iilit_v
In those legal systems ren,gninng the concept of the age of cnminal responsibility for .,m ,·niks. the beginn,ng of that age shall m,t
be fixed at too low an ., ,, Ic,el. bearing m • ,nd the facts of emotional, mental and mt<'ilcctual maturoty.
Commentary
The mimmum age of crimtnal responsibility d," "wid,.:., "wing to htStory and culture The modem approach would
to con,ider whether a
child can hve up to the moral and psyrholog1co' ,mponcnts of criminal
responsibility; that is. whether a child. by Vlftue .-..f her or his individual
discernment and understanding. can be held n·,ponsihk lor c,senhally
anti-social behaviour. If the age ot ,nm,nal responsibility ,s hx<'<l too low
4.1

of Intolerance and of D1scrimtn 11100 Ba~ed ,\n Reltgt,11 ~>r BelH'f n··,.olut1on
36.155); the Standard Mmnnum Rule, frlf the I reatrr••·nt ol • .. ,nc,, (see
fluman R1xh1s: A ( ompilatu,n ",,,.,,,
·,1/ in,11,,
ms 1•
·cl Nations

public.ation. Sales No F.81.Xl\
I

7 l ,

anne~ t a n d m l < ' ..,~

11

the

~cas [),:

,t:on I, , ,-,.,1;,,n _1'> 1

t;eneral Assembly- Fortieth Session

208

Rights 0(1uven1/e.1

or tf there is no lower age limit at all, the notion ul respons1b1ltt 1 ;.uuld
become meaningless. In general, there ,s a close relationship betwee11 th,
notion nf responsibility for delinquen1 , " cnmmal hchav,our a"d ,the,
social rights and responsih1hties (<.;uth ,-.. ITJ;lntal ',tati1,, , 1vi! n1,w,r11,

Basic procedural safeguards such as the presumption of inno,:cnce. the righ1 to be notified of the charges, the right to remam
•,ilent, the right to counsel, the nght to the presence of a parent or
guardian, the nght to confront and cross-examine witnesses and
the right to appeal to a higher authority shall be guarant,-ect at all
stages of proce,-dings

etc)

Efforts should therefore be made to agret· 1.,0 ,i !Tasnnahk 1o'A,C'" agi
limit that is apphcabk intemational!y
i'

5.

5.1

11nu of ,iuvem/{'

mm,•ntarr

u:1(/('t'

The juvenile iusllce system shall emphas11t th,· well-hcmg of tht
juvenile and shall ensure that any react1on 10 1uv,·nile offenders
shall always be in propon,on I<> tht· ,·ireumst;anres of botl1 th,·
offenders and the offenn·

( ·ommentary

Rule 5 refers to two of the most important ob1ect1ves I if Juve-mk Justice
fhe first objective 1s the promotion uf the well-hcmg ol the Juvenile Th,s
is the main focus of those legal svstems m which Juvenile offendeis are
dealt with by family couns or admm1strat1vc authorities. hut the well-hcmg
of the juvenile should also be emphasizt·d in lci;il systnns that follow the
criminal court model. thus contnbuting 10 tht· .:nrndan, ,. i:if merel~ rnn,
live sanctions. (See also rnle 14 1
The second objective is "the pnnc1ple .,,f proportionahty" rim pnncipk
is well-known as an instrument for curbing punitl\ c ,anctions. most!\
expressed in terms of just desen m relation to the gra, it) •Jf the oflencr
The response to young offenders should be based on the ;consideration not
only of the gravity of the offence but also of personal , 1rrumstanccs The
individual circumstances of the offende1 (for example social status. famil,
situation, the harm caused by the offence or other factors alli-cung pe,sonal
circumstances) should influence the proponmnalit, ,,. the reart,0<1 (for
example by having regard to the uffender, cndea,ow to ,n,kmnif:, th,- v1<.
tlm or to her or his willingness to 111rn t() a 1.;,,'holesomc .1nd useful ld"'e)
By the same token, reactions :.ummg !~) ensure lh1.· wdfar·~ ol the ..,oung

offender may go beyond necessit:, and therefore infring,· upon 1he f<inda
mental nghts of the young individual, a~ has ht"en ohsei ,·ed m ,llflH' JU\-T
nile justice systems. Here, too, tht· proport1onaht~ qf 1hr reacw•n 0 ttw
circumstances of both the offender .md the nlf<·nn· ·n• udmg ltw <'1111
should be safeguarded
1

In essence, rule 5 calls for no less and 1w rnore than a !air 1·eactwn ,nan·~
given case of juvenile delinquency and, nmr fhe issun rnmbmed ·nth,:
rule may help to stimulate development III both regard, new and ""''"' ,,
tlvt" types of reactions are- as desirable ,l'i- µr1;.•taul1t 1 n5i. ,,garn,i ;m\ 'ndl1'
widemng <,f the net t ) f formal ~x 1al 1...·(rntrol , 1v1.·1 1u, ,·n1!("\

Rule 7 i emphasizes s..>mc important points that represent essential elemenis for a fair and just trial and that are mtemationally recogni,ed in
nisting human rights instruments. (See also rule 14.) The presumption of
"'"'"·ence, for instance. is also to be found m article 11 of the l lniversal
I >eclaration of Human Rights6 and
article 14, raragraph 2, of the lnter,,at,onal Covenant on C "'land Poht1cal Rights.
Rules : 4 seq. of these Standard Minimum Rules specify issues that are
important for proceedings in iuvenile cases. in particular. while ruk ' I
,ilfoms t!1e most basic p--ocedural safeguards in a general way.

in

ProtPctwn q( pnvacy
~

I

L,

rhe Juvenile's nght to privacy shall be respected at all stages m
order to avoid harm being caused to her or him by undue puhlicity or hy the 11rocess of labelling.
In pnnciple, n,- information that may lead to the 1dentilicat1on of
a Juvenile offe Hkr shall be published.

,1mmPntan

Rule 8 stresses the imoortance of the protection of the Juvenile's nght to
pn •, acy. Young persons are particularly susceptible to stigmatiz.at1on.
1 nminological research into labelling processes has provided evidence of
It1t· .Jetrimental effects 1uf different kinds) resulting from the permanent
,dl'ntificat,on of young persons as "delinquent" or "criminal"
I{ ule 8 also stresses the importance of protecting the juvenile from the
.id vi·rse effects that may result from the publication in the mass media of
,ntormatwn about the ·ase (for example the names of young offenders.
,dkg,-d or convicted). 1 he interest of the individual should be protected
"'"' <Aphl'id. at least in r ·,nnpk (The general contents of rule 8 arc fun her
i•, ,fied iri ruk cI )

'i.

, I

Sawng clause

Nothing m these Rules shall be interpreted as precluding the
apphcat,on of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Pnsonersh 7 adopted by the United Nations and other human
rights mstrumccnts and standards recognized by the intemat1onal
,:ommumty 1ta, relate to the care and proteclJon of th,· young.

•mmnztan'

6.1

In view of lht' varymg spcna1 nt"t'ds of JU, e11dc~ a~ ..-.,ell ,ts tht'

vanety of measures available appropnaw scope fo1 ,1isnet1on
shall be allowed at all stages nf proceeding, and at the d1tleren1
levels of juvenile JUSt1c•· administrat1un, :Oi.:luliing mvt:'st1gat1rn
prost."'Cution, adjudica11<m and !he- fi:>llow-up ,,r d1spos1t1or,..,
6 2 Efforts shall be made. howeve, to ensurr ,i,ufhci..·nt accouJJtab1l
ity at all stages and lt'vt·I\ m the e.,eH·1~· n'. a·iy -.urh d1"-<.·rr11on
63

Those whc I exercise d1scretwn \ll.:ill hf

trained to e,rrrise 11 Ji,di..10H'i-1v
functwns and mandate--,

n1d

1,.

'loJ){"1

ially quail fwd

au·,, rdann~ ,, ;tt

1 ,,

thc,r

Rule •1 is meant to wmd any misunderstanding in mterpreting and
•mplementmg the present Rules m conformity with principles contained in
.-lcvant existing or emerging mtemational human rights instrnments and
·,tandards - such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; 6 the
,wrnational ( ·ovenant u11 Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 7 and the
n1nnational Covenant 011 Civil and Polit1cal Rights; 7 and the Declaration
,t 1he Rights of the Ch,ld 66 and the draft convention on the nghts of the
t111,1h 8 It should be understood that the application of the present Rules is
-"nl·oul 1xeJudice to an) such mtemational instruments wh1rh may 1..-on~
.1q
pn•· 1swn~ of wtde applirat1on. 61 (Sc."'C also rule ~7.l
Part ,,...,.

( ·o,nmentarv

f11,atigatio11 and proucution

IO

ln11ial con/act

Rules 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3 combm,· several 1mpor1an1 k.nure, of dkct1w
fair and humane Juvenile Justice admm1~trat1on the riet"'d to i:x-rn:11 1hr
exercise of discretwnary power at all significant level, ol proces,11ig •,,, 1h.,1
those who make determinations can lake th,· al'!iom deemed t, · t·• mo,
appropriate in each individual case: and the need 111 prov·1dr- i:hc-d ~ a11,,
balances in order to curh any abuS(~s ot d,srrrllonan power and :i -.al{
guard the nghts of thr young offender Accountab,litv and professionahsn
are instruments best apt to curh hroad d1scret10n fhus, orofess1onal (lual1
fications and expert trammg an: emphasized heir ,t\ a ,.ialuahle m(,,1m,
ensuring the judicious exercise of d1scrrtwn m matter\ ,Jf Ju'"emle l•fli~nd
ers. (See also rules I 6 and 2.2.) J'hc forn,ulallon "t sp<·nfic guiddrne, "''
the exercise of d1scret1on and tht· pnn-1<,;.1on ul ~y'i,tt"m"i ,It rev1r" tppea
and the like m order to permit scrutiny l)f der1s1on~ and au ount.ah!l:t~· :Ht
emphasized in this context. Such met:hdm~m\ ,1rt: no1 \pec1fied h,'fe .. , . .
they do nut easily lend 1hemseivn, ll ,ncorrx)ra!,1)n mtn inl!.:rn:it10na'
standard minimum rules. whil h ,111rn i p,n·,,1hh ,v, al di!li.·1e1 .-t~~ ,
Justice systems.

R :,·s. fnr 1he r,e;-itmcr

67 See Human Rtgllts. ,·I ('omptlutwn ol lt111,r1w11,,,idi
Nations publication. Sales No. F kl I(!\ 11

··' rh,· Standard Mn ,mum Rules for the Treatment of Pnsoners and
,·1.1ted recommendatu,,,s were adopted in 1955 (see First Unilt'd !1/atwm

Ill

Iii,

,iJ

1

1

~R See EronomIC and Snr1al ( , ~1111

I

.,,,,1r10>1.en;

1

ll

""\ <1lc

'l[fC\·

Upon the a.iprehension of a juvenile, her or his parellls or
guardian sh<1ll be ,mmediately notified of such apprehension.
and, where surh immediate notification is not possible, the parents or guar han shall be notified within the shortest possihk
tune thereat" e1
A.Judge or o, l1er competent official or body shall, wllhoui delay
consider the 1~sue nf release.
( 'ontarts be1 ween the law enforcement agencic-s and a Juvenile
oflender sha'I be managed m such a way as to respt'<'I the legal
status of th, iuven1le. promote the well-being of tne iuvenik
and J\ md h.trrn to her or tum, with due regard to iht· cucum
stance.., of lt1 ,, rase
1_/ I J\ 10 pnn\·1ple rontamed in ruk 92 ofthr Standard

•n !hl' f'rnenr

Minimum

~1f Pnsonrrs.t,Q

·1 r1{ ( ·rur1e 1,u1d the

/'reatmcnt <1 (()/fi.,ruicn-, t ;t'fll'\!U

VJ.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committet

The question of release (rule 10.2) shall be ronsidered without delay by a
Judge or other rompetent official. The latter refers to any person or institution in the broadest sense of the term. including community boards or
police authorities having power to release an arrested person. (See also the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. article 9, paragraph
3 'l
Ruk 10.3 deals with some fundamental aspects of the procedures and
behaviour on the part of the police and other law enforcement officials in
cases of juvenile crime. To ··avoid harm" admittedly is flexible wording
and ,:overs many features of possible interaction (for example the use of
harsh language. physical violence or exposure to the environment).
lmolvement in Juvenile Just,~e processes in itself can be "harmful" to
juveniles: the term "avoid harm" should be broadly interpreted. therefore.
as doing the least harm 1>0ssible to the jmenile in the first instance, as well
as any additional or undue harm. This is especially important in the imtial
contact with law enforcement agencies, which might profoundly influen,,·
th,· juvenile's attitude towards the State and society. Moremcr. the success
of any further intervention is largely dependent on such imtial contacts
( ·ornr,assion and kind firmness are important in these situatu)n-.
II.
iI I

I 1.2

lhe police, the prosecution or other agencies dealing with juvenile cases shall be empowered to dispose of such cases, at their
discretion, without recourse to formal hearings, in accordance
with 1hr criteria laid down for that purpose in the respective
legal system and also in accordance with the principles con-tained in these Rules.

II i

Any di,crsion involving referral lo appropriate community or
other services shall require the consent of the Juvenile. or her or
his parent5 or guardian, provided that such decision to refer a
case shall be suhj«·t to review hy a competent authority, upon
application

11 4

In order to facilitate the discretionary d1spos1tinn of juvemk
cas,.,. efforts shall be made 10 pnnide for cornrnun1ty programmes, such as temporary supervision and guidance. restitution. and rompensation of virt1ms

( ·ornmentarr

Diversion, involving removal from cnminal justice processing and, frequently, redirection to community support services, is commonly practised
on a formal and informal basis in many legal systems. This practice serves
to hinder the negative effects of subsequent proceedings in Juvenile justice
administration (for example the stigma of conviction and sentence). In
many cases, non-intervention would be the best response. Thus, diversion
at the outset and without referral to alternative (social) services may be the
optimal response. This is especially the case where the offence is of a nonserious nature and where the family, the school or other informal social
c•mtrol institutions have already reacted, or are l1kcly to react. rn an appropriate and ronstructive manner.
As stated in rule 11.2, diversion may be used at any point of decisionmaking -- by the police, the prosecution 01 other agencies such as the
courts. trihunals, boards or councils. II may be exercised by one authority
01 ~veral or all authorities. according 10 the rules and policies of the
,especti,e systems and in line with the present Rules. It need not necessaPly be limlled lo petty cases. thus rendering diversion an important instrument
Rule 11.3 stresses the important requirement of securing the consent of
the young offender (or the parent or guardian) to the recommended diversionary measure(s). (Diversion to communitv service without such consent
would contradict the Abolition of Forced Labour \ 'onvention. 70 ) However. this consent should not be left unchallengeable. since it might some-times be given out of sheer desperation on the part of the juvenile. The rule
underlines that care should be taken to minimize the potential for coercion
22 August - 3 September 1955: report prepared hy the Secretariat (United
Nations pubhcat10n, Sales No. 1956.IV.4). In its resolution 663 C (XXIV) of
_\ I July 19 57, the Economic and Social Council approved the Standard Minimum Rules and endorsed, inter aha, the recommendations on the selection
and training of personn,el for penal and correctional institutions and on open
penal and correctmnal institutions. The Council recommended that Governments should give favourable consideration to the adoption and application
of the Standard Minimum Rules and should take the other two 11roups ofrecommenda11nns as fully as possible into account in the administration of
penal and rnrrectional institutions. The inclusion of a new rule. rule '15, was
authorized by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 2076 (LXII)
of 13 May 1977. The complete text of the Standard Minimum Rules for the
rr~atment of Prisoners is contained in flrunur. Ra~hl\

J'nto:'1af10·:oi f-11 1,:u~N•n/\

and intimidation at all levels in the diversion process. Juveniles should not
feel pressured (for example in order to avoid court appearance) or be pressured mto consenting to diversion programmes. Thus. it is advocated that
provision should be made for an objective appraisal of the appropnateness
of dispositions involving young offenders by a "competent authority upon
application" (The "competent authority" may he different from that referred to in rule 14.)
Ruk 11.4 recommends the provision of viable alternatives to Juvenile
justice processing in the form of community-based diversion. Programmes
that involve settlement by victim restitution and those that seek to avoid
future ron~ict with the law through temporary supervision and guidance
are espec,ally commended. The merits of individual cases would make
diverswn appropriate, even when more serious offences have been ..·nm
m1tted (for example firs1 offenc,· the act having been rnmmittcd 111u<e1
peer pressure. etc)
I.'. I

Di,wsum

( ·onsideration shall be given, wherever appropriate, to dealing
with juvenile offenders without resorting to formal tnal by the
competent authority, referred to in rule 14.1 below.

•I { ·om11t!urion , ,(

209

12 Spec,a/i:·urton wuh,n th,• police
In order to best fulfi, their functions, police officers who fre
quently or exclus,veli deal with Juveniles or who are primarily
engaged in the prevention of juvenile crime shall be special!,
mstructed and train~d. In large cities. special poli(·c unib
should be established fr,r that purpoS<"

r·,1rnmentun·

Rule 12 draws attention to the need for specialized training fo, all la"'
enforcement officials who are involved in the administration of Juvenile
justice. As police are the first point of contact with the juverule justice system. ,t ,s most important that hev act in an informed and appropriaw
manner
While the relationship between urbanl7ation and crime is clearly rnm
plex. an increase in juvenile crime has been associated with the growth of
large cities. particularly with rapid and unplanned growth. Speciali,.ed
police units would therefore be indispensable. not only in the interest of
1mplement1ng specific principles ,·ontained in the present instrument (such
as rule I 6) but more generally kn improving the prevention and rnntrnl ol
iuvende ,-r,n-w and the handling .,f Juvenile offender~.
I \

/)efi ntwri pn1d1nR tnal

I letenuon pending tr ,al shall be used only as a measure of last
resort and for the shortest possible period of time.
i l 2 Whenever possible. detention pending trial shall be replaced b,
irtltematlve measures, such as close supervision. intrnsi"e care
dt placement with :1 family or 1n an t:'ducational ,;,.cuing or
i i

h\)rne.

IU

Juvemles under detention pending trial shall be entitled to all
nghts and guarantees of the Standard Minimum Rule, for •hr
l'reatment of Prisoners 67 adopted hy the United Naliuns.
I l 4 Juvemles under dete 111011 pending trial shall he kept separate
from adults and shall be detained in a separate institution or 111
a separate part of an mst1lution also holding adults
I i ' While in custody.Ju,eniles shall rece1w care, protection and all
necessary individual assistance - social, educational. voca1,onal. psychological medical and physical -·- that they mav
require in view of thi·1r age, sex and personality.
( ·ommentt11 ,,

The danger to Juveniles of "criminal contamination" while in detention
pending tnal must not be underestimated. It is therefore important to
stress the need for alternative measures. By doing so, rule 13.1 encourages
the devising of new and innovallve measures to avoid such detention m
the interest of the well-being of the Juvenile.
J meniles under detention pending trial are entitled to all the rights and
guarantees of the Standard Min1,num Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners
as well as the lnternal!onal ( ovenant on Civil and Political Rights. 7
especially article 9 and article I •J. paragraphs 2 (b) and 3.
Rule 13.4 does not prevent States from taking other measures against :he
negative influences of adult offenders which are at least as effectiH' as 1he
measures mentioned in the rule
Different forms of assistance that may become necessary have been ,·11u
merated lo draw attention to th.- hroad range of particular needs of you11~
detamee, "' be addressed (for ,·,ample females or males. drng add,rts,
alcohoh,s, mentally ill JU'Cniles young persons suffering from the 11~uma,
for ,·.,ample. of arrest, etr.).
Varying physical and psycho:og1cal characteristics of young detarnees
may warrant clas,iticat1on meas11n~s b~ which some arr kept s.eparatl' while
' 1' ( 'cmH·1111011 No. 105. adop,ed on 25 June 1957 hv the (ieneral Cunfcrl'm·e oi th~· International Labour Organisation at its fr:n1cth session. \Vith
reEUHd h 1 1h,· te,t of the Conve-n·inn. st~e t~)otnotr 67

General Assembly -- Fortieth Session __ _

210

in detention pending trial, thus contributing to the avoidance of v1c11m1zation and rendering more appropriate assistance.
The Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and tht
Treatment of Offenders, in its resolution 4 61 on juvenile justice standards
specified that the Rules, inter alia, should reflect the basic principle that
pre-trial detention should be used only as a last resort, that no minors
should be held in a facility where they are vulnerable to the negative influences of adult detainees and that account should always be taken of the
needs particular to their stage of development

Part three. Adj•dication and disposition
14. Competem authority w ad;ud,care
Where the case of a juvenile offender has not been diverted
(under rule 11 ), she or he shall be dealt with by the competent
authority (court. tribunal. board, council. etd according to the
principles of a fair and Just trial.
14.2 The proceedings shall be conducive to the best interests of the
juvenile and shall be conducted in an atmosphere of under
standing, which shall allow the Juvenik to participate 1hercm
and to express herself or himself free I;

14_ I

Commemary

It is difficult to formulate a definition of the competent body or person
that would universally describe an adjudicatmg authority. "Competent
authority" is meant to include those who preside over courts or 111 bunals
(composed of a single judge or of several members). induding professional
and lay magistrates as well as admimstrative boards (for example the Scottish and Scandinavian systems) o• olher more informal community and
conflict resolution agencies of an adjudicatory nature.
The procedure for dealing with juvenile offenders shall in any case folio-.
the minimum standards that are applied almost universally for any c1im1nal defendant under the procedure known as "due process of law". ln
accordance with due process, a "fair and just tnal" includes such bas,c
safeguards as the presumption of innocence, the presentation and examina
tion of witnesses, the common legal defences. the right to remain silent. the
right to have the last word in a hearing. the right lo appeal. et<.e (See als,,
rule 7.1.)
15. Legal counsel. parent, arui guardians
Throughout the proceedings the Juvenile shall have the righl to
be represented by a legal adviser or to apply for free legal a,d
where there is provision for such aid in th~ country
15.2 The parents or the guardian shall be entitled to part1c1pak "'
the proceedings and may bt· required by the competent author
ity to attend them in the mterest of the Juvenile. They may
however, be denied participation by the competent authority 1I
there are reasons to assume that such rxclusion is nece'isal)' 1r\
the interest of the Juvenile

15.1

Commentary

Rule 15.1 uses terminology similar to that found m rule 93 of the Stand
ard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. 67 Whereas legal counsel and free legal aid are needed to assure the juvenile legal assistance. lh<
right of the parent~ or guardian to participate as stated in rule 15.2 should
be viewed as general psychological and emotional assislance to the JUW
nile - a function extending throughout the procedure
The competent authority's search for an adequate dispositton of the cas<·
may profit, in particular. from the co-operation of the legal representattves
of the Juvenile (or, for that matte,. some other personal assistant who the
juvenile can and does really trust). Such concern can he thwarted if 1h,·
presence of parents or guardians al the heanngs plays a negative role. fnr
i11stance, if they display a hostile atlttude l'.lwards the Juvenile: hence_ lh,·
possibility of thetr exclusion must he provided fnr
16.

16.1

.')~oc,af ,nqu,ry report,·

In all cases except those involving mmor offences, before the
competent authority renders a final disposition prior to sentencing, the background and circumstances in which the Juvenile ,s
living or the condi1ion, under which the offence has been committed shall be properly in vest1gated so as to facilitate Judicrnus
adjudication of the case b, the compett·nt authority

Commentary

Social inquiri, reports (social reports m pre-sentence reports) are an
indispensable ai,1 ,n most legal proceeding, mvolving 1uvcniles The com
oetent authoritv should he informed of relevant facts about the Juvemil'
such as social and famil~ hackgroun,J. sd,ool career. educational expe1
1ences, etc. For this OHqmse, "iom1· JH" 1,d:1 tHmc, d~. ~pecrn! social serv1n·"'
7 1 ReSl}lution 34·\2 (X XX). amw:•.

or personnel attached ·o the rnurt or board. Other personnel. mcluding
probation officers. may serve the same function. The rule therefore requires
that adequate social services should be availabk to deliver social inquiry
reports of a qualified n.nure
17.

<iuidi11,: principles in adJ11d1cation and d1spos111ori

The disposi11on of the competent authonly shall he guided b,
the followmg pnnc1ples:
(a) The reaction taken shall always he in proportion not onl)
to the nrcumstances and the gravity of the offence but also
to the , 1rcumstanCt"s and the nreds of the juwnile as well
as to the nreds of the society:
(b) Restric:ions on the personal hberty of the Juvenile shall bt·
imposed only after careful consideration and shall he lim ·
ned to the possible minimum:
(c) Deprivauon of personal liberty shall not he imposed unless
the juvenile is adjudicated of a senous act involving violence against another person or of persistence m committmg other serious offences and unless there is no other
appropriate response:
(d) The well-bemg of the Juvenile shall be the guiding factor m
the consideration of her 01 his case.
17 2 Capital punishment shall not be imposed for any lTime committed by juvemles.
17 3 Juveniles shall nol be subJect to corporal punishmen1.
17.4 The competent authority shall have the power to discontinue
the proceedings at any tune
1 ·ommentary
fhe main difficulty m formulating guidelines for the adJudicat1on ol
ynung persons stems h,m the fact that there are unresolved confl,cls of"
philosophical nature. ,uch as the following:
, a) Rehabihtat1on ,ersus iusl dese1i;
,I>) Assistance versus repression and punishment;
<c') Reaction accoro,ng to the singular merits of an mdiv1dual case ver
w, reaction according 10 the protc-ct1on of society m generaL
,d) (,eneral deterrence versus ind1v1dual mcapacitat1on.
rhe conflict between these approaches ,s more pronounced m Juvcntk
cases than in adult ca~es. With the variety of causes and reactions charac
tl'nzing Juvenile cases 1hese alternatives become intricately interwoven
It is not the function nf the Standard Mm,mum Rules for the Admims
!ration of Juvenile Ju,1ice to prescribe which approach is to he followed
but rather to identify one that is most closely in consonance wnh interna11onally accepted prinr·iples. Therefore the essential elements as laid down
m rule 17. 1, in particular in subparagraphs (a) and ic), are mainly to be
understood as practical guideline~ that should ensure a common starting
potnt; ,f heeded by th,:, concerned authorities (see also rule 5). they could
contribute considerably to ensuring that the fundamental rights ofjuveml,·
offenders are protected, especially the fundamental rights of personal
development and education.
Rule 17.1 (h) implies that ,tnctly pumtive approaches are not appropr,
ale. Whereas m adult cases, and possibly also in cases of seve•e offences hy
Juveniles, just desert and retributive sanctions might be considered to have
some merit. in juvemle cases such considerations should always be outweighed by the mteresl of safeguarding the well-being and the futun- of the
,oung person.
In line with resolution 8 of the Sixth United Nations Congress.•J rule
I - I (h) encourages tht· use of alternaltves to institutionalintion to the
maximum extent possible. bearing m mind th~ need to respond lo the spe
nfic requirements of the young. Thus. full use should be made of the rang,·
,,t existmg alternative sanctions and new alternative sanctions should he
,kveloped, bearing the publit· safety in mind. Probation should be granted
1r, the greatest possible extent via suspended sentences. rnnditional
sentences. board orders and other dispositions.
Rule I 7. I (c) corre~mds 10 one of the guiding principles in resolution 4
nf the Sixth Congress 3 which aims at avoiding incarceration in the case of
:uveniles unless there is no other appropriate response that will protect the
r>ublic safety
fhe provision prohibiting capital punishment in rule 17 2 is in accordance with article 6. raragraph '\. of the lntemati,mal Covenant on Civil
a«d Pohttcal Rights_
fhe provision against corporal pumshment 1s in line with article 7 of the
international Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 7 and the Oedaration
, 111 the Proteetron of •\II Persons from Being Subjected to I orture and
,· )ther ( ·ruel. lnhuma 1 or Degrnding T,catmenf ()r P11n1s!imi•r1t, 71 as wi•II
17.1

VI.

10.

a, the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading

I ,eatment or Punishment 72 and the draft convention on the rights of the

, hdd. 68

I he power to discontinue the proceedings at any time (rule I 7.4) 1s a
characteristic inherent in the handling of juvenile offenders as opposed to
adults. At any time, circumstances may become known to the competent
authority which would make a complete cessation of the intervention
appear to be the best disposition of the case.
18. Various disposition measures
A. large variety of disposition measures shall be made available
to the competent authority, allowing for flexibility so as to
avoid institutionalization to the greatest extent possible. Such
measures. some of which may be combined, include·
(a, Care, guidance and supervision orders;
(b) Probation;
(c) Community service orders;
(d) Financial penalties, compensation and restitution;
(e) Intermediate treatment and other treatment orders;
(/) Orders to participate in group counselling and similar
activities;
(g) Orders concerning foster care, living communities or other
educational settings;
(h) Other relevant orders.
18 2 No juvenile shall be removed from parental supervision.
whether partly or entirely, unless the circumstances of her or his
case make this necessary.
Commentary
Rule I 8.1 attempts to enumerate some of the important reactions and
sanctions that have been practised and proved successful thus far, in differrnt legal systems. On the whole they represent promising options that
deserve replication and further development. The rule does not enumerate
staffing requirements because of possible shortages of adequate staff in
some regions; in those regions measures requiring less staff may be tried or
,ieveloped.
·1 he examples given in rule 18.1 have in common, above all, a reliance
.n and an appeal to the community for the effective implementation of
alternative dispositions. Community-based correction is a traditional
measure that has taken on many aspects. On that basis, relevant authorities
,hould be encouraged to offer community-based servirt''.
Rule 18.2 points to the importance of the 1am,1y which, according to
~111cle I 0, paragraph I, of the Intern?' :0nal Covenant on Economic, Social
and _Cultural Rights, is "the natP-al and fundamental group unit of society" 7 Within the family, the parents have not only the right but also the
responsibility to care for ano supervise their children. Rule 18.2, therefore,
requires that the separation of children from their parents is a measure of
last resort. It may be resorted to only when the facts of the case clearly warrant th,s grnve step (for example child abuse).

20. I

Avoidance of unnecessary delay

Each case shall from the outset ix' handled expeditiouslv, without any unnecessary delay.

Commentary
The speedy conduct of formal procedures in juvenile cases is a paramount concern. Otherwise whatever good may be achieved by the procedure and the disposition 1s at risk. As time passes, the juvenile will find it
increasingly difficult, if not impossible, to rdate the procedure and disposition to the offence, both intelle..-tually and psychologically.

18 I

19. Least possible use of instilulionalizalion
The placement of a Juvenile in an institution shall always be a
disposition of last resort and for the minimum necessary
period.
~ ummentary
Progressive criminology advocates the use of non-institutional over
institutional treatment. Little or no difference has been found in terms of
the success of institutionalization as compared to non-institutionalization.
The many adverse influences on an individual that seem unavoidable
within any institutional setting evidently cannot be outbalanced by treatment efforts. This is especially the case for Juveniles, who are vulnerable to
negative influences. Moreover, the negative effects, not only of loss of liberty but also of separation from the usual social environment, are certainly
more acute for juveniles than for adults because of their early stage of
development.
Rule 19 aims at restricting institutionalization in two regards: in quantity ("last resort") and in time ("minimum necessary period"). Rule I9
reflects one_ of the basic fuiding principles of resolution 4 of the Sixth
Umted Nations Congress: 3 a Juvenile offender should not be incarcerated
unless there is no other appropriate response. The rule, therefore, makes
the appeal that if a juvenile must be institutionalized, the loss of liberty
should be restricted to the least possible degree, with special institutional
af111ngements for confinement and bearing in mind the differences in kinds
of offenders, offences and institutions. In fact, priority should be given to
"open" over '"closed" institutions. Furthermore, any facility should be of a
u>rrectional or educational rather than of a prison type.
19.1

!l Resolutu,n W, 46, annn

2ll

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

;1

Rt'cord'i

iI I

Records of Juvenile offenders shall be kept strictly confidential
and closed to third parties. Access to such records shall be limited to persons directly concerned with the disposition of the
case at hand or other duly authorized persons.

21.2

Records of juvenile offenders shall not be used in adult procee,t1ngs ,n subsequent cases involving the same offender.

('ommentary
The rule attempts to achieve a balance between conflicting interests connected with records or files: those of the police, prosecution and other
authorities in improving control versus the interests of the Juvenile
offender. (See also rule 8.) "Other duly authorized persons" would generally include. among others. res,·arrhers

n.

Need for pm(esswnali.<m and 1ra1nwg

22.1

Professional education, in-service training, refresher courses
and other appropriate modes of instruction shall be utilized to
establish and maintain the necessary professional compett·nce
of all personnel dealing with juvenile cases.
22.2 Juvenile justice personnel shall reflect the diversity of juveniles
who come into contact with the juvenile justice system. Efforts
shall be made to ensure the fair representation of women and
minorities in juvenile Justice agencies.

Commentary
The authorities competent for disposition may be persons with very different backgrounds (magistrates in the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and in regions influenced by the common law system; legally trained judges in ~ountries using Roman law and in regions
influenced by them; and elsewhere elected or appointed laymen or jurists,
members of community-based boards etc.). For all these authorities, a
minimum training in law, sociology. psychology, criminology and
behav10ural sciences would be required. This is considered as important as
the organizational specializat,on and independence of the competent
authority
For social workers and probation officers, it might not be feas1hle to
require professional specialization as a prerequisite for taking over any
function dealing with juvenile offenders. Thus, professional on-the-Job
instruction would be minimum qualifications.
Professional qualifications are an essential element in ensuring the
impartial and effective administration of juvenile justice. Accordingly, it is
necessary to improve the recruitment, advancement and professional training of personnel and to provide them with the net·essary means to enable
them to properly fulfil their functions.
All political, social, sexual, racial, religious, cultural or any other kind of
discrimination in the selection. appointment and advancement ofjuvernle
justice personnel should be avoided in order to achieve impartiality in the
administration of juvenile justice. This was recommended by the Sixth
Congress. Furthermore. the Sixth Congress called on Member States to
ensure the fair and equal treatment of women as criminal justice personnel
and recommended that special measures should be taken to recruit, train
and facilitate the advancemen1 of female JJ("rsonnel in Juvenile justice
administration. 61
Part four.

23.
23 I

Non-i,utitatiolllll trutment

Effective 1mp/ementatwn of disposition

Appropriate provisions shall be made for the implementation
of orders of the competent authority, as referred to in rule 14.1
above, by that authority itself or by some other authority as circumstances may require.
23 2 Such provisions shall include the power to modify the orders as
the competent authority may deem necessary from time to
time, provided that such modification shall be determined in
accordance with th • princ,ples contained in these Rules.

212

General Assembly ~ Fortieth Session

Commentary
Disposition in juvenile cases, more so than in adult cases, tends to influence the offender's life for a long period of time. Thus, it is important that
the competent authority or an independent body (parole board, probation
office, youth welfare institutions or others) with qualifications equal to
those of the competent authority that originally disposed of the case should
monitor the implementation of the disposit10n. In some countries. ,t ju1:e
de /'execution des pemes has been installed for this purpose.
The composition, powers and functions of the authority must be flexible;
they are described in general terms in ruk ~ 1 ,n ordrr to ensure wide
acceptability.
24.
24.1

Provisum of needed ass1sta11ce

Efforts shall be made to provide Juveniles, at all stages of the
proceedings, with necessary assistance such as lodging, education or vocational training, employment or any other assistance,
helpful and practical, in order to facilitate the rehabilitative
process.

Commentary
The promotion of the well-being of the juvenile is of paramount consideration. Thus, rule 24 emphasizes the importance of providing requisite
facilities, services and other necessary assistance as may further the best
interests of the juvenile throughout the rehabilitative process.
25.
25.1

Mobilization o(mlunteers and nther commumtv serv1ce.1
Volunteers, voluntary organizations, local institut10ns and
other community resources shall be called upon to contribute
effectively to the rehabilitation of the juvenile in a comm unit,
setting and, as far as possible, within the :am1ly unit

Commentary
This rule reflects the need for a rehabilitative onentation of all work wi1h
juvenile offenders. Co-operation with the community is indispensable ,f
the directives of the competent authority are to be carried out effec1ively
Volunteers and voluntary services, in particular, have proved to be valu
able resources but are at present underutihzed. In .S()m,· instances, the co
operation of ex-offenders (including ex-addicts) can he of considerable
assistance.
Rule 25 emanates from the principles laid down in rules I.I to 1.6 and
follows the relevant provisions of the International Covenan1 on Civil and

Political Rights. 7
Part live.

26.
26.1

/ nJtit"tional trl!lltment

Ob1ect1ves of inst1tut10na/ treatmmt

The objective of training and treatment of Juveniles placed m
institutions 1s to provide care. protection. education and vocational skills, with a view to assisting them to assume socialh
wnstructive and produc11ve roles in societ)

26.2 Juveniles in inslitutions shall receive care, protection and all
necessary assistance -- social, educational, vocational. psychological, medical and physical - thal they may require because
of their age, sex and personality and in the interest of their
wholesome development
26.3 Juveniles in institutions shall be kept separate from adults and
shall be detained in a separate institution or ,n a separate part of
an institution also holding adults
26.4

26.5

Young female offenders placed in an institution desef\e ~pec1al
attention as to their personal needs and problems. They shall t,y
no means receive less care, protection, assistance, treatment and
training than young male offenders. Thetr fair treatment shall be
ensured.
In the interest and well-being of the inst1tut1onalized juvenile.
the parents or guardians shall have a nght of a,cess.

26.6

Inter-ministerial and inter-departmental co-operat10n shall be
fostered for the purpose of providing adequate academ1t or, a,
appropriate, vocational training to inst1tuhonalized ,1uvenile,,
with a view to ensuring that they do not leave the institut10n al
an educational disadvantage
Commentary
The objectives of institutional treatment as stipulated in rules 26.1 and
26.2 would be acceptable to any system and culture However. they have
not yet been attained everywhere. and much more ha, to be done m tlm
respect.
7 3 See resolut10n 15/ 17 I. annn. para I 6
74 Resolution 226 l (XXII).

Medical and psychological assistance, in particular, are extremely important for mstitutionalizecJ drug addicts, violent and mentally ill young per(,,on,
The avoidance of negative influences lhrough adult offenders and the
safeguarding of the well-being of juveniles in an inshtutional setting, as
stipulated in rule 26.3. are in line with one of the basic guiding pnnciples of
the Rules, as set out by the Sixth Congress in its resolution 4. 63 The rule
does not prevent States from taking other measures against the negative
influences of adult offenders, which are at least as eff«·tive as thr mt"asures
ment,oned in the rule. (See also rule 13.4.)
Rule 26.4 addresses the fact that female offenders normally receive less
attention than their male counterparts, as pointed out by the Sixth
Congress. In particular, resolution 9 of the Sixth Congress 63 calls for the
fair treatment of female offenders at every stage of criminal Justice proces
ses and for special attention to their particular problems and needs while in
custody. Moreover, this rule should also be considered in the light of the
( ·aracas Declaration of the Sixth Congress, which, inter alia, calls for equal
treatment in criminal justice administration, 73 and agamst the background
of the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women 74
and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Dtsn,mmatton
agamst Women. 75
The nght of access (iule 26.5) follows from the prov1S1ons of rules 7.1.
10 I, 15.2 and 18.2. Inter-ministerial and inter-departmental co-operation
(rule 26.6) are of particular importance in the interest of generally enhancing the quality of instit~tional treatment and training.
:7.

Application of 1he Standard Minimum Rules for the 7 rcatml'lrt
of Prisoners adopted by the Unit,•d Nations
27. I The Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners
and related recommendations shall be applicable as far as relevant to the treatment of Juvenile offenders in institutions, including those in detention pending adjudication.
27.2 Efforts shall be made to implement the 1elevant pnnc1ples laid
down in the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatm,·nt of
Prisoners to the largest possible extent so as to meet the varying
needs of jmeniles specific to the,r age, sex and per,;onahty

t ommen1ary

The Standard Mmimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners wet<
among the first instruments of this kind to be promulgated by the United
Nations. II is generall} agreed that they have had a world-wide impact
Although there are ,till countries where implementation is more an asp1ra
lton than a fact, those Standard Minimum Rules continue to be an important influence in the humane and equ;table administration of rorret·tional
institutions.
Some essential protet.·tions covering Juvenile offenders in instnutions arr
rnntained in the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Pnsoners
\accommodation, architecture. bedding, clothing, complamts and requests.
contact wnh the outside world, food, medical care. religious service, separation of ages, staffing, work, etc.) as are provisions rnnceming punishment
and discipline, and restraint for dangerous offenders. It would not be
appropriate to modify those Standard Minimum Rules according to the
particular characteristics of institutions for juvenile offenders w11hm the
scope of the Standard "'1inimum Rules for the Admimstration c,f Juvenik
J ust1ce.
Rule 2 7 focuses on .,he necessary requirements for Juveniles m inst1tu
t10ns (rule 27.1) as well as on the varying needs sl)C{'ific to 1heir age, ..-x an,l
personality (rule 27.2). Thus, the objectives and content of the rule inter.elate to the relevant provisions of the Standard Minimum Rules for the
rreatment of Prisoner,
28. frequ,,nt and early recourse to corui1tiorwl rele,L\'C
Conditional release from an institution shall be used t,y the
appropriate authority to the greatest possible extent. and sha!I
be granted al the earliest possible time.
28.2 Juveniles released conditionally from an institut10n shall be
assisted and supervised by an appropriate authorih and shall
receive full support by the community.
1 ·om,nentary
28.1

!'he power to ordet conditional release may rest with the rompe1e111
authority, as mentioned in rule 14.1, or with some other authority. In vie"
of this, it is adequate to refer here to the "appropnate" rather than to the
"competent" authorit}
i '1rcumstances permitting. condit1onal rdease shall be preferred to "'"'
1ng a full sentence. Upon evidence ofsatisfanorv rrngress towards 1L"hah1I

\ Rrsolutton 141 18( anne.,

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

itation, even offenders who had been deemed dangerous at the time of their
institutionalization can be conditionally released whenever feasible. Like
probation, such release may be conditional on the satisfactory fulfilment of
the requirements specified by the relevant authorities for a period of time
established in the decision, for example relating to "good behaviour" of the
offender, attendance in community programmes, residence in half-way
houses, etc.
In the case of offenders conditionally released from an institution, assistance and supervision by a probation or other officer (particularly where
probation has not yet been adopted) should be provided and community
support should be encouraged.
29.
29.1

Semi-institutional arrangements

Efforts shall be made to provide semi-institutional arrangements, such as half-way houses, educational homes, day-time
training centres and other such appropriate arrangements that
may assist juveniles in their proper reintegration into society.

Commentary
The importance of care following a period of institutionalization should
not be underestimated. This rule emphasizes the necessity of forming a net
of semi-institutional arrangements.
This rule also emphasizes the need for a diverse range of facilities and
services designed to meet the different needs of young offenders re-entering
the community and to provide guidance and structural support as an
important step towards successful reintegration into society.
Rueorcli, p/a1111i11g, policy form11/atio11 tuUI ~,aJ11atio11

Part six.

30.

Research as a basis for planning, policy formulatwn
and evaluation

30.1

Efforts shall be made to organize and promote necessary
research as a basis for effective planning and policy formulation.

30.2

Efforts shall be made to review and appraise periodically the
trends, problems and causes of juvenile delinquency and crime
as well as the varying particular needs of juveniles in custody.

30.3 Efforts shall be made to establish a regular evaluative research
mechanism built into the system of juvenile justice administration and to collect and analyse relevant data and information
for appropriate assessment and future improvement and reform
of the administration.
30.4 The delivery of services in juvenile justice administration shall
be systematically planned and implemented as an integral part
of national development efforts.
Comm,·ntary
The utilization of research as a basis for an informed juvenile justice policy is widely acknowledged as an important mechanism for keeping practices abreast of advances in knowledge and the continuing development
and improvement of the juvenile justice system. The mutual feedback
between research and policy is especially important in juvenile justice.
With rapid and often drastic changes in the life-styles of the young and in
the forms and dimensions of juvenile crime, the societal and justice
responses to juvenile crime and delinquency quickly become outmoded
aml inadequate.
Rule 30 thus establishes standards for integrating research into the process of policy formulation and application in juvenile justice administration. The rule draws particular attention to the need for regular review and
evaluation of existing programmes and measures and for planning within
the broader context of overall development objectives.
A constant appraisal of the needs of juveniles, as well as the trends and
problems of delinquency, is a prerequisite for improving the methods of
formulating appropriate policies and establishing adequate interventions,
at both formal and informal levels. In this context, research by independent persons and bodies should be facilitated by responsible agencies, and
it may be valuable to obtain and to take into account the views of juveniles
themselves, not only those who come into contact with the system.
The process of planning must particularly emphasize a more effective
and equitable system for the delivery of necessary services. Towards that
end, there should be a comprehensive and regular assessment of the wideranging, particular needs and problems of juveniles and an identification of
clear-cut priorities. In that connection, there should also be a co-ordination
in the use of existing resources, including alternatives and community support that would be suitable in setting up specific procedures designed to
implement and monitor established programmes

213

40/34. Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for
Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power
The General Assemblr,
Recalling that the Sixth United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders recommended that the United Nations should continue its
present work on the development of guidelines and standards regarding abuse of economic and political power,s 6
Cognizant that millions of people throughout the world
suffer harm as a result of crime and the abuse of power and
that the rights of these victims have not been adequately
recognized,
Recognizing that the victims of crime and the victims of
abuse of power, and also frequently their families, witnesses and others who aid them, are unjustly subjected to
loss, damage or injury and that they may, in addition, suffer hardship when assisting in the prosecution of offenders,
I. Affirms the necessity of adopting national and international measures in order to secure the universal and
effective recognition of, and respect for, the rights of victims of crime and of abuse of power;
2. Stresses the need to promote progress by all States
in their efforts to that end, without prejudice to the rights
of suspects or offenders;
3. Adopts the Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice
for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power, annexed to the
present resolution, which is designed to assist Governments and the international community in their efforts to
secure justice and assistance for victims of crime and victims of abuse of power;
4. Calls upon Member States to take the necessary
steps to give effect to the provisions contained in the Declaration and, in order to curtail victimization as referred to
hereinafter, endeavour:
(a) To implement social, health, including mental
health, educational, economic and specific crime prevention policies to reduce victimization and encourage assistance to victims in distress:
(b) To promote community efforts and public participation in crime prevention;
(c) To review periodically their existing legislation and
practices in order to ensure responsiveness to changing circumstances, and to enact and enforce legislation proscribing ·1cts that violate internationally recognized norms
relating to human rights, corporate conduct and other
abuses of power;
(d) To establish and strengthen the means of detecting,
prosecuting and sentencing those guilty of crimes;
(e) To promote disclosure of relevant information to
expose official and corporate conduct to public scrutiny,
and other ways of increasing responsiveness to public concerns;
(I) To promote the observance of codes of conduct and
ethical norms, in particular international standards, by
public servants, including law enforcement, correctional,
medical, social service and military personnel, as well as
the staff of economic enterprises;
(g) To prohibit practices and procedures conducive to
abuse, such as secret places of detention and incommunicado detention;
(h) To co-operate with other States, through mutual
judicial and administrative assistance, in such matters as
the detection and pursuit of offenders, their extradition
and the seizure of their assets, to be used for restitution to
the victims;
5. Recommends that, at the international and regional
levels, all appropriate measures should he taken:
