s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/24510
2 September 1992
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL:
ENGLISH/SPANISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the
Council at its 3111th meeting, on 2 September 1992, in connection with the
Council's consideration of the item entitled "Letter dated 28 August 1992 frorn
the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council":
"The Security Council takes note with appreciation of the letter of
the Secretary-General, dated 28 August 1992, conveying the documents of
the London stage of the International Conference on the former
Yugoslavia, held on 26 and 27 August 1992, which the Secretary-General
co-chaired with the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, President of the Council of Ministers of the
European Cornrnunity.
"The Council expresses its full support for the Statement of
Principles adopted and the other agreements reached at the London
Conference.
"The Council shares the Secretary-General's hope that the political
will shown in London will speedily be transformed into the concrete
actions foreseen in the documents of the London stage of the
International Conference on the former Yugoslavia.
"The Council reaffirms all its previous resolutions related to the
former Yugoslavia and calls for their complete implementation.
"The Council notes with satisfaction that the London stage of the
International Conference has established the frarnework within which an
overall political settlernent of the crisis in the former Yugoslavia in
all its aspects may be achieved through a continuous and uninterrupted
effort.
"The Council welcornes the establishment, under the overall direction
of the Permanent Co-Chairmen of the Conference, of the Steering
Committee.
It also welcomes the appointment of the two Co-Chairmen of

92-41882

3358c (E)

020992

020992

/

...

S/24510

English
Page 2
the Steering Committee who will direct the Working Groups and prepare the
basis for a general settlement and associated measures. It notes with
satisfaction that they will commence their work this week which will be
pursued in continuous session at the United Nations Office in Geneva.
"The Council notes the commitments entered into by the parties and
others concerned within the framework of the London Conference. It
underlines the importance it attaches to the full implementation of these
commitments as rapidly as possible.
"The Council notes the urgency of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and calls on the parties to cooperate fully with the
Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee in achieving a comprehensive
settlement.
"The Council requests the Secretary-General to keep it informed on
an ongoing basis of developments and to make recommendations to the
Council as may be appropriate."
