A /69/PV.81

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

81st plenary meeting

Thursday, 5 March 2015, noon
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at noon.
Agenda item 136 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/69/722/Add.5)
The President: Before proceeding to the items on
our agenda, I should like, in keeping with established
practice, to draw the attention of the General Assembly
to document A/69/722/Add.5, in which the SecretaryGeneral informs the President of the General Assembly
that, since the issuance of the information contained
in document A/69/722/Add.4, the Marshall Islands has
made the payment necessary to reduce its arrears below
the amount specified in the Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of the information contained in that document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/69/L.54)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held a debate on agenda item 13 and its
sub-item (a), jointly with agenda item 115, at its
51st plenary meeting, on 14 November 2014.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Mongolia to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.54.
Mr. Och (Mongolia): I have the honour to introduce
today the draft resolution entitled “Education for
democracy” (A/69/L.54) on behalf of a large number of
sponsors representing various regions.
This new draft resolution reaffirms the
fundamental link between democratic governance,
peace, development and the promotion and protection
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms. The
text also takes note of the Global Education First
initiative, launched by the Secretary-General in 2012,
in particular its third priority area — namely, fostering
global citizenship — and encourages human rights
education programmes throughout the world. The
draft resolution would reinforce global, regional and
national efforts on educating people in the culture of
peace, democracy, tolerance and respect for different
civilizations and religions and in upholding the values
of freedom and human rights.
Since late January, we have organized several
rounds of informal consultations, made an effort to
accommodate the interests of Member States and
reached consensus on the draft text. In the new text, we
stress the complementarity of human rights education,
training and learning and education for democracy.
We recall the relevant commitments from the United
Nations Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2), while
acknowledging the role of international, regional and
all intergovernmental organizations in the support of
democracy. Member States are encouraged to integrate

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-06030 (E)

*1506030*

A/69/PV.81

education for democracy along with civic education
and human rights education into their educational
standards and to develop and strengthen programmes
and curricular and extracurricular educational activities
aimed at the promotion and consolidation of democratic
values, democratic governance and human rights. The
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, a specialized agency with the relevant
expertise and mandate, is requested to cooperate with
the Secretary-General on the implementation of and
reporting on this draft resolution.
I wish to take this opportunity to extend our
gratitude to all delegations that took an active part in
our discussions on the draft text, and to all the sponsors
for their invaluable support.
In conclusion, on behalf of all the sponsors, may
I express our hope that the draft resolution will, as
in previous years, receive the unanimous support of
Member States and wide sponsorship.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.54, entitled
“Education for democracy”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin: I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/69/L.54, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Andorra, Argentina,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Morocco, Panama, Peru, the Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain,
Sweden, Turkey and the United States of America.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.54?
Draft resolution A/69/L.54 was adopted (resolution
69/268).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America.
Ms. Derderian (United States of America): The
United States wishes to thank the Mongolian delegation

2/5

05/03/2015

in its capacity as facilitator and sponsor of the resolution
just adopted (resolution 69/268).
We wish to recognize the vital work that the United
Nations Democracy Fund (UNDEF) is doing to support
democracy and human rights around the world. UNDEF
is uniquely positioned to promote capacity-building,
and its work is especially important now, with so many
areas of the world in transition. All of us can increase
the reach of good governance by doing as much as we
can to support UNDEF, which relies solely on voluntary
contributions for its critical activities.
Transparency and good governance are not just
good politics; countries with open Governments, open
economies and open societies increasingly flourish.
They become more prosperous, healthier, more secure
and more peaceful. This resolution reaffirms that
democracy is a universal value based on the freely
expressed desire of individuals to fully participate in
all aspects of political and social life in their societies.
We recognize the importance to democracy of the
right to equal access to education as reflected in the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. We also understand the
resolution’s reaffirmation of prior documents to apply
to those who affirmed them initially.
We support today’s resolution despite our
disappointment that it continues to single out the right
to development. The concerns of the United States
about the existence of a right to development are longstanding and well known. The right to development does
not have an agreed international meaning. Furthermore,
work is needed to make it consistent with human rights,
which the international community recognizes as
universal rights held and enjoyed by individuals and
which every individual may demand from his or her
own Government.
The United States stands firm in its commitment
to the promotion of democracy and views this
resolution’s goal of promoting education for democracy
as an important step in the consolidation of democratic
values, while at the same time recognizing that
education standards and curriculums in the United
States are determined at the state and local levels.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 13.

15-06030

05/03/2015

Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 19 September 2014, the General
Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (c) of agenda
item 19 to the Second Committee. In order to enable
the General Assembly to take action expeditiously
on the draft resolution before it, may I take it that the
Assembly wishes to consider sub-item (c) of agenda
item 19 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 19 (continued)
Sustainable development
(c) International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
Draft decision (A/69/L.56)
The President: The General Assembly will now
proceed to consider the draft decision entitled “Third
United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk
Reduction”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft decision A/69/L.56?

A/69/PV.81

51st plenary meeting, on 14 November 2014. Members
will also recall that, under sub-item (a) of agenda item 13
and agenda item 115, the Assembly adopted resolution
69/108 at its 65th plenary meeting, on 8 December 2014.
Members will furthermore recall that, under the same
agenda items, the General Assembly adopted resolution
69/244 and decision 69/550 at its 77th plenary meeting,
on 29 December 2014, as well as decision 69/555, at its
78th plenary meeting, on 16 January 2015.
The Assembly will now take action on draft decision
A/69/L.57, entitled “Opening of the United Nations
summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development
agenda”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft decision A/69/L.57?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 69/557).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
items 13 and agenda 115.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Contributions

The draft decision was adopted (decision 69/556).

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/565/Add.2)

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (c)
of agenda item 19.

The President: In paragraph 3 of its report, the Fifth
Committee recommends that the General Assembly
appoint Ms. Seongmee Yoon of the Republic of Korea
as a member of the Committee on Contributions for a
term of office beginning on 5 March 2015 and ending
on 31 December 2017.

Agenda items 13 and 115 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
(a) Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft decision (A/69/L.57)

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Ms. Seongmee Yoon as a member of the
Committee on Contributions for a term of office
beginning on 5 March 2015 and ending on 31 December
2017?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 113.

The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a debate on agenda item 13
and its sub-item (a) jointly with agenda item 115 at its

15-060303/5

A/69/PV.81

Agenda item 112 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(b) Election of five members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission
The President: Members will recall that, in
accordance with paragraphs 4 (a) to (e) of resolution
60/180, of 20 December 2005, the Organizational
Committee shall comprise seven members of the
Security Council, including the five permanent
members; seven members of the Economic and
Social Council, elected from regional groups; five top
providers of assessed contributions to United Nations
budgets and of voluntary contributions to United
Nations funds, programmes and agencies, including
a standing peacebuilding fund; five top providers of
military personnel and civilian police to United Nations
missions; and seven additional members elected by
the General Assembly, giving due consideration to
representation from all regional groups in the overall
composition of the Committee.
Members will also recall that, at the 62nd and
65th plenary meetings of its sixty-seventh session,
the Assembly elected Brazil, Kenya, Malaysia, Peru
and South Africa as members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission for a
two-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2013;
and that, at the 69th plenary meeting of the sixty-eighth
session, the Assembly elected Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Guatemala as members of the Organizational
Committee for a two-year period, beginning on
1 January 2014.
Members will furthermore recall that, by
resolution 63/145, of 18 December 2008, the General
Assembly decided at its sixty-third session that the
term of office for members of the General Assembly
on the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission would begin on 1 January instead of
23 June.
By a letter dated 5 December 2014 (A/69/634)
addressed to the President of the General Assembly, I
was informed by the facilitator of the group of leading
financial contributors of the decision that the financial
contributors Canada, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands
and Sweden would serve a full two-year term from
2015 to 2016. Also, by a letter dated 11 November 2014
(A/69/577) addressed to the President of the General
Assembly, I was informed by the facilitator of the
4/5

05/03/2015

troop-contributing countries of their decision that
Bangladesh, Ethiopia, India, Nigeria and Pakistan will
serve from the troop-contributing countries category of
membership for a term of office beginning on 1 January
2015 and ending on 31 December 2016.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to take note of documents A/69/634 and
A/69/577?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly will
now proceed to the election of five members of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
By resolution 60/261, of 8 May 2006, the Assembly
decided that the members of the Organizational
Committee shall serve for renewable terms of two years,
as applicable. Accordingly, Brazil, Kenya, Malaysia,
Peru and South Africa are eligible for immediate
re-election.
Regarding candidatures for the five seats, I should
like to inform members that for the African States, the
Group has endorsed Egypt, Kenya and Morocco; for the
Asia-Pacific States, the Group has endorsed Malaysia;
and for the Latin American and Caribbean States, the
Group has endorsed Colombia.
Members will recall that, in resolution 60/261, the
General Assembly decided that the rules of procedure
and established practice of the Assembly for the election
of members of its subsidiary bodies shall apply to its
election of members of the Committee. For this election,
rules 92 and 94 shall be applicable. Accordingly, the
election shall be held by secret ballot and there shall be
no nominations.
However, I should also like to recall paragraph 16
of decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs
when the number of candidates corresponds to or is less
than the number of seats to be filled should become
standard, unless a delegation specifically requests
a vote on a given election. In the absence of such a
request, may I take it that the Assembly decides to
proceed to the election on that basis?
It was so decided.
The President: Since the number of candidates
endorsed by the Group of African States, the Group of
Asia-Pacific States and the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States is equal to or less than the number of
15-06030

05/03/2015

seats to be filled, may I take it that the General Assembly
decides to elect Colombia, Egypt, Kenya, Malaysia and
Morocco as members of the Organizational Committee
of the Peacebuilding Commission for a two-year term
of office beginning on 1 January 2015?
It was so decided.
The President: I congratulate Colombia, Egypt,
Kenya, Malaysia and Morocco on their election as

A/69/PV.81

members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 112?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

15-060305/5
