S/PV.8963

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8963rd meeting

Wednesday, 9 February 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kuzmin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mrs. Aguiar Barboza
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Roscoe
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Fourteenth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in
support of Member States in countering the threat (S/2022/63)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-25377 (E)
*2225377*

S/PV.8963

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

acts of terrorism. My heartfelt thoughts and sympathies
will forever be with the survivors and the families of
the victims.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Fourteenth report of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to
international peace and security and the range
of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat (S/2022/63)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, UnderSecretary-General, United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism; and Mr. Weixiong Chen, Acting Executive
Director, Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/63, which contains the fourteenth
report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed
by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat.
I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.
Mr. Voronkov: I thank the Security Council for the
opportunity to brief it today.
Just over 20 years ago, the footage of planes
crashing into the Twin Towers, here in downtown New
York, was seared into the minds of millions of people
as, in a short span of time, Al-Qaida terrorists killed
nearly 3,000 people from the United States and more
than 90 other countries. Only two weeks later, on
28 September 2001, the Security Council demonstrated
decisive leadership and resolve with the adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001) and the establishment of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee.
International peace and security and support for
the victims of terrorist attacks around the world are the
core values for the United Nations counter-terrorism
efforts. I wish to offer my sincere condolences to the
Governments and the people who have suffered from
2/22

09/02/2022

Today Al-Qaida and Da’esh and their various
affiliates remain serious threats, while terrorist
attacks based on xenophobia, racism and intolerance
are increasing. As we begin a new decade of counterterrorism, it is time to ask ourselves difficult questions
and search for honest answers.
It is in that context that I present the fourteenth report
(S/2022/63) of the Secretary-General on the threat posed
by Da’esh to international peace and security, and the
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering that threat, as mandated by resolution 2610
(2021). I am pleased to be joined today by Mr. Weixiong
Chen, Acting Executive Director of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, to present
this report, which our offices prepared jointly with the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team.
I welcome the recent mandate extensions by the
Council of two United Nations counter-terrorism
entities, namely, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the Monitoring Team,
through resolutions 2610 (2021) and 2617 (2021). I also
take this opportunity to commend the excellent work
of the Monitoring Team, aptly led by Mr. Edmund
Fitton-Brown, which recently produced its twenty-ninth
report (see S/2022/83) on the threat posed by Da’esh
and Al-Qaida, which informed the Secretary-General’s
fourteenth report on Da’esh.
The threat posed by Da’esh and its affiliates to
international peace and security remains significant.
Two weeks ago, I briefed the Security Council (see
S/PV.8958) on the terrorism landscape in the north-east
of the Syrian Arab Republic, following the Da’esh’s
jailbreak attack on Al-Sina’a prison in Al-Hasakah city.
The assault on the prison was one of the group’s most
significant operations since Da’esh’s defeat in Syria
nearly three years ago.
The attack was also a shattering and sober reminder
of Da’esh’s extreme brutal violence. I was particularly
disturbed by the group’s use of children as human
shields during the intense fighting that occurred in and
around the prison. That deeply distressing event also
took a heavy toll on the civilian population in nearby
neighbourhoods and was denounced around the world.
22-25377

09/02/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV. 8963

It is encouraging to note that, according to reports,
a targeted attack last week resulted in the death of
Da’esh’s leader, Amir Muhammad Sa’id Abdal-Rahman
Al-Mawla, also known as Abu Ibrahim Al-Hashimi
Al-Quraishi. While that is perhaps the most significant
in a series of blows against its leadership in recent
months, Da’esh is known for its ability to regroup
despite similar losses in the past, maintaining and
intensifying its activities in conflict-afflicted regions
across the world.

access to those locations to alleviate their suffering and
reduce security concerns.

We have learned over the past two decades that
counter-terrorism is a long-term game and that there are
no quick fixes. Military counter-terrorism operations
may be necessary, but comprehensive measures with a
strong focus on prevention are required to address the
dynamics that fuel the appeal of terrorism. I therefore
urge the Council and all Member States to use every
available tool at their disposal to sustain important
gains against the threat posed by Da’esh to prevent its
regional expansion and curtail its capabilities to launch
attacks and recruit new members to its ranks.

In that regard, I note that most of the individuals
held in those camps and detention centres are Syrian
and Iraqi nationals. It is essential that those efforts
be grounded in human rights and the rule of law,
including due process and fair trial guarantees,
promoting accountability and bringing justice to the
victims and survivors of crimes by Da’esh. I wish to
highlight, in that regard, the Global Framework that
my Office coordinates together with UNICEF, which
assists requesting Member States with those efforts. I
urge the international community to support the Global
Framework’s Multi-Partner Trust Fund, which was
launched in September.

Starting in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, where
its operational leadership is still concentrated, Da’esh
continues to operate as an entrenched rural insurgency,
exploiting the porous borders between the countries,
where it retains between 6,000 and 10,000 fighters.
During the reporting period, the group maintained its
ability to launch attacks at a steady rate, including hitand-run operations, ambushes and roadside bombs in
both countries. It also continued to attack Government
forces and civilians with the apparent aim of instigating
panic and increasing pressure on the authorities.
It is crucial to build on the momentum following the
recent death of Abu Ibrahim Al-Hashimi Al-Quraishi.
Now is the time to address the grievances that Da’esh
and other terrorist groups exploit with their propaganda
to attract new followers.
We must focus on restoring human dignity, trust
and social cohesion. That must start with addressing
the desperate situation in displacement camps and
detention facilities across Syria and Iraq. I remain
profoundly disturbed by the humanitarian hardships of
thousands of people, especially children with presumed
family links to Da’esh members, who — through no
fault of their own — remain stranded in that precarious
limbo, at a growing risk of further radicalization and
recruitment. It is essential to ensure humanitarian

While I welcome the efforts of those Member
States that have repatriated their citizens, the current
pace does not demonstrate the requisite urgency and is
likely to exacerbate conditions conducive to terrorism.
Repatriation alone is not sufficient. Comprehensive
responses in countries of nationality that include
protection, prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration,
as appropriate, are crucial.

During the reporting period, Da’esh’s regional
affiliates beyond Syria and Iraq continued to expand
at an unsettling scale and pace, partly enabled by
the proliferation of conventional arms and weapons,
especially in fragile conflict settings. While the
interplay between terrorism and conflict and the
threat of spillover is a global strategic challenge, it
is particularly pronounced in Central, East and West
Africa, where the expansion of Da’esh affiliates could
have serious and lasting repercussions well beyond
the continent.
In Cabo Delgado and the border area between
Mozambique and Tanzania, the Da’esh affiliate
has suffered setbacks following the deployment of
foreign troops. There has been an increase in sporadic
violent attacks on civilians in more remote areas. The
group appears displaced rather than defeated, and its
fighters have continued to regroup into smaller, more
autonomous cells.
The deteriorating situation and the intensification
of Da’esh activity in Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, the Niger,
Nigeria and Uganda are another cause for serious
concern. Tactical gains in those regions may also
increase the group’s revenues.

22-253773/22

S/PV.8963

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

In North Africa, terrorist activity by Da’esh
affiliates declined in Egypt, Libya and Morocco
during the reporting period, following counterterrorism gains, defections and public investments in
development initiatives.
The security landscape in Afghanistan changed
dramatically on 15 August, following the Taliban
takeover. Member States are concerned that Da’esh
and other terrorist groups enjoy greater freedom
in Afghanistan than at any time in recent history. I
reiterate Secretary-General Guterres’ repeated calls to
work together to prevent Afghanistan from once again
becoming a safe haven for terrorist activity.
Outside conflict zones, in Europe online terrorist
radicalization and recruitment remained a foremost
concern over the reporting period, possibly inciting
terrorist attacks by lone actors or small groups
inspired by, but unaffiliated with, Da’esh. European
Member States identified a common pattern in ongoing
investigations of homegrown terrorism cases, typically
involving young individuals who had underlying
vulnerabilities and who combined a fascination with
extreme violence with personal grievances, making
them receptive to terrorist propaganda.
My Office has continued to work closely with
partners across all sectors. I am very proud that we
have ensured business continuity during the ongoing
coronavirus disease pandemic and intensified the
implementation of our global programmes and projects
to address the needs of Member States. Those efforts
have been bolstered by our growing presence in the
field, as requested by Member States. That includes
our new Programme Office in Nairobi — and I thank
Ambassador Kimani and the Government of Kenya
for their close collaboration in that regard — and the
Programme Office for Counter-Terrorism and Training
in Rabat, in the context of which I thank the Government
of the Kingdom of Morocco.
This past June, the General Assembly adopted
by consensus its most comprehensive and forwardlooking resolution during its seventh review of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly
resolution 75/291). We need to nurture that consensus
and work together towards stamping out terrorism,
including groups like Da’esh, which continue to evolve,
finding new and malicious ways to spread fear.
In his report entitled Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) Secretary-General Guterres identified
4/22

09/02/2022

terrorism as a strategic global risk and pointed to the
need for continued international counter-terrorism
cooperation as part of a new agenda for peace. The
Council’s guidance remains instrumental to our
collective fight against terrorism. I count on continued
consensus on this matter. That is the spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations, which comes with a
blueprint for peace and security and for a world free
from terrorism. The United Nations system, through
the Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact,
led by my Office, stands ready to support all Member
States in their fight against terrorism.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Voronkov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chen.
Mr. Chen: I thank you, Mr. President, for giving the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) the opportunity to brief the Security Council
on the fourteenth report of the Secretary-General on
the threat posed by Da’esh (S/2022/63) and the efforts of
the United Nations to assist Member States to counter
the threat. I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov for his overview of the report, which
we just heard. And I thank the Office of CounterTerrorism (UNOCT) and the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team for their invaluable
collaboration in preparing the report.
Just last November, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee held a special meeting to commemorate the
twentieth anniversary of the 11 September attacks and
the subsequent adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) and
the establishment of the Committee. On that occasion,
the Committee issued an important outcome document,
which not only highlighted notable successes achieved
in countering terrorism and violent extremism
conducive to terrorism but also stressed the need to
strengthen national, regional and international efforts
to address and mitigate the emerging challenges.
The global terrorist landscape continues to present
a range of complex challenges for Member States.
The threat of Da’esh persists, as the group and its
affiliates continue to recalibrate their strategic and
operational approaches. Da’esh has become more
decentralized — with supporters notably emerging
and expanding their operations in the battlefields of
West, East, Southern and Central Africa — and is also
seeking to exploit recent developments in Afghanistan.
It has also continued to regroup in its traditional
22-25377

09/02/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

geographic centre, resulting in a resurgence of violence
in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. Developments
following the recent death of the Da’esh leader should
be closely monitored.
Over the past two years, the terrorist threat has
of course also intersected with the many challenges
posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic. Da’esh and
other terrorist groups have sought to exploit fault lines
arising from social restrictions, political tensions and
economic downturns exacerbated by the pandemic. In
some States, increasing political instability has led to
critical governance situations, which may exacerbate
a significant existing terrorist threat. Many States
have understandably diverted resources from counterterrorism training and capacity-building to pandemicrelated efforts, thereby creating challenges for States
requiring counter-terrorism assistance. The pandemic
has also influenced existing trends in terrorism and
violent extremism conducive to terrorism, and has also
generated human rights concerns, which may provide
fertile ground for further exploitation and potential
radicalization to violence.
The challenges that have arisen during the pandemic
have curtailed not only counter-terrorism operations but
also civil society and humanitarian outreach, thereby
worsening pre-existing conditions of displacement
and insecurity. The lack of measures and strategies
to ensure safe and voluntary repatriation, as well as
comprehensive and tailored prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration, may also expose already vulnerable
populations to further violence.
Monitoring and suppressing the flow of funds
to Da’esh and other terrorist groups also remains an
imperative for the international community.
Terrorists and terrorist groups also continue
to exploit social media and online platforms. The
global rise in hate speech and misinformation and
disinformation, often online, also remains a concern
for many Member States.
Against the backdrop of those many challenges,
CTED continues to coordinate closely with UNOCT
and other key partners to ensure that the CounterTerrorism Committee’s recommendations serve as the
basis for relevant capacity-building activities. I would
also note that CTED recently issued its updated global
survey of Member States’ implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) and other resolutions, as well as its updated
global survey of the implementation of resolution 1624

S/PV. 8963

(2005), and a number of other reports and studies on the
challenges faced by Member States.
Acting under the all-of-United Nations approach
and in accordance with resolutions 2395 (2017) and
2617 (2021), CTED has continued to work closely
together with UNOCT on a series of activities aimed
at enhancing the capacities of Member States on, inter
alia, countering terrorist travel; the creation of fusion
cells; countering the trafficking of small arms and
light weapons; the protection of vulnerable targets;
countering the financing of terrorism; and prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration.
Combating the global terrorist threat requires a
multilateral approach that involves close collaboration
among Member States, United Nations entities,
international and regional organizations, and civil
society. The strategies and measures employed should
also be tailor-made, gender-sensitive and human rightscompliant. In that regard, CTED will continue to
actively support the Security Council and the CounterTerrorism Committee in those efforts.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Chen
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank the briefers for their presentations.
Last week, on orders from President Biden,
United States troops conducted an operation in
Syria against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) — consistent with our letter to the SecretaryGeneral dated 23 September 2014 — that resulted in the
death of the leader of ISIS, Abu Ibrahim Al-Hashimi
Al-Quraishi, also known as Hajji Abdullah, who
had served as the overall leader of ISIS since he was
appointed to replace the group’s previous leader, Abu
Bakr Al-Baghdadi, who died, on 26 October 2019, in a
United States counter-terrorism operation. Under Hajji
Abdullah’s leadership, ISIS provided material support
to its Afghanistan branch, ISIS-Khorasan, which was
responsible for the heinous attack on the Hamid Karzai
International Airport.
As we have all seen, ISIS and those inspired by
it continue to engage in horrific attacks wherever
and however they can. The group attempts to exploit
humanitarian crises and recruit and radicalize to
violence members of vulnerable populations and attack

22-253775/22

S/PV.8963

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

civilians. The international community must augment
the ability of vulnerable populations to reject appeals to
violent extremism and to avoid misplaced assumptions
about the susceptibility of those populations to
such appeals.
We wholeheartedly agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s characterization of the human tragedy
resulting from the so-called “caliphate” of ISIS to
include approximately 40,000 foreign nationals, among
them tens of thousands of innocent children, currently
residing in displaced persons camps. They should not be
further victimized because of the activities of others. The
situation is unacceptable and is a humanitarian, human
rights and security crisis. That is why the repatriation,
rehabilitation, reintegration and prosecution of foreign
terrorist fighters, as appropriate, is the best way to hold
individuals accountable for their crimes and prevent the
uncontrolled return or movement of foreign terrorist
fighters to their countries of origin or elsewhere. We
are not just calling on others to repatriate their citizens,
we are repatriating our own as well. To date, we have
repatriated 30 United States citizens from north-east
Syria — 13 adults and 17 children. The United States
stands ready to support any Member State that wishes
to bring their own nationals home.
With the recent extension of the mandate of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the Directorate will now facilitate the training and
assistance Member States need in order to develop
and implement comprehensive strategies to provide for
the proper collection, preservation, sharing and use of
battlefield evidence.
Financing continues to be the lifeblood for
terrorists. We must bolster our efforts to go after
terrorist financiers and financial facilitators and stymie
vital resource streams that exploit weak regulatory
oversight in vulnerable jurisdictions.
The United States is especially concerned about the
increasing terrorism threat in areas of Africa outlined in
the Secretary-General’s assessment. ISIS and Al-Qaida
affiliates have metastasized in pockets across Africa
and grafted onto long-simmering conflicts, providing
them new volatility and lethality. Islamic State-West
Africa Province merits particular focus, as the group
has grown into the largest numerically and one of the
most lethal ISIS affiliates outside the core region. The
United States continues to provide our African partners
critical counter-terrorism assistance to disrupt and
6/22

09/02/2022

degrade ISIS and Al-Qaida affiliates, underscoring that
capable law enforcement and broader security service
responses are essential to prevent and counter terrorism.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/63)
highlights, it is critical that the international community
continue the fight to deny safe haven for Al-Qaida
and its affiliates, including those in Afghanistan.
Further, ISIS-Khorasan remains active and continues
to orchestrate sophisticated attacks that target civilians,
including vulnerable ethnic and religious minorities,
civil society actors and others who are risking their
lives to improve the lives of Afghan citizens across
the country.
As President Biden has stressed,
“[w]e will hold the Taliban accountable for its
commitment not to allow any terrorists to threaten
the United States or its allies from Afghan soil”.
Globally, promoting good governance, the rule
of law and accountability, inclusive democracy and
respect for human rights mitigates the conditions
and grievances conducive to violent extremism and
terrorism used to recruit. The most successful counterterrorism approaches incorporate perspectives and
voices beyond Governments, including those of women,
youth, civil society, members of marginalized racial,
ethnic and religious groups and victims of terrorism.
To bolster civil society engagement, the United States
provides funding to the Strong Cities Network, the
Global Community Engagement and Resilience Fund,
Mother Schools for Countering Radicalism and many
other civil society organizations that work to strengthen
community resilience to violent extremism.
In conclusion, the Secretary-General’s report
provides a vivid reminder of the continuing and
evolving ISIS threat. Moving forward, we must use
the report to shape the collective actions we take to
maintain pressure on ISIS.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I would also
like to begin by thank Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov and Acting Executive Director Chen for
their informative briefings today. We also welcome the
evident collaboration between their two teams, both
in the preparation of this briefing and the delivery of
their mandates. The work of the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team, the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) in analysing
22-25377

09/02/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and helping States to tackle the ever-changing terrorist
threat is an indispensable part of combating global
terrorism. We also welcome the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2022/63) on the global terrorist threat.
Recent events have reminded us of the continuing
threat of terrorism and underline the importance of this
debate today. The January attack in north-eastern Syria
was a sobering reminder that, despite its territorial
defeat, Da’esh continues to pose a threat in Iraq, Syria
and beyond. We condemn that attack and in particular
share Mr. Voronkov’s concern about the taking of
children as hostages. The international community
must hold firm in its determination to counter and
defeat Da’esh. That is why the United Kingdom is a
committed member of the Global Coalition against
Da’esh and co-leads its counter-propaganda efforts.
Alongside that, we provide significant humanitarian
and stabilization support to liberated areas of Iraq
and Syria. We also continue to seek justice and
accountability for Da’esh. Those who have fought for
or supported Da’esh should face justice for their crimes
in the most appropriate jurisdiction. In that regard,
we welcome the emphasis on battlefield evidence
preservation, as set out in the report. It is our view
that justice will often be better served in the region
where the crimes were committed, and any such justice
mechanism must respect human rights and the rule of
law, as well as ensure fair trials and due process.
We must continue to be alert to the threat elsewhere
in the world. The context in Afghanistan has changed.
We welcome the Taliban’s commitments to tackle
terrorist groups and urge them to ensure that Al-Qaida
and Da’esh affiliates and other terrorist groups do not
raise funds or plan attacks from Afghan territory.
The threat continues to grow in sub-Saharan
Africa, as we heard again today. The United Kingdom
provides security, stabilization and humanitarian
assistance in many of the affected countries in order to
help them tackle the threat, build stability and support
affected communities. But much more needs to be
done. Terrorist groups continue to incite and recruit
supporters around the world, particularly now using
social media and encrypted online platforms. And, as
the Secretary-General’s report makes clear, that has
all been exacerbated by the impact of the coronavirus
disease pandemic, as set out so clearly by Mr. Chen just
now. As such, it is right that the Council, as it came
together at the end of last year to reaffirm the important

S/PV. 8963

work of CTED and renew its mandate (see S/2021/1107),
also encouraged a new focus on those technologies.
Finally, we must all ensure that we protect and
promote human rights, fundamental freedoms and
the rule of law as we go about this work. We welcome
CTED’s ongoing efforts to engage civil society and the
emphasis Mr. Chen placed on their involvement with
other partners, including with regard to the examination
of gender and masculinity in terrorism prevention. We
are committed to working together to continue the
global fight against terrorism and violent extremism
in a manner that protects human rights and upholds
international law.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to thank Mr. Voronkov, UnderSecretary-General of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, and Mr. Chen, Acting Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate,
for their valuable briefings. The United Arab Emirates
places great importance on countering terrorism and
extremism in accordance with international law.
Notwithstanding the progress made by the
international community in the war against the Da’esh
organization in Syria and Iraq, including the killing of
its leader last week, the recent report (S/2022/63) of the
Secretary-General’s indicates that threats by Da’esh still
exist and are dangerous, especially as the group spreads
in several African countries. To expand their influence,
terrorists continue to exploit security and political gaps
as well as the difficult humanitarian conditions.
The recent developments in Afghanistan have
raised international concerns about the possibility
of becoming a hotbed of terrorism and a destination
for foreign terrorist fighters. We therefore emphasize
the need for Afghanistan not to be used a safe haven
for terrorists or for threatening the stability of
neighbouring countries.
No country or region is safe from terrorism. These
cross-border threats cannot be totally eliminated
without unity and concerted international efforts. I
would therefore like to focus on the following points.
First, there must be zero tolerance for terrorist
acts and groups that undermine international stability
and target innocent civilians. Recently, my country
witnessed vicious terrorist attacks carried out by
the Houthi militias against civilians and civilian
infrastructure in flagrant violation of international law.

22-253777/22

S/PV.8963

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Accordingly, we urge countries to coordinate, exchange
information and impose international sanctions on
terrorist groups to deter them from any behaviour that
threatens international peace and security.
Secondly, we must continue to develop strategies
and laws at both national and international levels, while
taking into consideration the local and regional contexts.
In that regard, the Hedayah Center collaborates with
more than 100 countries to prevent extremism and
terrorism, including by establishing national plans
tailored to national contexts.
Thirdly, advanced technology is a double-edged
sword. We therefore must take the measures necessary
to prevent terrorists from exploiting advanced
technology to carry out their operations or finance
them. At the same time, we must harness technology
and artificial intelligence to protect societies from
extremism and terrorism.
In that context, as my country co-chairs, together
with the United States of America and the United
Kingdom, the Communication Working Group of the
Global Coalition against Da’esh, we continue to confront
extreme narratives by terrorists and develop counternarratives. That is done by exchanging experiences
with other countries, developing comprehensive
strategies and cooperating with relevant institutions. In
addition, the Sawab Centre in Abu Dhabi has continued
to counter false allegations by Da’esh by launching
several awareness initiatives, including the Africa
Against Extremism campaign, which aims to prevent
Da’esh from penetrating the African continent and
expanding there.
Finally, we must take the necessary preventive
measures to protect people from extremism and
terrorism by promoting the values of peaceful
coexistence, empowering women and youth and
increasing our efforts aimed at achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals. Efforts to bring about stability and
rebuild the liberated areas in Syria and Iraq must also be
intensified. By co-chairing the Stabilization Working
Group of the Global Coalition against Da’esh, together
with the United States and Germany, my country has
contributed more than $170 million to support such
efforts as rebuilding infrastructure and historical sites,
building national capacities and encouraging the safe
return of internally displaced persons.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates believes
that we are stronger united. Harnessing our energy and
8/22

09/02/2022

efforts together will help us to eliminate the scourge of
terrorism and achieve security, stability and prosperity
for the people.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov and Acting Executive Director Chen
for their briefings. I would also like to thank all those
individuals and entities that have contributed to the
fourteenth report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/63),
which makes for sober reading.
Wounds of the terrorist acts committed in the
course of the past two decades by Al-Qaida, Da’esh
and other terrorist groups are profound and still open.
We remain deeply worried that the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continues to operate and is
metastasizing in different parts of the world, despite
coordinated efforts to defeat it.
The Secretary-General’s assessment that Da’esh
not only continues to be active and operational in Syria,
Yemen, Iraq, Afghanistan and in the Sahel, but is also
becoming stronger outside conflict zones by using
online/offline propaganda to radicalize and recruit
mostly children is a cause for serious concern. The
recent use of children in their terrorist attacks acts in
Syria — a familiar and notorious Da’esh tactic — bears
witness to the fact that their cruelty remains intact. This
clear and present threat to peace and security requires
renewed cooperation of all States to uproot the group’s
existence and fight the ideology that fuels it.
In face of such brutality and the cruel ideology of
Da’esh and other terrorist groups, a decisive military
response will undoubtedly remain key, and Albania is
part of the lobal Coalition against Da’esh. We applaud
the recent elimination of ISIL leader Al-Quraishi by
United States forces.
But as we all know, to defeat ISIL and its appeal,
much more must be done. Robust military action
against terrorists and cutting sources of financing must
be accompanied by social and tailor-made programmes
countering violent extremism and terrorist ideology
with development and humanitarian assistance and
addressing the root causes of radicalization, which
all too often are xenophobia, exclusion, extreme
poverty and the lack of perspective. We advocate
a comprehensive whole-of-society, human-rightscompliant and gender-sensitive approach and welcome
an emphasis on interreligious and intercultural dialogue
as effective preventive tools.
22-25377

09/02/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

While we deal with the consequences of terrorism,
we must show the same resolve in upholding our values,
norms and principles. We must not allow conditions
that violate the basic principles of human rights that we
seek to protect everywhere, including in particular in
our fight against terrorism. Terrorists win when we fail
to uphold these very values in our actions, and in such
cases we all collectively lose. We therefore support
all efforts, including through the Global Framework
and the Multi-Partner Trust Fund, to ensure the
protection, repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration of suspected terrorists and their families,
especially women and children.
We are concerned by the inhuman and degrading
conditions of detainees, especially women and
children, in the detention facilities in Syria and Iraq.
We think this is unsustainable and counterproductive.
Due process for detainees and suspects of terror must
be ensured. Full accountability for the heinous crimes
committed by fighters is necessary, including through
the application of universal jurisdiction, which must
be applied. In this regard, we welcome the conviction
for crimes against humanity of individuals by German
courts, which we hope will be followed by other rulings.
But we must not allow that such places become
recruitment and radicalization centres that exacerbate
the very threat that we are seeking to contain. Young
boys and children are especially vulnerable to exposure
to terrorist ideology. They are harassed, stigmatized,
ill-treated and violated.
We must do what we can — and, indeed, we can do
so — to help them get out of hell, give them a normal
childhood, help them become normal adults and not
become terrorist incubators and monsters who prepare
the next generation of terrorists. Let us not forget that
many of them are victims of terrorism themselves,
misled by a violent ideology that is fuelled by ignorance.
That is why women and children need to be
repatriated in a humane and safe manner, with due
regard for their rights, following a strategy that is
sensitive to gender, age, rights and special needs. There
is a need for a comprehensive approach to reintegrate
them, especially children and women, back into society
in order to allow them to restart their lives in security
and dignity.
In conclusion, I know that repatriation is, of course,
a delicate and complex process; it needs to reflect
security considerations. But we also need to share and

S/PV. 8963

learn from one another and exchange best practices in
order to manage the process effectively and humanely.
It is in that spirit that Albania has approached this
humanitarian problem. We have already repatriated
dozens of women and children from Syrian and
Iraqi camps and have devised bespoke reintegration
programmes by providing housing, employment
and assistance to ensure their proper rehabilitation,
adaptation and long-term reintegration in normal life.
Our principles, our values and our philosophy of
life must defeat the appeal to terrorism, to death, to
darkness. We must win the battle of hearts and minds,
and our actions must follow suit.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I should like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir Voronkov and Acting Executive Director
Weixiong Chen for their briefings. Their valuable
analysis of and inputs on the threat posed by terrorism
should be carefully studied and considered by the
Security Council in its future work.
Terrorism is the common enemy of humankind.
Our fight against terrorism is a long-term one that
requires comprehensive strategies and united action.
To that end, I should like to make the following points.
First, every effort must be made to curb the new
wave of terrorism. The Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) is still active in regions such as Iraq, Syria
and Libya and is expanding at a fast pace in many
parts of Africa. In Afghanistan, the rapid withdrawal
of foreign troops has created a vacuum in the security
situation, providing an opportunity for terrorist forces
to grow by taking advantage of the chaos. We hope that
the Taliban will fulfil the relevant counter-terrorism
commitments to prevent Afghanistan from falling into
the hands of terrorists once again.
We should note that the threat of terrorism remains
grave; we cannot let our guard down. China supports
the international community in its efforts to continue
coordinating its actions to combat terrorism in all its
forms. Any slacking off in the fight against terrorism;
any appeasement of or connivance with terrorism;
and any act of politicizing or instrumentalizing
counter-terrorism or using terrorist forces to pursue
geopolitical interests are acts of betrayal of the victims
of terrorism, acts that have serious consequences and
will eventually backfire.

22-253779/22

S/PV.8963

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Secondly, every effort must be made to prevent
ISIS from colluding with other terrorist organizations.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/63)
points out that ISIS continues to recruit from the
East Turkestan Islamic Movement (ETIM). China is
deeply concerned about that issue. ETIM is a terrorist
organization designated by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities. It has carried out
many inhumane terrorist attacks in Xinjiang, China,
resulting in mass casualties among innocent people.
In recent years, that organization has expanded in
Central Asia, South Asia, the Middle East and other
regions. The report released by the Monitoring Team of
the 1267 Committee earlier this month further points
out that there are 1,000 to 3,000 ETIM fighters in Syria.
They not only launch attacks on the ground but also
recruit, train and send terrorists to attack Central Asian
countries and China. ETIM fighters in Afghanistan
even clamour to “return to Xinjiang for jihad”. We
call on the Security Council and the international
community to pay close attention to the continued
active and developing terrorist threat posed by ETIM
so as to cut off its connection with the Islamic State and
eliminate its breeding grounds.
Thirdly, counter-terrorism operations must abide by
international law and uphold the principle of protecting
civilians. The lesson of the twentieth anniversary of 9/11
is that we cannot rely solely on military means to fight
terrorism. The abuse of force will not help to eradicate
terrorist threats. On the contrary, it may weaken the
legitimacy and effectiveness of counter-terrorism
efforts and result in the dilemma of the more counterterrorism, the more terrorism. Military intervention
in the name of counter-terrorism is a blatant violation
of national sovereignty and territorial integrity that
will lead to major disasters and civilian casualties and
create a breeding ground for terrorists.
We call on the countries concerned to prudently
use military means in counter-terrorism operations
and to give priority to the protection of civilians. The
retaliation for the Kabul airport bombing last August
killed 10 Afghan civilians, including seven children.
We look forward to credible findings from the relevant
authorities. Last week’s military raid against the Islamic
State leader also caused 13 civilian deaths, including
those of six children. Such incidents reoccur, which is
unacceptable and must be investigated.
10/22

09/02/2022

Fourthly, we should work vigorously to help
African countries strengthen their counter-terrorism
capacity-building. Terrorism and violent extremism
are spreading in many places in Africa, posing a
severe challenge to national security. In the Sahel
region, terrorist activities have led to instability,
mass casualties and displacement. The Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) established a Joint Force to
carry out counter-terrorism operations, which is an
effort worthy of recognition. The G-5 Sahel counterterrorism operation should be supported with sufficient
and predictable funding. That issue can be discussed in
depth within the framework of the United Nations so as
to devise concrete and feasible arrangements.
Meanwhile, military operations by external forces
in the Sahel should strengthen their coordination with
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force in order to create synergy.
China has always been committed to supporting
capacity-building on the part of African countries,
which are at the forefront of terrorism, as this is a key
funding area of the China-United Nations Peace and
Development Fund.
China has funded the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate in the implementation
of a number of projects and provided counter-terrorism
training, textbooks and special equipment to the
relevant African countries. It has also held seminars on
cross-border counter-terrorism cooperation.
We stand ready to continue our practical support for
African countries in their pursuit of peace and security.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): Norway thanks UnderSecretary-General Voronkov and Acting Executive
Director Chen for their informative briefings today and
for their coordinated efforts.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/63) and
recent events in north-east Syria serve as a stark
reminder of the resilience of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL). Nearly three years after its
territorial collapse, the group retains the ability to
conduct sophisticated, high-impact attacks. That is
the case not only in the group’s core area of activity
in Syria and Iraq, but also increasingly in Afghanistan
and across Africa. The international community must
sustain its collective efforts against that threat.
It remains a fact that the countries and regions most
vulnerable to terrorism are those also characterized by
22-25377

09/02/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

armed conflict, political instability, poverty, climate
change and weak governance. The threat that ISIL
and its affiliates pose, including in numerous country
situations on the Security Council’s agenda, cannot be
effectively addressed without recognizing that context.
As such, we need to employ a comprehensive, whole-ofsociety approach to counter-terrorism that forms part of
a broader political strategy, addresses the underlying
drivers of radicalization and is firmly anchored in
human rights and the rule of law.
Let me highlight three points that Norway considers
crucial in such efforts.
First, regarding prevention, the most effective
counter-terrorism strategy is a preventive one. We must
build resilience to radicalization by ensuring social,
political and economic inclusion, providing access to
justice and security and empowering women and young
people. Such investment in the social contract pays
dividends, saving both lives and resources.
Secondly, on protection, recent ISIL attacks,
including in Al-Hasakah, underscore the need to place
the protection of civilians at the centre of counterterrorism. Norway condemns the prison attack, and we
reiterate our deep concern that children were caught in
the crossfire. The attack also further draws attention to
the dire humanitarian consequences of urban warfare,
which Norway highlighted in the Council last month
(see S/PV.8953).
Thirdly, concerning prosecution, we must continue
the fight against impunity and hold perpetrators of
terrorism accountable. In that regard, Norway welcomes
the efforts in national jurisdictions, including recently
in Germany, to investigate and prosecute ISIL members
in line with international law. We also commend the
work of international investigative mechanisms,
such as the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism.
Ensuring accountability is a prerequisite for justice.
The elimination of the leader of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham last week represents another
significant blow to the group. However, while ISIL
remains diminished, it is not defeated. To eradicate the
group once and for all, we must be clear-eyed about
the vulnerabilities that it exploits and the contexts in
which it embeds itself. We must recognize that counterterrorism is not only a technical but also a political

S/PV. 8963

exercise — that it is not only intelligence, air strikes
and arrests, but also good governance, human rights
and the rule of law.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I first
thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov and Mr. Weixiong Chen
for their briefings.
At the outset, I would like to pay a heartfelt tribute
to all the victims of terrorism. The negation of humanity
that terrorist acts represent and the suffering endured
by victims call for determined collective action.
That is why the fight against Da’esh will continue
until the group is defeated. France condemned in the
strongest terms the attack carried out by Da’esh on
20 January against the Al-Hasakah detention centre in
north-eastern Syria. On that occasion, we welcomed
the action of the Syrian Democratic Forces and the
Global Coalition against Da’esh, which put an end to
the attack.
Blows are being dealt to Da’esh. I am thinking
in particular of the neutralization of Abu Ibrahim
Al-Hashimi Al-Quraishi, also known as Hajji Abdallah,
as well as the capture by the Iraqi authorities of Hajji
Hamid. That arrest, we hope, will allow us to shed light
on the group’s finances, thereby enabling us to better
fight against it in the long term. Such funds play a
major role for Da’esh, as well as for its affiliates. They
enable it to increase its recruitment, with a view to an
anticipated resurgence, against which we are fighting
with unfailing determination. To eradicate terrorism in
the region, a solution to the Syrian crisis is essential.
That solution can only be political. We know the road
map — resolution 2254 (2015). In Iraq, we continue
to support the Iraqi authorities in their fight against
Da’esh, alongside our partners in the Global Coalition.
France is also committed to countering terrorism
in Afghanistan. Indeed, together with the challenges
posed by humanitarian and human rights issues, the
security threat in Afghanistan is one of our main
concerns. On the one hand, since August we have seen
an increase in the number of attacks by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan, the local
Afghan branch of Da’esh, and its deployment in more
provinces. At the same time, the Taliban has not severed
its links with Al-Qaida. On the contrary, it has included
several Al-Qaida leaders in its interim Government.
The Taliban has therefore failed to keep its promise
to provide no further support, direct or indirect, to
terrorists and to prevent Afghanistan from becoming a

22-2537711/22

S/PV.8963

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

sanctuary for such groups. In line with resolution 2593
(2021), we will continue to demand that the Taliban
honour its commitment. Beyond Afghanistan, that
terrorist risk could have significant repercussions for
the region and the world.
In the Sahel, France is militarily involved and, in
that regard, has dealt severe blows to the local branch
of Da’esh, neutralizing its leaders, such as Adnan Abu
Walid Al-Sahraoui. Terrorism has socioeconomic roots
there. We will therefore continue to carry out military
actions, together with the necessary development
programmes, in line with the comprehensive approach
and the objectives of the Coalition for the Sahel. To
that end, we are working closely with the international
community, including our African and European
partners, several of which are also deployed in the Sahel.
The expansion of Da’esh into Nigeria, Central
Africa and Southern Africa is a major concern. I am
thinking in particular of the situation in northern
Mozambique, which has spread from Cabo Delgado
province to neighbouring provinces of Mozambique
and may also have repercussions for the entire region.
A coordinated approach by regional and international
actors is essential. At the request of the Mozambican
authorities, the European Union has therefore
established a peace and security mission to train and
equip the Mozambican armed forces to protect the
civilian population and restore safety and security in
northern Mozambique.
In this global fight, in addition to our commitment
to a comprehensive approach, we identify three areas
of action.
First, the fight against terrorism must remain
ambitious, but it must never be used as a pretext for the
oppression of individuals belonging to minorities or for
the violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Secondly, on countering the financing of terrorism,
the action that we have taking since 2019, with the
adoption of resolution 2462 (2019), must continue. In
that regard, we are ready to work with a key partner,
India, in preparing the third No Money for Terror
conference, which we hope will be held in New Delhi
in 2022 once the health situation allows. We also expect
the full implementation of resolution 2462 (2019) and
the strengthening of our collective capacity to deal
with the emergence of new financing technologies,
which represent new challenges to countering
terrorism financing.
12/22

09/02/2022

Finally, the third priority is the fight against the
misuse of the Internet for terrorist purposes. On the
Internet, like everywhere else, we must tirelessly
fight terrorists.
To be effective, our fight must be collective. I would
like to recall the key role of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate in assessing our
collective response and in ensuring that there are
adequate resources in every case and that they always
respect human rights and international law.
In conclusion, I reaffirm our steadfast commitment
to fight terrorism, in particular Da’esh, wherever it is
to be encountered. We owe it to the people who are
unjustly its first victims.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir
Voronkov and the Acting Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
Mr. Weixiong Chen, for their presentation of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2022/63) on the threat
posed by international terrorism, in particular ISIL
(Da’esh), to international peace and security, as well as
the range of United Nations efforts to support Member
States in countering the threat.
As we mentioned last month at the meeting (see
S/PV.8958) on the situation in Syria, the attack against
the prison in Al-Hasakah is a vivid reminder of the
operational capabilities of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and confirms the threats it poses. The
incident also highlighted the overcrowded conditions
of approximately 700 minors and confirms the urgent
need for States to develop effective plans for the
repatriation, rehabilitation and reintegration of foreign
fighters and their families and to include mental health
care in reparations for the harm suffered by the victims
of terrorism.
Let me underscore three points that I believe to be
important with regard to countering ISIL.
First, in order to limit ISIL’s operational capacity,
we must begin by preventing its access to weapons,
especially small arms and light weapons. That can
be achieved by ramping up the fight against the illicit
trafficking and diversion of such weapons, mainly in
Africa, the Middle East and Afghanistan, in accordance
with resolution 2616 (2021), adopted by the Security
Council in December 2021 at the initiative of Mexico.
22-25377

09/02/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Secondly, efforts to combat terrorism must prioritize
the protection of civilians and the promotion of human
rights. Resorting to military strategies only reinforces
the spiral of violence, while related military operations
have a serious impact on the civilian population. In
that regard, we reiterate that the collective security
system must not be violated under the pretext of the
need to address terrorism. Violations of Article 51 of
the Charter of the United Nations are inadmissible.
Lastly, it is imperative to tackle the root causes of
terrorism through a development agenda that includes
a cross-cutting gender strategy. In that regard, let
me recall that in August 2021 (see S/PV.8839), we
requested the Secretary-General to include the concept
of masculinities in his report on the root causes of
and strategies to prevent terrorism. We regret that the
report once again omitted that dimension. We therefore
repeat our request to the briefers to kindly include such
information in the next report of the Secretary-General.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): Terrorism
not only represents an attack against the life and
dignity of the human person; it also, and above all,
negates the principles of civilization, and therefore
cannot be justified. No cause, ideology or religion
can be used as a pretext for the atrocities perpetrated
throughout the world — in Benin, Mali, the United
Arab Emirates, Pakistan and Syria, to list only the
most recent examples. Terrorism has become the major
security problem of the century, and its goal is always
the same — to spread fear.
In that regard, I thank Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir Voronkov and Mr. Weixiong Chen, Acting
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, for their respective briefings,
which highlighted the synergies among the various
United Nations entities responsible for combating
terrorism, resulting in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/63).
Despite the setbacks experienced by the Islamic
State since 2017 leading up to the total loss of its
territory in Iraq and Syria, the global threat posed by
Islamist terrorism remains very strong. The Islamic
State’s transition underground and the actions of many
other groups that have gained a foothold in the Middle
East, Africa and South-East Asia make the fight against
terrorism a major issue for international cooperation.
The information provided by the Secretary-General’s

S/PV. 8963

report provides several insights into the state of the
global terrorist threat.
First, the Islamic State has suffered significant
territorial and financial losses but continues to
maintain a large number of affiliated groups and small
cells scattered throughout the world. Paradoxically, the
move underground is likely to make the threat more
difficult to define and disrupt.
Secondly, the global Da’esh network continues to
demonstrate resilience. The threat it poses must be
assessed in terms of its ability to spread by considering
the number of attacks, the persistence of its operational
networks and their motivation to commit terrorist acts.
The Islamic State therefore remains capable of posing
a sustained threat and undermining stabilization
operations in many parts of the world, including the
Arabian peninsula, North Africa, West Africa, Central
Africa, East Africa, South Asia, and South-East Asia.
Africa has become one of the main fronts in the
fight against terrorism. In its propaganda, the Islamic
State increasingly vaunts its operations in Africa. The
terrorist front in the so-called three-border zone in the
Sahel is currently the epicentre of a war whose end no
one can predict. The disturbing developments of recent
months, with the activities of groups such as Boko
Haram, the Allied Democratic Forces and Al-Shabaab,
which claim affiliation with Da’esh, give reason to fear
a contagion effect for the entire African continent.
Obviously, the resulting security threat erodes the
democratic foundation of the continent and imperils
its people, who at the same time feel the impact of the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
The issue of the return and resettlement of foreign
fighters has emerged as a new terrorist threat and
proven to be a real concern in Africa. The new threat
is fuelled by the ability of groups to launch remote
attacks outside their established sphere of influence.
The Islamic State’s capability is based on considerable
financial resources. The group’s move underground has
been supported by the use of new modes of financing
that rely on criminal practices, such as extortion, illegal
trafficking of all kinds and smuggling.
Given the changing faces of terrorism, the
international community must adapt its means of
combating the phenomenon by demonstrating zero
tolerance for terrorist acts and their perpetrators.
We must continue to work for a stronger and more
effective international response through the broad and

22-2537713/22

S/PV.8963

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

effective application of existing international tools
and compliance with the numerous counter-terrorism
norms, which must be regularly adapted as the threat
evolves. It is imperative to strengthen international
support for the most vulnerable States and be aware
that, in the fight against terrorism, it only takes one
weak link to undermine the international response as
a whole.
While the lack of action may be due to insufficient
political will, it also depends to a large extent on the
financial, human and technical resources available
to States. We once again call for strong support for
initiatives such as the Group of Five for the Sahel, with
predictable funding.
Today the connection between development and
terrorism remains clear, especially in fragile States that
often face political or security crises, poverty and a
lack of prospects for young people, which create fertile
breeding ground for the emergence of terrorist networks.
The fight against terrorism also requires economic
development, social justice and improved living
conditions for the population. Increased development
aid from the international community to countries
afflicted by terrorism can also contribute to fending off
that scourge.
We must also strengthen the fight against crossborder trafficking, which is often used to finance
terrorism. Given the clear link between terrorist
financing and organized criminal activity, whereby
various forms of trafficking are exploited by terrorist
organizations, the international community must
maintain and step up its efforts to curb such forms of
trafficking. The United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime appears to be a particularly appropriate agency
for monitoring the proper implementation of existing
frameworks, such as the 2000 Palermo Convention,
and for supporting capacity-building in the most
fragile States.
Above all, we must consolidate international
cooperation with countries affected by armed conflict
and jihadism. The international community in its
entirety is affected by Islamist terrorism; therefore,
we must place particular focus on cooperating with
countries directly affected by terrorist organizations,
either on their territory or close to crisis zones.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm my country’s
support for the mandates of the various bodies
14/22

09/02/2022

responsible for counter-terrorism activities, including
the Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee.
We wish to commend the unity that the Council has
shown in the fight against terrorism, thanks to which
we have observed significant progress. Attacks have
been foiled around the world, and hundreds of terrorists
have been brought to justice.
Nevertheless, the threat persists and continues to
diversify. The Islamic State continues to take advantage
of social grievances and sexist stereotypes to inspire
isolated actors and co-opt other groups. Their advances
in Africa are particularly alarming. Supporting African
countries in preventing and countering the threats
posed by those groups should be a priority for the
international community.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I also want to thank UnderSecretary-General Voronkov and Acting Executive
Director Weixiong Chen for their informative if
sobering briefings.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/63) is clear
that the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) to international peace and security
remains potent and indeed is growing in some regions.
We echo his concerns regarding the expansion of ISIL
affiliates in Africa, as well as the growing influence of
ISIL-Khorasan Province in Afghanistan following the
Taliban takeover.
Despite the ongoing degradation of ISIL’s
leadership, the recent attacks in Iraq and Syria also
serve as a stark reminder of the enduring threat posed
by the group in the core conflict zone. The prison
attack in Al-Hasakah, reminiscent of the campaign in
Iraq that first catapulted ISIL to global attention almost
a decade ago, is particularly troubling. We must heed
the warnings of the past.
Ireland shares the deep concern about the situation
of children expressed by UNICEF and others. That
attack, which saw hundreds of boys caught in the
crossfire, also highlights the responsibility for us — the
international community — to treat children primarily
as victims of conflict and provide them with support
appropriate to that status.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out, counterterrorism measures must comply with international
law, including international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. Too often, counterterrorism measures are misused to silence human rights
22-25377

09/02/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

defenders, political opponents and civil society. As
Member States, if we are serious about countering the
threat of ISIL, we should be serious about protecting
human rights too.
We welcome the UN-Women initiatives to
strengthen
gender-responsive
counter-terrorism
policies that were detailed in the Secretary General’s
report. The full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in counter-terrorism processes and mechanisms
is essential for sustainable progress and reform.
However, comprehensive counter-terrorism policy
should include a mainstreamed gender-responsive
approach that also considers the impacts of terrorism
and counter-terrorism on men, boys and persons
identifying as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer
and others, as well as the impacts of gender inequalities
and stereotypes.
Effective counter-terrorism requires a whole-ofsociety approach, including meaningful engagement
with civil society and affected communities. The
Secretary-General’s report draws attention to a range
of capacity-building initiatives undertaken by United
Nations entities. Those entities should consider the most
recent report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion
and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism, Fionnuala Ní
Aoláin (see A/76/261), which highlights how human
rights-compliant capacity-building plays a valuable
role in strengthening whole-of-society approaches and
underscores the importance of a One-UN approach.
Thanks to collective efforts to tackle terrorist
financing, we have seen an important reduction in
ISIL’s core finances, but more international cooperation
is required. Ireland therefore welcomes the recent
action taken by the European Banking Authority to
enhance cooperation in the European Union through
the creation of a central database on countering the
financing of terrorism.
It is essential that those responsible for committing
crimes, including genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes, be held accountable. While the pursuit
of accountability for crimes committed by ISIL remains
challenging, it is not completely elusive. The SecretaryGeneral’s report offers hope, including progress in
investigations by the United Nations Investigative
Team for Accountability of Da’esh/ISIL and an update
from Germany on the first conviction of an ISIL
member for genocide against the Yazidi community.

S/PV. 8963

We must build on that momentum to secure justice
for all victims and survivors of ISIL atrocities. That
includes closing the accountability gap for sexual and
gender-based violence, such as rape, sexual slavery and
human trafficking.
The year 2021 marked an important year of
commemoration, in which the Council reflected on
two decades of counter-terrorism action. While much
progress has been achieved, we must also acknowledge
that shortcomings remain. As we look ahead, we
hope that the Council can recommit to a United
Nations counter-terrorism framework that is effective,
comprehensive and grounded in international law.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Russian Federation for convening
this briefing on the threats to international peace and
security caused by terrorist acts. Ghana welcomes the
Secretary-General’s report on the subject (S/2022/63)
and thanks Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-SecretaryGeneral of the Office of Counter-Terrorism, and
Mr. Weixiong Chen, Acting Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), for
their additional perspectives.
Without a doubt, terrorism is a major threat to
international peace and security. From Afghanistan
in Asia to Yemen in the Middle East, from Syria to
Iraq and from Somalia to the countries of the Sahel,
we are living witnesses to the destabilizing influence
of terrorism. From 1970 to date, more than 170,000
incidents of acts of terrorism have been recorded,
with many killed, maimed or having their livelihoods
destroyed. The financial cost of terrorism has also been
heavy, with some estimates a few years ago putting its
annual economic impact, at that time, at approximately
$26.4 billion.
As we see surges in the incidence of terrorism,
particularly in countries engaged in armed conflict, it
is important to once again recall the landmark decision
of the Security Council in resolution 1373 (2001),
which signalled the commitment to a global approach
to addressing the menace of terrorism. Through the
establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
as well as binding obligations to enhance legal,
operational, and institutional responses to counter
the threat of terrorism, significant progress has been
made. More effort is nonetheless required as incidents
of terrorism have proliferated and networks of terrorist

22-2537715/22

S/PV.8963

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

organizations have become more agile and global, with
adapted disparate leadership and operational structures.
In response to the increasing number of incidents of
terrorism on the continent of Africa, several measures
have been taken over the years by the African Union,
including the adoption of the African Union Plan of
Action on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism
of 2002 and the establishment of the African Centre
for the Study and Research on Terrorism, which is
based in Algiers and undertakes a range of research,
analysis, knowledge management and capacitybuilding activities.
Notwithstanding those measures, we continue to
experience, in varying degrees of intensity, terrorism
and violent extremism, including the influx of foreign
terrorist fighters, as well as growing linkages among
terrorism, violent extremism and transnational
organized crime. The attendant social, economic and
humanitarian impacts are indeed disturbing. Besides
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemicrelated economic hardships, manifested by rising
unemployment, as well as growing poverty and
inequality, these situations continue to serve as fodder
for the radicalization and recruitment of vulnerable
groups, including women and youth.
Against this backdrop, Ghana would like to make
a few points, grounded in the situation of our region.
First, technical assistance for enhancing national
capacities continues to be critical for many countries.
We encourage the ongoing cooperation and capacitybuilding support of CTED and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crimes, as well as regional
groups and friendly countries, for Member States that
have a need to strengthen their security and counterterrorism strategies.
Secondly,
intraregional
and
cross-regional
intelligence-sharing must be enhanced to address the
reinforcing effects of cross-border collaboration by
terrorist groups. There is a need to better understand
these groups, their modus operandi, their networks
and structures. We therefore encourage support for
regional actions, such as the Accra Initiative, which
has become the platform of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) for intelligenceand information-sharing on questions of terrorism,
transnational organized crime and violent extremism.
16/22

09/02/2022

Thirdly, while regional initiatives, including
the ECOWAS counter-terrorism strategy, and the
deployment of regional counter-insurgency forces are
useful, they can benefit from an enhanced partnership
from the United Nations in terms of financing support
and greater burden-sharing. We therefore take this
opportunity to reiterate the call for the mobilization
of additional funding support from partners for these
regional and continental arrangements to enable
effective responses to be developed for the insecurity
situation posed by terrorists.
Fourthly, action to cut off terrorism financing
must be sustained and enhanced, including in the
digital economy, where cryptocurrencies have become
a medium of choice for financing terrorist activities.
We therefore welcome the call for greater attention to
be paid to the growing concern of the link between
terrorists on land and pirates at sea, particularly in the
Gulf of Guinea, to dry up sources of funding and check
any expansion of their operations.
Fifthly, dedicating greater attention and investment
to addressing the root causes of terrorism, particularly
governance and development deficits and the
socioeconomic conditions of the people, is one of the
sustainable ways of dealing with the canker. This area
is important because violent extremist groups exploit
those long-standing vulnerabilities, especially in areas
where the State is either absent, resented or too weak
to shoulder its responsibilities. Platforms for sharing
knowledge and experience in this area should therefore
be encouraged.
Lastly, the COVID-19 pandemic has further
degraded the capacity of many developing countries to
address the growing demands of their populations as
limited fiscal resources have had to be reallocated to
respond to the pandemic and to recovery efforts. This
situation, which several developing countries face, has
worsened their security vulnerabilities. We therefore
urge renewed responses to address the financial
challenges, including through debt cancellation and
the restructuring of debt repayment, to enable them
build back better and adequately tackle the security
challenges in their countries.
While the points I have raised, may be more specific
to the African context, most of them also resonate
globally. We therefore look forward to deepening such
discussions to help abate the incidence of terrorism in
22-25377

09/02/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

all its forms and manifestations, wherever it occurs and
by whomsoever.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I would like to join others
in thanking Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Acting Executive Director of Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) Chen for
their briefings on the fourteenth report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/63) on the threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), also known as
Da’esh, to international peace and security.
At the outset, I express my heartfelt condolences
to all the families who lost loved ones in recent terror
attacks in Afghanistan, the United Arab Emirates,
Iraq, Syria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Uganda. As a country that has long borne the brunt of
cross-border terrorism, including the 2008 Mumbai
terror attack and the 2016 Pathankot terror attack, with
victims of both those dastardly acts yet to get justice,
India is acutely aware of the human cost of terrorism and
remains fully committed to bringing the perpetrators of
these attacks to justice.
We reiterate our firm belief that terrorism in one
part of the world is a threat to the peace and security
of the entire world. Therefore, while condemning
such attacks, our response should be unified and
unequivocal. We should not forget the fact that, even 20
years after the 11 September attacks, we have leaders
who, without any remorse, continue to defend Osama
bin Laden as a martyr.
The current report of the Secretary-General
raises serious concerns of ISIL continued attempts to
revive itself in its core zone, as well as expanding and
strengthening its affiliates in several countries of Asia
and Africa. This is a matter of grave concern.
We have been consistently highlighting the threat
of terrorism in our neighbourhood. These security fears
have been further exacerbated by the changed political
situation in Afghanistan. The report (see S/2022/83) of
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
is concerning, as it highlights that Afghanistan has the
potential to become a safe haven for Al-Qaida and a
number of terrorist groups. The report of the SecretaryGeneral also highlights a near doubling of strength
of ISIL-Khorasan (ISIL-K), following the Taliban’s
release of several thousand individuals from prison.
In his twelfth report (S/2021/98), the SecretaryGeneral highlighted that Shihab al-Muhajir, the leader

S/PV. 8963

of ISIL-K, as having maintained familial ties to the
proscribed Haqqani Network as well. The report of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities recognizes the continuation of the links
among the Taliban, especially through the Haqqani
Network, and Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups in
our neighbourhood.
It is essential that we do not lose sight of the ease
with which the proscribed Haqqani Network, with
support from its patron State, has worked along with
prominent terrorist organizations, such as Al-Qaida,
ISIL-K and so forth in South Asia. We have been
reiterating the close links between proscribed terrorist
entities under the resolution 1267 (1999) sanctions
regime, such as Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and other terrorist
groups, including Jaish-e-Mohammed. However,
in spite of repeatedly flagging those concerns, the
Secretary-General’s report has failed to take notice of
those linkages. We hope that, in future iterations of
such a report, inputs from all Member States will be
treated on an equal footing and that an evidence-based
and credible yardstick will be applied by its authors.
The sign of the re-emergence of ISIL Da’esh in
Syria and Iraq calls for urgent action by the international
community. We reiterate that terrorists can neither
be defeated by forming alliances with non-sovereign
entities, nor while pursuing national political agendas.
We need to support regional Member States in the
implementation of their measures against terrorists and
United Nations-designated terrorist groups.
In Africa, it is becoming increasingly evident that
terrorist groups with linkages to ISIL and Al-Qaida
are gaining in strength. They have targeted and killed
civilians, especially women and children, security
forces and United Nations peacekeepers. It is heartening
to note that countries affected by those terrorist groups
are taking measures, both on their own and collectively,
to counter their threat. We commend all those efforts,
including that of the Southern African Development
Community in Mozambique, the Multinational Joint
Task Force in the Lake Chad basin and the Group of Five
for the Sahel in the five Sahel countries. Those efforts
should be supported by the international community
and the United Nations without any caveats.

22-2537717/22

S/PV.8963

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Today the terrorist use of information and
communications
technologies,
social
media
and emerging technologies, such as new digital
payment methods, encrypted messaging services,
cryptocurrencies, crowd-funding platforms, unmanned
aircraft systems and so forth, pose a dynamic threat
for which most Member States do not have adequate
response capabilities. Global expert bodies, such as
the Financial Action Task Force, have been raising
serious concerns about terrorist financing. We recently
witnessed terror attacks through the use of drones
in our neighbourhood, and now in the United Arab
Emirates and Saudi Arabia, which have been strongly
condemned by the Security Council. Recent resolution
2617 (2021) takes note of this threat posed by unmanned
aircraft systems. We need to work together to develop
appropriate solutions and evolve global standards to
address those threats. Terrorism impacts everyone,
regardless of place or origin. Unfortunately, it took us
decades and the 11 September attacks for us to move
from a flawed mindset of treating terrorism based on
motivations behind terror attacks.
I would like to mention that resolution 1566 (2004)
notes, in paragraph 3, that terrorist acts are
“under
no
circumstances
justifiable
by
considerations of a political, philosophical,
ideological, racial, ethnic, religious or other
similar nature”.
The resolution further underlines, in its eighth
preambular paragraph, that acts of terrorism
“seriously impair the enjoyment of human rights
and threaten the social and economic development
of all States”.
It is essential that we keep that in mind as we look to
further strengthen our counter-terrorism architecture.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate here in the
Chamber the eight-point action plan of India’s Minister
of External Affairs, Mr. Jaishankar.
First, summon political will. Do not justify
terrorism. And do not glorify terrorists.
Second, there can be no double standards. Terrorists
are terrorists. There can be no distinguishing between
good and bad terrorists.
Third, do not place blocks and holds on listing
requests without reason.
18/22

09/02/2022

Fourth, discourage exclusivist thinking against
false priorities.
Fifth, enlist and delist objectively, not based on
political or religious considerations.
Sixth, recognize the linkage to organized crime.
Seventh, support and strengthen the Financial
Action Task Force.
Eighth, provide greater funding to United Nations
counter-terrorism.
As Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
concerning counter-terrorism, India will work closely
with the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
and CTED and continue to take up this issue with
all stakeholders so that a zero-tolerance approach to
terrorism and its perpetrators becomes the norm of the
international counter-terrorism discourse.
Mrs. Aguiar Barboza (Brazil): I would like
to thank the Russian Federation for organizing this
briefing, as well as Mr. Voronkov and Mr. Chen for
their briefings on the fourteenth report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/63) on the threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh) to international
peace and security.
Brazil shares the Secretary-General’s concern
about the threat posed by Da’esh and its affiliates
to international peace and security, particularly its
regional spillover and online terrorist radicalization.
We also note the interplay between terrorism and
armed conflict, as a reminder of the importance of
pursuing comprehensive strategies to address the root
causes of both armed conflict and terrorism, which
frequently overlap.
The Secretary-General’s report affirms that
one of the most pressing issues is the situation of
foreign terrorist fighters and their family members
who are in detention camps in the core conflict zone
in the Syrian Arab Republic. It highlights that this
protracted humanitarian, human rights and security
crisis risks exacerbating the global terrorist threat
landscape. When counter-terrorism efforts disregard
basic notions of humanity, they tend to reinforce rather
than counter the narratives of terrorist groups. It is
therefore imperative — not only on moral and legal
grounds but also as an effective strategy to address
the terrorist threat — to ensure full respect for human
22-25377

09/02/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

rights, humanitarian law and refugee law in addressing
the situation. We have the responsibility to treat
children primarily as victims, and actions leading to
statelessness should be avoided by all States.
A second worrisome trend concerns the expansion
of Da’esh to the African continent, with a large number
of attacks and victims. We commend the efforts
of Mr. Voronkov and Mr. Chen in support of the
implementation of regional counter-terrorism strategies
and stress the importance of integrated policies to tackle
the conditions conducive to terrorism, while addressing
social, humanitarian and security concerns.
Brazil condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. The repudiation of terrorism is
enshrined in the Brazilian Constitution as a guiding
principle of our foreign policy. We note that, during the
reporting period, Da’esh continued to suffer leadership
losses, including the most recent ones mentioned today.
At the same time, it is concerning to receive reports on
the resilience of its terrorist ideology, including among
younger generations. It is high time to recognize that
security measures alone might be able to kill terrorists,
but not their ideas.
For Brazil, prevention is instrumental in any
sustainable counter-terrorism strategy. Terrorist
groups have attracted recruits by offering them a
sense of purpose and belonging that they probably
failed to acquire elsewhere. Social exclusion and youth
unemployment have increased the vulnerability of
people to the recruitment tactics of terrorist groups.
Expressions of xenophobia, discrimination and
prejudice not only contribute to social exclusion but
also fuel extremist narratives that are conducive to
terrorism. We must react against measures that are
inconsistent with respect for diversity, such those
associating terrorism with specific cultures, religions
or ethnic groups.
Moreover, all counter-terrorism actions must abide
by international law, including the Charter of the
United Nations, as well as human rights, humanitarian
law and refugee law. If counter-terrorism takes place at
the expense of international law, it will have defeated
its purpose and perhaps led to additional extremism
conducive to terrorism.
Despite all Security Council resolutions with
binding obligations on counter-terrorism, we have to
recall that there is no agreement on the exact parameters
of what constitutes terrorism, which is currently one of

S/PV. 8963

the major threats to international peace and security. We
should not let the lack of clarity on issues with criminal
repercussions be the norm in our work. And neither
should we circumvent due process when designating
new terrorist individuals or entities.
Last year, the General Assembly adopted the
seventh review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. The Strategy is a consensual text
that reflects the common views of the entire United
Nations membership on how to tackle the terrorist threat.
We encourage the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate to fully take into account the
guidance provided in the Strategy — a document
negotiated and adopted by the most representative
organ of the Organization.
In conclusion, being one of the last speakers
today, I can easily affirm that all members of this
organ continue to consider terrorism a major threat
to international peace and security. It is on the way to
combat it that might elicit divergent views. Brazil is
committed to contribute to our discussions on how to
combat terrorism and honour its victims, always acting
within the parameters of international law and in a
manner consistent with the division of labour among
United Nations organs, as established in the Charter.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov and Acting Executive Director Chen
for their briefings on the Secretary-General’s fourteenth
strategic-level report (S/2022/63) on the threat posed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh).
In his report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982),
the Secretary-General emphasizes that terrorism
is a strategic security risk that requires continued
multilateral cooperation as part of a new agenda for
peace. In that connection, we commend the concerted
efforts of the Security Council, the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate and other
international, regional and national stakeholders in the
fight against the scourge of terrorism.
Despite some successful intense international and
regional counter-terrorism efforts, we are experiencing
a dangerous surge in terrorism in other regions,
particularly parts of Africa, where Da’esh has continued
to expand its foothold after the loss of territory in the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) core.

22-2537719/22

S/PV.8963

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

In addition, following the Taliban takeover in
Afghanistan, Al-Qaida, Da’esh and other terrorist and
violent extremist groups and their affiliates have drawn
inspiration and are enhancing their capabilities and
increasing their attacks, with devastating implications.
In the Sahel and parts of West Africa, terrorist
groups including Da’esh, Al-Qaida and their affiliates
are exploiting local grievances and weak governance
infrastructure to recruit, radicalize and deploy.
Consequently, they are increasingly gaining control of
expansive swaths of territory and thereby exacerbating
State fragilities. In the Horn of Africa, we have witnessed
many acts of terrorism, including cross-border attacks
by Al-Shabaab, an Al-Qaida affiliate. Indeed, slightly
more than a week ago, seven innocent people travelling
in a public-service vehicle in northern Kenya were killed
following an improvised-explosive-device ambush
by this terrorist group. In other parts of sub-Saharan
Africa, in particular the Central, Eastern and Southern
regions, ISIL and Al-Qaida affiliates are increasingly
exploiting ethnic dynamics and social and economic
challenges to engage in destructive and potentially
destabilizing activities.
Against that backdrop, we wish to underscore five
points we consider imperative if we are to stop the surge
of terrorism across the world. First, there is an urgent
need to deploy an all-systems multilateral approach to
address the inadequacies and vulnerabilities that range
from weak governance and security infrastructure to
extremely challenging social and economic situations
that allow terrorism to thrive.
Secondly, the Security Council must apply its tools
on all terrorist groups of a transnational character with
equal force. Applying double-standards will only be
counterproductive. That is why Kenya will formally be
proposing the listing of Al-Shabaab and its leadership
under the resolution 1267 (1999) sanctions regime. We
hope to receive the support of the entire membership of
the Security Council in this regard.
Thirdly, the Security Council and the relevant
stakeholders must distinguish between political
stabilization and counter-terrorism. It is notable that such
terrorist groups as Al-Qaida, ISIL and their affiliates
seek to destroy the State and replace it with structures
that are completely alien to the political and cultural
life of the countries they attack. It is imperative that, for
a terrorist group to become party to national political
stabilization, it must, as a prerequisite, disavow its core
20/22

09/02/2022

ideological aims and renounce the use of terrorism to
pursue political or other ideological ends.
Fourthly, there is a need to do more to disrupt and
dismantle the economic means and revenue streams
available to terrorist groups. Many terrorist groups rely
on illegal taxation, extortion and trade in contraband. In
fact, even humanitarian assistance and access have fallen
victim to these schemes. The Council should therefore
carefully design humanitarian carve-outs to avoid the
unintended consequence of supporting terrorism.
Fifthly, robust partnerships between regional and
subregional organizations with the United Nations is
critical. We therefore welcome the establishment of
regional offices and programmes by the UNOCT, to
which Under-Secretary-General Voronkov referred
in his briefing. We look forward to the launch and
full operationalization of the UNOCT regional office
in Nairobi in early March 2022 as a milestone in
this regard.
In conclusion, I reaffirm that Kenya condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and we
remain fully committed to all counter-terrorism efforts.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov and Mr. Weixiong
Chen for their detailed analysis of the fight against the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), also known
as Da’esh. We are grateful for the efforts of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Executive
Directorate of the Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism
Committee in this important area.
The report of the Secretary General (S/2022/63)
draws the correct conclusion that Da’esh and other
terrorist organizations have not ultimately been
defeated. They continue their criminal activity in
various regions around the world. Of late, the centre of
their force has become Africa. It is therefore absolutely
essential that we do not allow Africa to become a
Caliphate 2.0.
There is also the very serious problem of terrorist
threats in the north-east of Syria. The illegal United
States military personnel stationed there have not
been able to restore order, or they do not want to. The
atmosphere of powerlessness and permissiveness around
the area occupied by the American troops has become a
fertile breeding ground for all kinds of terrorists. Local
22-25377

09/02/2022

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

fighters have become so strong and daring that they
have been able to openly attack the places where their
brothers-in-arms have been imprisoned.
Ultimately, then, even those terrorists who it
was previously possible to put into prison have been
liberated. The attempts of the United States to show
that they nonetheless have control of the situation on
the ground have at times led to the deaths of many
civilians. It is therefore difficult to call the recent
operation by American special forces to eliminate the
leader of the terrorists a successful one.
One of the most serious humanitarian challenges
has also arisen in the territory illegally occupied by
the United States, namely, the Al-Hol and the Al-Roj
camps, where tens of thousands of women and children
are being kept in appalling conditions. The withdrawal
of the occupying United States forces from Syria
would allow the Syrians themselves to clear up these
terrorist pustules on their territory and guarantee the
security of civilians. As practice has shown, the Syrian
Government would be significantly better placed to
achieve these objectives.
The Russian Federation supports the efforts of
States that are ready to cooperate in the fight against
terrorism on the basis of international law. There are
more than enough legal instruments to do this, including
those developed by the Security Council. The question
is always one of will and of genuine intention.
We are paying close attention to the issue of the
return of foreign terrorist fighters and members of
their families. We think that terrorist attacks must be
punished and that we must join the efforts of the global
community to this end. We are convinced that the
range of issues connected to foreign terrorist fighters
and members of their families can only be resolved in
cooperation with the legal authorities of the countries
where they are found.
Since 2017, Russia has carried out systemic
work with the authorities in Iraq and Syria to return
children from conflict zones. During this time,
effective cooperation has been set up, allowing us to
follow the norms of international law in carrying out
work to identify and repatriate the children of Russian
citizens. To date, we have been able to return around
350 minors from Iraq and Syria. One of the priorities in
this area has been guaranteeing the social adaptation of
these children, which is carried out, inter alia, through

S/PV. 8963

providing support to their relatives who have taken
them on and are raising them.
We also must pay attention to the worrying
situation in Afghanistan. There is a local cell of ISIL/
Da’esh, the Khorasan Province, which, according to
our assessments, now has more than 6,000 fighters.
There is information that in the northern provinces of
Afghanistan some former Government forces — coming
from the army and the special forces — are moving
towards joining ISIL. This picture is similar to the one
we saw previously in Iraq.
There is particular concern about the substantial
number of terrorists in Afghanistan who nationals of
States of Central Asia. That significantly increases
the risk of the spillover of terrorist activity into
neighbouring countries.
The Secretary-General’s report underlines the
problem of a glut of weapons in the Middle East, Africa
and Afghanistan, which could fall into the hands of
ISIL and other terrorist groups. The panicked flight
of the United States and its allies from Afghanistan,
leaving behind huge volumes of modern weapons and
equipment, allowed terrorist groups to significantly
increase their capacities. The Afghan people have had
to pay for the irresponsibility of American and NATO
military forces and the many self-appointed experts on
the building of democracy, the rule of law and so-called
Western values. They spent more than 10 years trying
to build that artificial construction, which began to fall
apart like a house of cards even before American troops
had been completely withdraw. It could not have been
otherwise: the imposition by force of cookie-cutter
democratic values in the strictly Western sense could
not have brought any good to those States that were
being experimented on.
The lives of civilians in those geopolitical games
are cheap. Day by day they are written off as collateral
damage. It might be worth counting how many people
have fallen into that category in the course of the socalled highly precise attacks by the Americans and
their allies in Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan, Yugoslavia
and other countries — countries that have been
unlucky enough to fall under the American steamroller
of democratization.
Today our Western colleagues once again called for
compliance with human rights law and humanitarian
law when carrying out counter-terrorist measures. In
that connection, we would like to encourage them to

22-2537721/22

S/PV.8963

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

begin with themselves, because for the time being there
is a clear gap between their words and their deeds.
In conclusion, we call for the broader international
community to consolidate its efforts to counter
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, without
hidden agendas or double standards.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The representative of the United States has asked
for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
made reference in my intervention to the operation by
United States forces in Syria against the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) last week. Two Council
members, among other points, expressed concern about
reported civilian casualties, so, for the record, let me
say the following.
Unfortunately, ISIS once again revealed its
barbarity in a final act of cowardice in displaying neverending disregard for innocent lives. Hajji Abdullah

22/22

09/02/2022

detonated an explosive device shortly after United
States forces arrived on site, killing himself, a woman
and three children. There were additional women and
children at the site, a possibility for which our forces
were well prepared. An associate of Hajji Abdullah,
an ISIS lieutenant, barricaded himself and members of
his own family on the second floor. He and his wife
engaged the assault force. They were also killed in
the course of the operation. In the early stages of the
operation, the family on the first floor, one woman, one
man and a number of children, were safely removed
from the site. After the second ISIS terrorist had been
eliminated, additional children came out of the secondfloor dwelling and were safely removed from the site.
The important thing here is that ISIS has made clear
over and over again its utter and complete disregard
for human life, and that was clearly on display last
week, just as it was when Hajji Abdullah’s predecessor
detonated a suicide vest, killing himself and his family
during a 2019 operation. I would ask Council members
to keep that in mind.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

22-25377
