IL
ICIA
TWENTY-SIXTH

ECOR
YEAR

MEETING: 9 FEBRUARY 197 1
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1565) ..............................

1

Statement by the President ....................................

1

Point of order raised by the representative of Somalia
Adoption of the agenda ......................................

5

..................

10

Admission of new Members:
Letter dated 10 December 1970 from the King of Bhutan addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/l 0050) .................................

10

SlPV.1565

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements of the Official Records

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutionsand Decisionsof the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

a

.

i’
1

‘,..T

,

.,.

l

I

,,

,.

.:

,”

/
,’

‘_

‘.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTY -FIFTY

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 9 February 1971, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Charles W. YOST

(United States of America).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, BeI@m, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l565)

Pini& of Spain and Ambassador Mwaanga of Zambia. Their
contributions to the work of this Council during their two
years of service are noteworthy. I believe 1 can assert
without question that they will be a continuing source of
inspiration to all of us, old and new members alike:
4. Since this is the first meeting of the Council in 1971
and since this is the last month in which I, as representative
of the United States, will have the occasion to preside, I
should like very much to initiate one or two very modest
reforms before turning to the draft agenda.

I. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Admission of new Members: Letter dated 10 December 1970 from the Ring of
Bhutan addressed to,the SecretaryGeneral (S/10050).
Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT: Before turning to the draft agenda
for today’s meeting I should like to make a few preliminary
remarks.
2. The annual accession of five non-permanent members
is, of course, an important and happy occasion. It ensures
the continued vitality of the Security Council by associating five new members each year with the Council’s work
and it is most fitting and proper that they should be
accorded a warm welcome. We expect much from the
representatives of Argentina, Belgium, Italy, Japan and
Somalia, who join us today, and I know that we shall not
be disappointed. Ambassadors Ortiz de Rotas, Longerstaey,
Vinci, Tsuruoka and Farah may have varying periods of
United Nations service behind them, but they share with us
a dedication to the ideals and objectives of the United
Nations as laid down by the Charter. Eminent representatives of their respective countries, skilled in the arts of
bilateral as well as multilateral diplomacy, steeped in the
special atmosphere that is particular to the United Nations,
they bring to the Security Council qualities and qualifications that bode well indeed for the future. I know they will
make significant contributions to our work. We all look
forward to a close and cordial association with these
colleagues, during which the high regard and esteem we
have for all of them and for the countries they represent
will be further enhanced.

5. It strikes me as an dnachronism that consecutive
interpretation into the other three working languages, in
addition to their simultaneous interpretation into the
official languages, is now almost exclusively restricted to
procedural and ceremonial statements by the President.
Thus, statements by the President welcoming new members, congratulating his predecessor, returning compliments
paid to him, and inviting non-members who have asked to
participate under rule 37 to take their seats, when
interpreted consecutively three times have slowed the
Council’s work and consumed inordinate amounts of our
valuable time. On occasions in the past, Presidents of the
Council have waived consecutive interpretation of certain
statements of the kind I have just mentioned but no steady
practice has yet been established. It is my hope to
contribute to the effective functioning of the Security
Council by following their good example. I therefore
declare that during my presidency, consecutive interpretation will not be required of the President’s routine
procedural and ceremonial statements. 1 shall so indicate
when I believe consecutive interpretation of my statements
is required. Of course, any member will have the right to
request that a particular statement of the President should
be interpreted consecutively.
6. Speaking for the moment as the representative of the
UNITED STATES, I shoutd like to remark that the most
familiar sentence in t-his Council is “I waive my right to
consecutive interpretation.” I should like the Secretariat to
note that henceforth the United States waivesthis right for
all Of its interventions unless a specific statement to the
contrary is made before the United States representative
begins his remarks.
7. Reverting to my capacity as PRESIDENT, I should l&e
to close with a word about the traditional practice of
extending congratulations to the President of the Council.
.The
. President of the Council for January, Sir Colin Crewe,
joins me in requesting each and every one of you to
dispense with these Preliminary statements, and we urge

3. I cannot, however, welcome them without saying a
word about their distinguished predecessors.Let me once
more thank our former colIeagues on the Security Council:
Ambassador Espinosa of Colombia; Ambassador Jakobson
of Finland; Ambassador Khatri of Nepal; Ambassador de
1

YOU to address yourselves directly to the matter which led ’ the Security Council designed to reaffirm its main responaibilhy in the field of, the maintenance of peace anh the
you to request the floor. Both Sir Colin and I feel that the
peaceful settlement of disputer.
high esteem in which WC alI hold each other is mutual,
enduring, and beyond any words which cotid be corn14. My delegation furthermore took note with interest of
mitted to the official records of this august body. We
the fmal commurriqud on the t%at of the periodic meetings
therefore thank you for the kind remarks that we ask you
at the ministerial level and we are happy that the
not to utter. Needless to say, in accordance with the
par%clpating
members “also agreed to examine possibilities
practice I have just mentioned, I waive consecutive Interprefor further improvements in the methods of work of the
tation of these remarks.
Security Council in promoting the peaceful settlement of
disputes
in accordance with the Charter”[Z555th meeting,
8. A number of representatives have asked to be allowed
m. 51.
to make statements at this point and I shall call on them in
turn.
15. As the representative of a country of Western Europe,
may
I be permitted to pay a tribute to the permanent
9. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium) ~inte~ef&~n
from
representatives of Finland and Spain, the eminent AmbasFrench): I thank you, Mr. President, for the kind words of
sadors Jakobson and de pin&, who both contributed
welcome that you have just uttered and I shafl be pleased to
significanffy to the organisation of that historic meeting.
transmit them to my Government. Permit me, for the first
Together with Italy, Be&m enjoys a very noble and rich
and also the last time to violate slig.hhuythe rule that you
heritage. The active participation of ourtwo colleagues and
have just outlined. Last month we enjoyed the great
predecessorsin the work of the Security Council during the
privilege of benefiting from the valuable experience, the
last two years has given proof positive that the role of
keen intelligence and the subtle wisdom of Sir Colin Crowe.
individual initiative and personal action of the diplomat
We are happy that this month our work will be conducted
remains, despite the changes that hava occurred in the
by a diplomat who is as eminent as he is courteous. His
course of time, an important factor in the search for
sense of compromise, his realistic view of problems and his
solutions or the achievement of compromises.
sincere faith in our Organization quite naturally point to
him for the delicate role of President of the Security
16. By the same token, we would also express the
COUIU~.
It is unnecessary to add, Mr.President, that YOU
hope-without in any way challenging the obvious merits of
can count on the full co-operation of the BeIgian delegapubic diplomacy-that the Security Council will not depart
tion .
from the practice it has followed, very often successfully, in
the past, particularly in the most recent past when personal
IO. I take this opportunity to transmit to you, in your
and confidential contacts made it easier to arrive at the
capacity as permanent representative of the United States,
necessary concessions and the establishment of a unanithe warmest congratulations of my Government on the
mous consensus.
prodigious feat just accomplished by Apollo 14 and which
we trust will be brou@tt to a successful conclusion a few
17. The Charter has entrusted the Security Council with
moments from now.
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of intemational peace and security. At present, international affairs
11, May I also be allowed to express my deep feelings of
are stiB troubled by a number of hotbeds of tension,
joy at finding myself@sitting ‘next to the permanent
sources of conflict and even warlike activities. At the same
representative of Burundi, a country with which Belgium
time, we cannot forget that our hope in these times must Be
enjoys very friendly and harmonious relations based on
in the fact that nations have become aware not only of
mutual respect and the sincere will to co-operate in
their material solidarity but especially of the absolute need
strengthening the ties that have linked us for so long.
to achieve a moral community. Today peace no longer
depends on!y on treaties or commitments. Primarily it
12. My country has been a member of the Security
depends on the creation of conditions that will guide the
Council twice since the creation of the United Nations and
conduct of men towards peace. That is the great lesson that
we are fully aware of the honour as well as the responsiEuropean reconciliation has taught us since the Second
bility incumbent upon us in joining this august group again.
World War. At this time Europe is enjoying an era of peace
and a climate of stability because, over and above the
13. Each time that Mr, Harmel, Minister for Foreign
interests that divide it, Europe has raised its sights to an
Affairs, has mounted the rostrum of the General Assembly,
international ideal.
he has reaffirmed the adherence of the Belgian Government
to the great principles of the Charter of the United Nations
18. In the field reserved to it and within the limits set for
and its determined will to contribute to the achievement of
it by the Charter, the Security Council will be called upon
the five options chosen in 1945 by the founders of our
to show political courage and creative imagination in order
Organization. He has constantly offered his support for any
to revitalise -the machinery most appropriate for the
initiative, any proposal that might increase the effectiveness solution of disputes by peaceful means, to eIiminate the
of the principal organs of the United Nations. The Coun.ciI
sources of conflicts, to reduce rivalries or antagonisms and,
will further recall that the Belgian delegation took an active
in a word, to create conditions for lasting peace and
part in the preparation of the Declaration on the Strengthunderstanding.
ening of International Security, adopted by the General
Assembly on 16 December 1970 /resolution 2734 (XXV/,
19. It is with those ideas in mind that my delegation will
which contains a number of recommendations addressed to
co-operate in the work of the Council.

2

The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Belgium for his kind words, his most interesting statement
and particularly his congratulations to our astronauts,
20.

21, Mr. TSURUOKA (Japan): Mr, Presldcnt, fuat of all I
should like to join the previous speaker, Mr. Longerstaey, in
congratulating you most whole-heartedly on your assump.
don
of the presidency of the Council for the second month
of this year. This Is an office of the greatest importance,
which I am sure you will grace with the charm of your
personality and with your wisdom and experience. We are
most fortunate to have you as our presiding off& for this
month.
22. I wish also to take this opportunity to thank the
President of the Security Council for the month of January,
Sir Colin Crowe of the United Kingdom, for his silent but
efficient work during his tenure of off~c-e.No meetings of
the Council took place during that month, but the
President, with his usual skill and diplomacy, kept the
situation under control.
23. I should like also to express my heartfelt tributes to
the former members of this Council, namely, Colombia,
Finland, Nepal, Spain and Zambia, whose terms expired at
the end of last year. The services they rendered to the work
of this Council are still fresh in the minds of all of us. My
delegation, as one of the n,ew members of this Council,
wishes to learn from their good example of devotion to the
enhancement of the prestige of this body.
24. Let me take this opportunity of expressing, on behalf
of the Government and-people of Japan, our strong desire
and determination to take an active part, in cooperation
with our fellow members, in the lofty efforts of this
Council towards world peace.
25. We may recall that on the occasion of the twenty-fifth
anniversary celebration of our Organization last autumn
much was said about the organization and functions of the
United Nations. The year 1970 wasindeed for all of us a
year of retrospection over the past and of renewed
determination for the future. Much was said about assessrnent of the past activities and of the future of the Security
Council as well. Out of that retrospection and assessment
one thing, we believe, emerged with certainty: that is, that
the Security Council, though its efforts over the past
twenty-five years, has firmly established its authority and
position as the preeminent organ in charge of the preservation of peace and security in the present international
society, a responsibility of the highest order.
26. In this connexion it is worth noting that not infrequently observers from outside have pointed out that our
Qrganization,
and particularly the Security Council, has
teen
an indifferent attitude in a number of cases where
titernational
peace was seriously disturbed. We must think
piously
about that attitude, in case there should be any
b&a
for such criticism, Such a “hands off” attitude with
regard to dangerous situations in the world would certainly
not serve the cause of the United Nations or of the Security
Council,
on which the Member States have conferred
pflma0’
responsibility for the maintenance of international
r>eace and security in order to ensure prompt and effective
action by the United Nations.
3

c

27. The Security Council has in the .past played an
, indispensable role in peace-keeping functions. It has established a number of concrete peace-keeping operations *in
various parts of the world and no one could be certain that,
without these operations, the flame of the conflicts would
not have flared up to endanger the peace and security of
the whole world. We beIieve that the Security Council
might well be able to discharge more fully its responsibility
BS the primary organ in charge of the maintenance of
international peace and security.
28. I shall refrain from further abusing the indulgence of
Council members by setting forth any more remarks of a
general nature. I wish merely to add that the delegation of
Japan looks forward with keen anticipation and with a
senseof challenge to participation in the work of this most
distinguished body. Japan is an Asian country and a
member of the Afro-Asian group within the United
Nations, consequently we are fully aware of our special
responsibilities in this regard. At the same time, it is our
firm belief that we should contribute to the construction of
world peace, each of us acting as a representative of the
whole population of the world.
29. We are dkeply conscious of the importance of the
heavy responsibilities Japan is assuming as a member of the
Security Council. I should like to pledge our whole-hearted
co-operation,
30. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Japan
for his kind words and his most constructive statement,
31. Mr. VINCI (Italy): Mr. President, I shall at once
respond positiveIy to your request and suggestions, which
are in my view perfectly consistent with the wishes of my
delegation, as well as of many other delegations, to improve
the work and the effectiveness of the United Nations. I
shall therefore avoid the compliments and ceremonial
expressions customary in the past,
32. Allow me, however, Mr. President, to congratulate you
on your assumption of the office of President of the
Security Council and to assure you of the full co-operation
of my delegation in helping you in this delicate task.

33. I wish to thank you especially for the warm weIcome
addressed to my country and to me personally at this
moment when Italy, together with Belgium, a country with
which we have the closest relations, starts to carry out the
mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly upon the
nomination of the Western European and other States
group. Your words are particularly gratifying to me as they
come from the representative of a country with which Italy
has very close ties of friendship and co-operation in all
fields. Even the eventful and spectacular mission of Apollo
14 testifies to that, as our American friends named the
destination site of Antares after an Italian cartographer.
They established an ideal symbolic link between pioneers
from two continents, two eras; a link between a humble
Italian monk, Fra Mauro, whose ingenuity and intuition
five centuries ago gave the world a map of the earth which
is still a source of admiration, and three gallant American
astronauts, who have applied the unprecedented amount of
scientific and technological knowledge acquired by their

country to the opening of a systematic exploration of the
moon, in the Sea of Rains. We look forward to the
impending return to earth of Shepaxd, Mitchell and Roosa,
who have reiterated the message of understanding and’
peace which previous champions of mankind in outer space
have sent to earth. It is a most inspiring message to all
members of the human family and especially to USwho sit
in the Security Council.

36. In the framework of the “global stratew for peace”
suggested to the General Assembly by the Foreign h&l&~+
of Italy, Mr. Aldo More, at the 1783rd plenary meeting two
years ago, in order to face present problems on a world
scale, the Italian Government believes that the Securi~’
Council has a prlmrtry role. In the view of Minktar Aldo
More present problems have taken on such dimensions thai
they cannot be solved by single Governments; they require
a collective commitment, and no arena better than the ona
offered by the Security Council can put to the test thle new
spirit adjusted to our times as well a4 the joint will,
particularly of those States which together have the means
to do it, to build an international order based on
international law, on progress and on justice.

34. Allow me now, to welcome’ the new members,
Argentina, Belgium, Japan and Somalia, all countries with
which Italy has very close relations of friendship and
co-operation, and to associate myself with the tribute you
have paid to the outgoing members, Colombia, Nepal,
Finland, Spain and Zambia. We for our part are particularly
grateful to the outgoing members of the Western European
37. Italy, which has always complied faithfully with thu
and other States group, Finland and Spain, for the
decisions of the Security Council, acting in conformky with
constructive contribution they have made to the deliberathe obligations deriving from the Charter, intends to
tions of this body. Their delegations, in particular our
respond to the extent of its capacities to all these
colleagues Ambassadors Jakobson and de Pinids, have
expectations, And, on behalf of my Government, I wish to
fulfilled their mandate with a high sense of duty and
assure you, Sir, and the other members of this Council that
dedication to the principles and objectives of the Charter,
Italy is determined to pursue in this forum with an even
Among the decisions taken during the past two years I
greater commitment the action, often little known, that it
cannot fail to recall the one w&h has historic significance:
has increasingly undertaken for the solution of the crises
the holding of periodic meetings under Article 28, parawhich afflict the world. Italy will at the same time favour
graph 2, of the Charter. And in this connexion I wish to
all those initiatives which, in our opinion, could strengthen
mention the happy coincidence by which the first periodic
the authority and the operative capacity of the Security
meeting was held upon the initiative of Finland-an
CounciI. You can rely Mr. President on the full and
initiative relentlessly pursued by its permanent represencontident co-operation of the Italian delegation, which will
tative-and took place in this room at the level of Foreign
steadily follow in its actions thelines of policy I have just
Ministers on 21 October 1970 /ISSSHi meeting], during
briefly traced. I wish to give the same assuranceto all the
the session commemorating the twenty-fifth anniversary of
members of the Council,
the United Nations. I should like to congratulate .the
Finnish delegation and particularly Ambassador Jakobson.
38. Before concluding, Mr. President, and following the
example you have given, I wish to state that I waive the
The successof the work of that delegation in this field is a
good omen for the Wire of the United Nations and it is an
right of my delegation to consecutive interpretation during
incentive to follow its example in order to strengthen the
our entire term of office unless we make a special request
for It,
authority and the effectiveness of the Security Council in
the pursuance of its actions for peace.
39. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representatlve of Italy
35, My Government is fully aware of the heavy responsifor his assurances of co-operation with the Council, his
bility Italy assumes in taking its seat at this table. My
references to the flight of Apollo 14 ‘and his most
country has participated%nly once in the work of the
thoughtful and important statement,
Council-to be more precise, in the years 1959 and 1960,
when it had to fulfil delicate tasks ln ‘a period of
40. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentlnna) ftnrerprerutlon
international crisis. Some areas of the world are today the
from Spanish): Mr. President, always obedient to the
scene of wars or are m danger of becoming so again. Among
decisions or suggestions of the President, I shall comply
these areas there is one very close to my country which, In
with your retuest and I shall omit the very wellearned
our view, is virtually a hotbed and haa constituted for long
congratulations that I had planned to address to you and to
years the most dangerous threat to world peace. Further
your predecessor, the representative of the United Kingmore, Governments and peoples, whatever the region they
dom, although I assure you that those feelings are implicft
belong to, are increasingly demanding that the Security
in the words I shall speak. Sir, knowing as you do my
Council should really become the Irreplaceable instrument
personal as well as official respect for you as a diplomat and
for the maintenance of peace that the founding fathers of
gentleman, may’1 limit myself to expressing my satisfaction
the Organization devised. In fact the world of today, a
that my fuat statement in the Security Council is behig
world in a state of rapid and sometimes tumultuous change,
pronounced under your presidency. On behalf of, my’
requires such an instrument more than ever. The DeclaraCovermnent and the delegation I head, I wish warmly td,
tion on the Strengthening of International Security,
thank you, Mr.Presldent, for the words of welcome that
unanimously approved by the General Assembly on 16
YOUaddressed to Argentina on.its assumption of its selif in
December 1970 [resoiuHon 2734{XXV)J, bears witness to
he Security Council.
*I ,, :,’f,- I :,
/,
‘.
.I
this need since, while solemnly reaffirming certain basic
Principles governing the relations among States, it contains,
Il. I should also like specifically to iddregs my remarks to
inter alia, certain important recommendations to this
t.he sister Republic of Nicaragua and to tell the represeneffect.
t ative of that country how honoured and privileged we feel
4

to share with Nicaragua the Latin American representation
in the Security Council. I wish to assurehim that we will
cooperate with him fully and at all times.
42. Furthermore, I wish to pay a tribute to the delegation
of Colombia and its permanent representative, Ambassador
Espinosa Valderrama, whose seatwe now occupy following
the expiration of the tenure of Colombia. We shall
endeavour at all times to live up to the conduct observed by
the delegation of Colombia during the deliberations and
debates in the Security Council,
43. Three times previously during the existence of the
United Nations, Argentina has been a member of the
Security Council. On all those occasions our conduct was
always intended, as it is today, to strengthen the role of the
SeCUrity
Council in the maintenance of international peace
and security and also to ensure the fulfilment of the
Purposes and principles’ of the Charter, We committed
ourselves then, as we commit ourselves now, to endeavouring to achieve those goals which would contribute to
reducing international tension, to ensuring
greater understanding among peoples and to strengthening good relations
among all nations.
44, My concluding words must be words of welcome to
the delegations of Belgium, Italy, Japan and Somalia,
which, together with Argentina, have now joined the
Security Council.
45. The PRESIDENT: I thank the, representative of
Argentina for his kind words and helpful assurance of
coqeration.
46. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Mr. President, my delegation
congratulates you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council at the start of a new year which, we
trust, will show progress towards the goal of world peace, I
thank you for your kind words of welcome and 1 also thank
other representatives who have so generously expressed
their goodwill towards my delegation. We thank the African
group of States for the confidence they placed in UBby
unanimously supporting our elaction. We are happy to be
able to join our sister States of Burundi and Sierra Leone in
providing an African standpoint on this most important
organ of the United Nations. It is also a matter of
satisfaction to my delegation that the representatives of
Argentina, Belgium, Italy and Japan, like ourselves new
members of the Security Council, will be our colleagues. We
look forward to working in close cooperation with them.
47, The Government and people of Somalia are fully
conscious of the honour that has’ been accorded our
country and of the heavy responsibiIity we have undertaken. In the task that lies ahead my delegation will
certainly find inspiration in the examplsof our predecessor
in this seat-the delegation of Zambia, which wasmost ably
Ied by Ambassador Mwaanga and which made a valuable
:ontribution to the work of this Security Council.
@. I think it is fitting that I should indicate at this time
he main principles and factors which will guide the actions
bf the Somali delegation as a member of the Security
council. While the energies of our Government and people
5

are directed primarily to the task of nation building, we arg
fully consdous of the fact that we are part of a world
community of nations and that the nations of the world are
‘more interdependent than at any other time in the history
of mankind I Large or small, developed or underdeveloped,
the peoples of the world were seen in true perspective by
the astronauts as fellow passengersof the spaceship earth.
Because of the advanced technology of our age it has never
been more possible, and, by the same token, It has never
been more necessary, to take a world view of the problemt
that beset us. This is why we look beyond our frontiers and
are ready to take up the challenge of world involvement. As
members of the Organization of African Unity and of the
non-aligned group of nations we share the concerns and
interests of the Third World-more particularly those
matters pertaining to security, to the preservation of our
independence, to the elimination of racism and colonialism
in all their forms, to the furtherance of human rights, and
to the uplifting of our people through an active programme
of national development. In addition to these commitments
we are seeking to forge and strengthen Iinks of friendship
whereverwe can in the international community at large.
49. In all these undertakings, whether on the national,
regional or international level, we shall always strive to act
in accordance with the principles of international morality
and international law laid down in the Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human Bights. We believe that
these principles provide a firm and complete basis for world
order and world peace. It is this belief which will support
the Somali delegation and will guide our actions as a
member of the Security Council.
50. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Somalia for his kind words and his most constructive
declaration.
Point of order raised by the representative of Somalia
51. The PRESIDENT: Before passing to the business
before the Council, I shall call again on the representative
of Somalia on a point of order.
52. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Mr. President, before the
Council proceeds with the adoption of its agenda for
today’s meeting, may I have your permission to place on
record the position of my Government on the credentials of
one,of the members of the Security Council.
53, It may,be recalled that at the 1387th meeting of the
Council on 25 January .1968, the representative of Algeria,
the late Ambassador Bouattoura, sought cladfication on
whether the Council was free to make a decision on the
credentials of all members of the Security Council and not
only in caseswhere there had been a change in representation or where new non-permanent members of the
Security Council had been elected.
54. The Algerian representative indicated his understanding of the matter to be that the Security Council
could indeed make a decision regarding the credentials of
any of its members, old or new. This interpretation of the
rules of procedure of the Council was supported at the time
by the representatives of the Soviet Union and France. The

I

President of the Cow-d at the time said he would a& the
Secretary-General for a report on the practice. of the
Security Counc~ regarding the credentials of its members:
The report app=d on 26 January 1968 as document
s/8365. That report shows that up 19 1948 the SecrcrtaryGeneral’s reports on credentials were included iin the
~ouncil’s provisional agenda, but that since that time they
have been circulated to all delegations and that, fn the
absence of any request that they should be considered by
the Council, they have been considered approved without
objection.
55. The credentials of the representatives of the five new
members that were elected to the Council for the two years
commencing January 1971, including my own credentials,
have formed the subject of separate reports by the
Secretary-General and have been circulated. The reports on
the credentials of other members have also been circulated
as documents of the Security Counctl. According to the
provisional rules of procedure any member may raise
objection to, or make reservations on, the credentials of
another member.
56. Within this context, I wish to place on record my
Government’s strong objections to acceptance of the
credentials of the representative who, since December
1962, has been occupying the seat reserved for the true
representative of.the Government of the State of China. In
the view of my delegation, acceptance of those credentials
would imply that the authorities which issued them were
empowered to do so, and that they were issued in the name
of and on the authority of the Iegal and de fucfo
Government of the State of China. We know that this is not
the case: the credentiah were issued by the regime of
Chiang Kai-shek who was ousted from authority by the
Chinese people over twenty-one years ago, To refuse to
allow the representatives of the effective government, the
Government of the People’s Republic of China, to occupy
the seat of the State of China is tantamount to nullifying
China’s membership of the United Nations, Obviously, the
State of China cannot e ercise its membership unless it is
properly represented, anif it is a question of fact that the
present occupants of the seat reserved for China have been
sent here by a noneffective and non-representative r&ime.

8 January 19502 and 20 January 19503 The texts of th
communications are avaflable for all to study.
58. Por the purposes of my statement, allow ms W
describe bdetly the ckntents of the telegrams dated x8
November 1949. One was addreaaedto the President of @@
General Assembly by Chou En-&i, then Foreign Mini&of &
the Central People’s Government of the People% RepubW
of China. It cuntained the text of a declaration by
Chairman Mao Tse-tung announcing the formation of *
Central People’s Government of the People’s Republic of
China as from 1 October 1949. The declaration went on to
say that the Central People’s Government wasthe sole 1Ggd
Government representing all the people of the People%
Republic of China, and that the Kuomintang GovemmaJat
was no longer qualified to represent the Chinese peopltThe declaration repudiated the legal status of the delegation
under Tsiang Tin&, sent by the Nationalist Party Cover-r?ment to the fourth session of the United Nations Gened
Assembly that wasin progress at the time, and made it clear
that the delegation could not represent China and had no
right to speak for the Chinese People in the United Nations59. Another telegram, dated 18 November 1949 and
addressed to the Secretary-General, also announced the
formation of the Central People’s Government of the
People’s Republic of China. It demanded that the United
Nations should
“deprive the ‘delegation of the Chinese National Govemment’, in accordance with the principles and spirit of the
United Nations Charter, of all rights to further represent
the Chinese people in the United Nations, so as to
conform to the wishes of the Chinese people”.1
60. In his communication of 20 January 1950, the
Chinese Foreign Minister, Chou En-lai, announced the
appointment of Chang , Wen .Tien as Chairman of the
delegation of the People’s Republic of China “to attend the
meetings and to participate in the work of the United
Nations, including the meetings and work of the Security
Council”.a The communication expressed his desire that
the new delegation should attend the meetings and participate in the work of the United Nations without delay.

61. I have found it necessary to recall these communications from t!ie Govermnent of the People’s Republic of
China to illustrate that one of its first international acts was
to serve notice to the United Nations that it wasready and
willing to assume the responsibilities of membership. These
communications in themselves should have been regarded as
sufficient evidence of the intention of the new Government
of China to take its rightful place in the world community
and of its readiness to subscribe to the purposes and
principles of the Charter.
.
::

57. In China, as no one can dispute, a popular revolution
took place and ended in 1949 with the expulsion of the
Kuomintang Government under Chiang Kabshek and its
replacement by the Government of the People’s Republic
of China. There are several representatives here, inchuling
myseIf, who represent Governments which have come to
power as a result of a popular revolution. The right of our
Governments to be considered the effective authorities of
OUT countries was established when they took effective
control of the national territory. When a change of
government takes place, either by revolution or by con&&utional process, steps are usually taken by the new govemmerit to inform the United Nations. In the case of the
People’s Republic of China. the President of the General
Assembly ai the time, ana the Secretary-General, were
informed of the change in government by telegraphic
communications transmitted on 18 November 1949,’

62. Many reasons have been given over the past twentyone years by *a powerful section of the United Nations
membership for tht: stand it has taken against the seating of
the representatives of the Government of the People’s
2 See Official Records of the Security CounciI,
459th meeting, p. 2.
3 Seedocument S/1462.

1 Seedocument A/1123.
6

Fourth

Year,

Republic of China. Let us examine some of the reasonsthat
have been given for the fact that an exception -to the ,
normal rules of procedure of our Grganizationwas made in
the case of the Government which came to power in China
in October 1949.
63. Doubts were expressed about the stability of the new
rdgime and about the possibility of its rem&@
in
effective control. One may well ask how long it takes for a
government to establish proof of its stability and effective
control. A few weeks or even a few days suffke in most
cases for international recognition by this Organization. It
is therefore patently unjust that after the Government of
the People’s Republic of China has been in effective control
for twenty-one years, after it has successfully tackled the
tremendous task of creating a common national purpose for
a country with a long history of feudal separatism, the
United Nations should, in $ffect, withhold recognition of
that Government by refusing to allow its representatives to
take their rightful places on its various organs.
64. It was said at one stage that the new Government was
not peaceqoving, and its involvement in the Korean War has
often been cited as evidence of this. However, since
opposition to the seating of the Communist Chinese in the
Security Council and in the General Assembly began nine
months before the Korean war, and since it is almost
nineteen years since that war csme to an end, I think that
argument can be safely rejected.
65. It is relevant to quote here the views of an international jurist, C. G. Fitzmaurice, which appeared in the Year
Book of World Affairs, 1952. He wrote :
‘Who can doubt, for instance, that the chances of
procuring an agreed settlement of the Korean issuewould
have been at least much greater than they are, or might
have‘materialized much sooner, if the effective Government of China had occupied China’s seat in the United
Nations? It can even be contended with some force that
had the Peking Government been permitted to occupy
China’s seat in the summer of 1950, and to be present in
the Assembly the same autumn, Chinese intervention in
Korea in November 1950 might have been wholly
averted .“4
66. It is ironic that one of the main supporters of the
argument that China is not a peace-loving nation, the
United States, has been involved in a war of aggression
against tfz people of Viet-Nam where hundreds of thousands of people have been killed or maimed, and where
atrocities comparable to those condemned at Nuremberg
have been committed by its forces.
67. It has also been argued that the Government of the
People’s Republic of China is critical of the United Nations
and does not subscribe to its principles and purposes. If
that Government has been critical of the United Nations, I
think that such criticism is not surprising and that it is
warranted in view of the unjust and illegal treatment it has
received at the hands of this Grganization. As to the
question whether the Chinese Government wasor would be

uely to subscribe to ‘the principles and purposes of the
United Nations, this is something that cannot be prejudged A number of those governments which arrogate to themselves the duty of passing moral judgements on the action%
of the Chinese Government in its international relations are
themselves engaged in reprehensible conduct unbecoming
to their membership of the United Nations.
68. 1 have described some of the main arguments that have
been put forward in opposition to the seating of the
representatives of the People’s Republic of China in the
United Nations, but, as representatives are all aware, none
of these is the real reason for China’s exclusion. This
unfortunate situation was sparked by the ideological factor
in the cold war struggle and has been supported by cold-war
power politics. It was an untenable position in 1949 to
exclude the Chinese communists simply because they were
communists. It is even more untenable at the present time
when peaceful coexistence rather than cold war is the order
of the day.
69. The illogic of the present situation with regard to the
representation of China in the United Nations is nowhere
more marked than in the workings of the Security Council.
Why do we speak commonly of the four permanent
members of the Security Council and not of the five
permanent members? Why is it that in important issues,
such as the Middle East question, it is the four permanent
members-the Soviet Union, the United States, France and
the United Kingdom-which are expected to guarantee a
peaceful settlement? Even in the establishment of subcommittees of the Council we find that, while the Big Four
automatically become members, the representative of
Chiang Kai-shek is bypassed and Asian representation is
given to another State. This exclusion is condoned by the
very nations which support his presence here.

70. So we have this very strange situation that the
representative of a regime, whose tenuous existence on the
island of Formosa is possible only because of United States
military support, can exercise the veto on any question
before the Council, Everyone recognizes the absurdity of
the situation. Why must we go on perpetuating it? It has
no basis in law, no basis in equity and no basis in common
sense,
71, In recent years there has been a growing awareness
among the members of the international community of the
injustice that has been inflicted on the Government of the
People’s Republic of China by the denial of its lawful seat
on this Council and on other organs of the United Nations.
Last year, for the first time since the question was brought
before the General Assembly, a majority of delegations
voted at the 1931st plenary meeting in favour of restoring
to the Government of China its lawful seat and of expelling
the representatives of the chlang Kai&ek r&me. That
same majority rejected the idea of a twoChina solution as
being another attempt to confuse and perpetuate the issue.
Unfortunately, an irrelevant and dishonest procedural
device prevented the will of the majority from being
implemented,
72. But the current of international public opinion continues to flow in favour of China, and there are increasing

4 London, Stevensand SonsLtd., 1952, p. 50.

7

emands for a more realistic approach to the question from
ithin States which have been that country’s strongest
olitical opponents. A call for a new approach WB~ made
St week by Senator George McGovern of the United
:ates. According to lllte iVew York Z&es, of 5 February
?71, Senator McGovern, speaking of United States policy
iwards China, said:
“Fog and myths for the past twenty years have
befuddled our attitudes and our actions toward mainland
China. These myths and fears may be the most costly and
dangerous untruths in all of American public policy.
“They have isolated a population of 800 million, more
ban one fourth of the world’s people. They have isolated
be United States position from a large and growing body
,f world opinion and practice; from trade, from diplonatic recognition, and from other forms of contact which
hould characterize relations between mature societies . . .
“Our policy”-and by this he means American policy‘still reflects a belief, persisting since 1949, that the
Iresent government in Peking is but a temporary usurper
If legitimate power in China. We still await the eventual
eturn of Chiang Kaiahek or his descendants, expecting
hat he and some two million followers on Taiwan will
omehow recapture control over the vast multitude on
le mainland which long ago expelled him. Put bluntly,
ris is pure fantasy.”
‘Pure fantasy”, This neatly sums up the situation in
Council when we are asked to acknowledge the validity
the credentials of the distinguished gentleman sitting in
seat reserved for the representatives of the effective,
1 and de facto Government of the State of China. It is
r from the Secretary-General’s report, contained in
ument S/52 19 of 18 December 1962, that the credenhave not emanated from the lawful Government of the
pie’s Republic of China, lhey bear the signature of
n Changhuan, who represents a regime which, in the
Lion of my delegation,%as no legal standing in the
:ed Nations,

77. .In my capacity as PRESIDENT, I now call on the
r@JPresentativeof Syria, also on a point of order.
78. Mr. TOMBH (Syria): Ambassador Farah of Somalia
has raised a Very important and valid point of procedure,
that is, the representation of the People’s Republic of China
in the Security Council.
79. The anomalous situation resulting from the absence of
this great Power from its legitimate seat in the United
Nations, and especiaIly in the Security CounciI, strikes the
work of the Council, in particular, with paralysis and gives
it an air of unreality. It is high time that this anomaly came
to an end.
80. The remarks of Ambassador Farah and his brilliant
and authoritative statement, to which I can add very little
indeed at this time, are fully in conformity with chapter III
of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council on representation. The delegation of Syria is in
complete agreement with those remarks.
81. The PRESIDENT: The Chair takes note also of the
statement of the representative of Syria, which will of
course also be fully reflected in the records of the Security
council.
82. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(tnanslated from Russian): I reserve the right to welcome
the new members of the Security Council after I have made
a statement on the item under discussion today, the
question of Bhutan.
83. In connexion with the point raised in the statement of
the representative of Somalia, Ambassador Farah, concerning the representation of China in the United Nations and
the Security Council, the Soviet delegation would like to
reaffirm the USSR’s we&known position on the question
of the restoration of the lawful rights of the People’s
Republic of China in the United Nations. The USSR has
consistently called for, and continues to caIl for, the
restoration of the lawful rights of the People’s Republic of
China in the United Nations and the expulsion of the
Chiang Kai-shek clique from all organs of this international
Organisation. Soviet representatives have repeatedly set
forth convincing arguments showing the need for an
appropriate decision on this question. It is hardly necessary
to repeat these arguments again.

My Government believes that it is time the Security
ncil became involved once more In this question where
ic and injustice combine to impair the credibility of the
ed Nations, I do not intend at this time to do more
express, on the grounds I have stated, my delegation%
tg reservations regarding the credentials of the represenw
84. The absurdity of the situation that has arisen, in which
e purporting to represent the lawful Government of the
the seat of the People’s Republic of China in the organs of
: of China. But I hope to be able to return to the
the United Nations has so long been illegally usurped by
er at a future date, after .consulting like-minded
persons representing no one, is perfectly obvious, The
[ations, and trust that the Council will be responsive to
Chiang Kai-shek r@ime has never represented and does not
I for reason and realism, and for a just solution to the
represent anyone in the United Nations. It has not had and
lem of the representation of the great State of China.
does not have any connexion with the Chinese people. It
cannot speak on behalf of the Chinese people and the
The PRESIDENT:
The Chair ties hate of the
Chinese State. That is the unchanging position of the Soviet
nent of the representative of Somalia and assureshim
Union on this question. I had the honour to make a
the position of his Government will be duly reflected
statement about it in the Security CounciJ on behalf of the
! records of the Security Council.
Soviet Government many years ago and I am stating my
Government’s position with regard to it again today.
Speaking as representative of the UNITED STATES I
urse reject categorically and totally his allegations in
85, Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretation
1 to United States resistance to aggression in Southfrom French): Mr. President, first of all I should like to
1sia.

8

associate myself with your words of welcome to the new
members: Argentina, Belgium, Italy, Japan and Somalia.
They may be new among us, in this Council, but I am sure
their experience will be a contribution much appreciated by
all members of the Council, as was the contribution of
Colombia, Finland, Nepal, Spain and Zambia.
86. I should also like to welcome the initiatives you have
taken. You are simply giving formal expression to a de
facro situation when you call on each of us to waive
consecutive interpretation. I believe this will facilitate our
work. It goes without saying that this waiver must be
subject to the reservation that in certain cases consecutive
interpretation can be expressly requested.
87. Lastly, I also associate myself with the censure
concerning the compliments that we address to one
another. However, I would not wish the outgoing Presidents-Ambassador Malik and Sir Colin Crowe-or you
yourself-to feel too frustrated. Know that our silence is
pregnant with esteem and friendship.
88. Concerning the statement made by the Ambassador of
Somalia, I should like to say that my delegation fully shares
the views he expressed on the representation of the People’s
Republic of China. We have no doubt that China’s seat
should be occupied by the representatives of the People’s
Republic of China. For us this is a matter of common sense,
of reason, of law; I might add that it would be in the
interests of the United Nations and of peace.
89. Mr. KUI,LAGA (Poland) (interpretation from French):
I shsll confine myself at this stage to the point of order on
which I asked for the floor. The representative of Somalia,
in raising the question of the lawful representation of China
and of the credentials of the delegation now illegally
occupying the seat reserved for China, has thereby raised a
problem which has long been of grave concern to the
United Nations. Poland’s attitude on this subject has never
changed: my delegation has always come out in favour of
the restoration to the People’s Republic of China of its
rightful seat in the United Nations, in all Its organs
including the Security Council. We have always maintained
that this attitude was entirely in conformity with the
principles of political realism, with the objectives of the
United Nations Charter and with the principle of the
universality of our Organization. Wemaintain this attitude,
which will continue to guide us in our activities in the
United Nations,

93. The United Nations being an international Orgamzation of a political character, it is not to be expected that
every Member State should recognize or have diplomatic
relations with every other Member State. Acceptance by a
Member State of the credentials of the representative of
another Member State which it does not recognise, or with
which it has no diplomatic relations, does not imply
recognition or a readiness to assume diplomatic relations,
On the other hand, any reservation or objection made by a
Member State with respect to the credentials of the
representative of another Member State does not in any
manner affect the legal status of that representative,
94. The representative of Somalia, however, is obviously
not raising the question of credentials: he is in fact raising
the question of the representation of the Republic of China
on the Security Council. He is thus raising a political
question of far-reaching consequences.
95. I do not think this is the time or place to renew debate
on the question of Chinese representation, but let me state
at once that it is no accident that the Republic of China is
specified in Article 23 of the Charter as one of the five
permanent members of the Security Council. When that
article was written into the Charter the Second World War
had not come to a close. It is relevant to recall that at that
time the Government of the Republic of China, in itslong
war of resistance, had its seat in Chungking and was not
then, any more than it is now, in effective control of the
major part of its national territory. Yet no one questioned
the right of my Government to speak on behalf of all the
Chinese people. It was the Government in Chungking, not
the illegal regime in Nanking, that represented the authentic
voice of China in all international conferences. It was one
of the principal allies which signed the Declaration of the
United Nations in 1942. It played an important part in the
drafting of the Dumbarton Oaks Proposals. It was one of
the four Powers that sponsored the San Francisco Conference, It actively participated in the formation of the
specialized agencies. The Republic of .China has thus earned
its place in the United Nations by virtue of its contributions
to the cause of peace.
96. Today, as during the years of the war of resistance, the
Chinese people, under the same Indomitable leader&p, is
still struggling for the right to a free and democratic way of
life, and is as always committed to cooperating with all
peoples for the fulfilment of the purposes and principles of
the United Nations.

90. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I do not wish to prolong this
meeting, but I feel duty-bound, since the representative of
Somalia has raised the matter, to place on record that my
delegation shares the reservations expressed by previous
speakers on the representation of China in the United
Nations.

97. As the organ of the United Nations charged with the
primary responsibility for international peace and security,
the Security Council acts on behalf of the entire membership of the Organization. Representation on the Council is
not a matter that concerns members of the Council alone; it
is a matter in which all Member States of the United
Nations have an interest, The voting at the twenty-fifth
session of the Assembly has not changed the basic position
of the Assembly in opposing the seating of Peiping, or the
legal status of my delegation.

91. Since I have the floor, I should like to thank the
representatives of the Soviet Union and France for the kind
remarks they have addressed to my country.
92. Mr. LIU (China): It is far from my intention to delay
the proceedings of the Council, but in the light of what has
been said by several representatives around the table I deem
It necessaryto make a reply on behalf of my delegation.

98. Therefore, in the interests of the proper fUnCtiOnhg
Of
the United Nations as a whole, and in the interests of the
sanctity and integrity of the Charter, I submit that the
9

Security Council would do well not to engage in ‘any
substantive debate on the question of China’s representati0J-l.

99. The PRESIDENT: I should like to make a brief
statement as representative of the UNITED STATES on the
matter that has just been raised.
100. The record shows that the credentials of the representative of the Republic of China, Mr. Liu, were reported
to the Council on 18 December 1962. Under the longstanding practice of the Council, his credentials were
considered and approved in the absence of objection and
they have not been put into question from that day to this.
Thus the provisions of rule 15 have been fully satisfied with
respect to the credentials of Mr. Liu, as of all other
representatives at this Council table.
101. With regard to the broad question of Chinese
representation in the United Nations, I would certainly
hope that the Security Council would not be asked, now or
in the future, to take action on that question. The Security
Council, composed of only fifteen members-less than one
eighth of the membership of the United Nations-is
manifestly the wrong organ in which to deal with a political
question of great moment that concerns every single
Member of the Organization. That fact wasrecognized from
the very beginning of the controversy over Chinese representation, when the General Assembly in 1950 adopted
resolution 396 (V). That resolution pointed to the risk of
conflicting decisions on such a question between the
various organs and noted that “in virtue of its composition,
the General Assembly is the organ of the United Nations in
which consideration can best be given to the views of all
Member States in matters affecting the functioning of the
Organization as a whole” and therefore recommended that
“when any such question arises, it should be considered by
the General Assembly”.
Adoption”of the agenda
The agenda WAYadopted.
Admission of new members
Letter dated 10 December 1970 from the King of Bhutan
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/10050)
102. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(mnslated
from Russian): Today’s meeting of the Security

Council is an unusual one, as is the first meeting of this
important
organ of the United Nations in every new year.
At this meeting five new members of the Security Council,
who were elected at the twenty-fifth session of the General
Assembly, are participating in the Council’s deliberations
for the first time.
103.
The, first meeting of the Security Council with its
new members customarily arousesgreat interest on the part
of all, causing us to reflect on the past and to want to have
a glimpse of the future. An analysis of the present
international
situation, characterized as it is by the existence of a number of acute armed conflicts endangering
Peace, makes unmistakably clear the enormous responsi-

’ bihty incumbent on the United Nations as a whole and ofl
the SeCurity Council in particular as the main organ
concerned with the maintenance of peace and security. In
this connexion, I should like, first of all to wiah both the
new members and all the other members of the Security
Council
8uccew in their efforts to achieve the lofty
purposes and c&my ou,t the tasks which the Council has
before it,
104. The delegation of the USSR, representing a country
that has, from the very fast days of the United Nations.
waged a tireless struggle to strengthen international peace
and security, would like particularly to extend sincere
congratulations to all our new colleagues, the representatives of States elected to membership in the Security
Council at the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly. As shown by their statements today, they are eager to
test their strength at the earliest opportunity and to use
their rich experience to further the noble cause to which
the Security Council is dedicated.
105. We should like to welcome Ambassador Farah, the
representative of Somalia, a young, independent African
country with which the Soviet Union is successfully
developing friendly relations in the political, economic,
trade, cultural and other fields, on the basis of full equality
of rights, mutual respect and non-intervention in each
other’s domestic affairs. We also note with satisfaction that
the Soviet Union and the Somali Democratic Republic are
successfully cooperating in the struggle against imperialism 3
colonialism and racism and for selfdetermination, national
independence, social progress and the strengthening of the
peace and security of the peoples. In the person of
Ambassador Farah, we are welcoming a tested fighter for
the freedom of the peoples of Africa.
106. We welcome as new members of the Security Council
the representatives of two European countries, Ambassador
Vinci of Italy and Ambassador Longerstaey of Belgium.
They represent countries with which the Soviet Union has
recently been developing constructive, businesslike relations. We hope that the representatives of these two
European countries, who, as members of the Security
Council, will concern themselves with questions relating to
the strengthening of international peace and security, will
also, as is to be expected, bear constantly in mind, like the
representatives of all other European States, the problem of
European security, We are of the fir-m conviction that the
task of strengthening security in Europe is one of the most
important foreign policy tasks of any European State which
genuinely advocates peace on that long-suffering continent
and throughout the world. We should like to take this
opportunity to mention the active role played by the
delegations of Italy and Belgium at the twenty-fifth session
of the General Assembly in the lengthy and complicated
consultations that led to the drafting and adoption by the
Assembly of one of its most important documents, the
Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security
[resolution 2734 (XXV)].

107. The Soviet delegation welcomes the representative of
Japan, Ambassador Tsuruoka, as one of the new members
of the Security Council, It gives us satisfaction to note that
relations between the USSR and Japan have moved forward

in the past few years, as stated recently by the Chatian of.
the Council of Ministers of the USSR, Aleksei Nikolaevich
Kosygin, in an interview with a correspondent for the
newspaper, As&f, which was also published in havda of
3 January 197 I. We hope that these relations will continue
to develop successfully in the interests of the peoples of the
two countries and the strengthening of peace and security
in the Far East, in Asia and throughout the world. The
representative of Japan, Ambassador Tsuruoka, is far from
being a newcomer $I the United Nations and the Security
Council. We remember, for example, that he played an
active role in the drafting and adoption by the Security
Council of its well-known resolution 242 (1967), concerning settlement of the Middle East conflict. We hope that, as
a member of the Security Council, Japan will work
constructively and consistently for the earliest possible
implementation of that important Security Council deciaion, with a view to eliminating the consequences of the
Israeli aggression in the Middle East &d establishing lasting
peacein that area.
108. Among the new members of the Security Council
there is also one of the Latin American countries, Argentina, with which the USSR has long maintained diplomatic
relations. We note with satisfaction that in recent years our
relations with the countries of Latin America have expanded considerably. We are pleased to welcome here the
representative of Argentina, Ambassador Ortiz de RODS,
and to express the hope that, with his great experience and
erudition in the field of diplomacy, he will make a valuable
contribution to general co-operation in the interests of
solving the international problems which will be considered
by the Security Council.
109. The Soviet delegation would like to take this
opportunity to express its gratitude to our colleagues the
representatives of those countries which, on the expiry of
their terms of membership in the Security Council, have
withdrawn from it. We shall always remember with pleasure
working together in the Council with the representatives of
Zambia, Nepal, Finland, Colombia and Spain. We note the
exceptionally useful and important role played by the
representatives of the African and Asian countries Zambia
and Nepal in the Security Council’s consideration of
questions relating to the elimination of the vestiges of
colonialism and the defence of the sovereignty and security
of the African and Asian countries against the aggressive
designs of the imperialists, colonialists and racists. We feel
we should make special mention of the fact that Ambassador Mwaanga of Zambia, Ambassador Khatri of Nepal,
Ambassador Espinosa of Colombia and Ambassador
Jakobson of Finland, together with our good friend
Ambassador Kdaga of Poland, were members of the Special
Missions dispatcheb by the Security Council-the first such
mission in this Council’s history-to Guinea in connexion
with the criminal act of aggression of the Portuguese
colonialists against that sovereign African State. As we all
know, the dispatch of that mission by the Security Council
wasan important event in the Council’s history and a new
initiative by the Council in the discharge of its function of
maintaining international peace and security, in strict
5 Security Council Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea
established under re8OhdiOn
289 (1970).

11

confot-mity with thbse provisions of the Charter which, for
well-known reasons, ha;e long been disregarded and violated.
110. We should like to express our gratitude to the
representative of the United Kingdom, Ambassador Crowe,
during whose term as President of the Council last month,
with the active participation of United Nations SecrefaryGeneral U Thant, contacts were finally resumed-after long
delays resulting from the stand taken by Israel-through the
special representative of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, Ambassador Jarring, with a view to
achieving a peaceful political settlement in the Middle East
and eliminating the consequences of the Israeli aggression
against the Arab States.
111. In conclusion we should m to welcome as President
of the Security Council for this month the representative of
the United States of America, Ambassador Yost, and to
express the hope that, during his term as l?resident,.the
negotiations between the parties to the conflict in the
Middle East, which are being conducted through Ambassador Jarring, will finally yield substantial positive results,
that progress will be made and that Israel will tinally
recognize the necessity and inevitablity of withdrawing its
troops from all occupied Arab territories, in strict conformity with the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war, which was clearly and unequivocally set forth in Security Council resolution 242 (1967)
and reaffirmed by the twenty-fifth session of the General
Assembly in two important documents which it adoptedthe Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security and resolution 2628 (XXV) on the Middle East.
112. The Soviet delegation expresses the hope that the
year 1971, upon which mankind has embarked and which
opens a new decade, will be marked by new successesin the
struggle of the forces of peace, progress and socialism
against the forces of reaction, imperialism, aggression and
social and national oppression, and for peace, security and
the freedom of the peoples.
113. The Soviet people are preparing for an important
historical event in the life of our country-the Twentyfourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, which will adopt a new five-year pian, the ninth,
and review the remarkable achievements of the Soviet
Union in the field of economic and social development and
in improving the well-being of the Soviet people during the
past five years, the period of the eighth five-year pian. The
new five-year plan, which will be considered and adopted at
the Twenty-fourth Congress, will represent yet another
giant step by our country towards the building of a
communist society. For the successful establishment of the
material and technical base of such a society, the further
raising of the standard of living of the Soviet people and the
development of their spiritual resources, we need lasting
peace, the strengthening of international security and the
development of friendship, mutual understanding and
co-operation among all peoples. The establishment of
lasting peace, the prevention of war and the development of
friendship and co-operation among peopfes have constituted and continue to constitute the fundamental principle
of the Soviet Union’s foreign policy.

114. The developing countries of Africa, Asia and Latin
America are also interested in the strengthening of peace
and international security, which are essential for their
independence and progress. In this the interests of the
developing countries and the Soviet Union fuJ.Jycoincide,
and we have the same outlook.
115. Carrying out the peaceful foreign policy bequeathed
to us by the great Lenin, the centenary ofwhose birth was
celebrated in 1970, the Soviet Union has struggled and will
continue to struggle to prevent a world war, to save
mankind from thermonuclear annillilation, to achieve the
strengthening of international security and to consolidate
the unity of the forces of socialism, democracy, national
liberation and peace.
116. Turning to the question being considered by the
Council today, the admission of Bhutan to the United
Nations, the Soviet delegation wishes to make the following
statement. The delegation of the USSR supports Bhutan’s
application for membership in the United Nations. As to
the proposals for the calling of a meeting of the Committee
on the Admission of New Members in connexion with
Bhutan’s application for membership in the United Nations,
the delegation of the USSR sees no special reason to
convene the Committee in this particular case.
117. The Soviet delegation would think it should be
possible in this case to have recourse to the procedure
which the Security Council has followed heretofore, that is,
that the Council, acting directly, should take a decision on
the substance of a State’s application for membership in the
United Nations without transmitting such a question to the
Committee on the Admission of New Members. Jfowever,
in view of the opinions and wishes of many other members
of the Security Council, we would have no objection to
transmitting the question to that Committee for consideration.
118. The PRESIDBNT~J thank the representative of the
Soviet Union for his kind remarks about me and share his
hope for substantial progress during this month in the
negotiations under Ambassador Jarring’s auspices for a just
and durable peace in the Middle East.
119. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Mr.President, allow me to
begin by disregarding your request and congratulating you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council during the month of February and expressing the
hope that the work of the Council under your tactful and
learned leadership this month will be fruitful:

contribution
of the delegation of Zambia, under the
dynamic direction of Mr. Mwaanga, Nor shall we forget the
fervour, the cooperation and the alertness which characterized the contribution of the delegation of Spain under its
leader, the able Mr, de PiniBs. Mr. Khatri of Nepal, with his
objectivity, devotion and wisdom, made positive contributions to the work of the Security Council. The Finnish
delegation, under Mr. Jakobson, also exhibited a great deal
of zeal and activity and has the deserved thanks of
everyone. We enjoyed also the tiendship and understanding
of the delegation of Colombia under both its chairmen, first
under the chairmanship of Mr. VaJJejo ArbaJaez and then
under that of Mr. Morales Sua’rez. They all have our
gratitude, together with our best wishes.
122. Today we wish- to welcome amongst us as a new
member the fraternal delegation of Somalia. Somalia’s
defence of the Charter and of its principles and its firm
attachment to international justice have been most SUCCESSfully illustrated by the continuous efforts of its permanent
representative, Mr. Farah, and his delegation. 1 am sure
their contribution to the work of the Council will be
valuable indeed. Likewise we wish to extend the warmest
and friendliest welcome to our new colleagues, the delegations of Japan, Argentina, Belgium and Italy, countries with
which my country has the strongest ties of friendship and
understanding, and we look forward to co-operating with
them in the service of the principles of the Charter and the
amelioration of the destiny of mankind. Let us hope that
the Security Council during this year 1971 will prove
instrumental in changing the tide from the rule of force to
the ncle of Jaw and from the spirit of conquest to the spirit
of Peace and justice.
123. It argues well for such an expectation that the
Council should start its work this year by enlarging the
family of nations by the admission of a new Member, the
Kingdom of Bhutan. The delegation of the Syrian Arab
Republic commends Bhutan’s admission to the United
Nations and extends its wannest welcome to this young
Member full of promise. With the co-operation of the
Bhutanese people and Government with the United Nations
and its agencies, a further step will be marked in the
realisation of the vast potential of the resources of Bhutan
for the corr?mon good, Its close co-operation, particularly
with its neighbours and the Asian community of nations,
and with the world at large, will enhance its status and
guarantee t&e acceleration of the tide of its modernization
and progress. We are certain of the success of such a
beneficial enterprise through which the community of
nations can only be enriched. We extend our best wishes to
Bhutan for a prosperous future.

120. The thanks and appreciation of my delegation go
likewise to 8% Colin Crowe, representative of the United
Kingdom, who discharged the duties of President in the
month of January with sagacity and skill. Of course, we
cannot forget that during the month of December the
Council was presided over by Mr. MaBk of the Soviet
Union. During that month, under his statesmanlike and
experienced guidance, very important decisions of the
Security Council were adopted.

125. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Syria
for his generous words in my regard.

121. This year we shall miss the outgoing delegations. We
shall never forget the spirit of dedjcation and the valuable

126. Since there are no other speakers, I would say that in
accordance with procedures which have been agreed upon

124. The United Nations is being extended from one year
to the next. Let us hope that, parallel with this horizontal
extension, its role in the defence of justice and the
maintenance of peace will also be extended in depth and
efficacy.

12

In informal consultations among members of the Council in
regard to the application for membership in the United
Nations submitted on 21 December 1970 by the Govemmerit of Bhutan /S/10050/, the President refers the
application, as provided in rule 59 of the Security Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, to the Committee on
Ad.&sion of New Members for examination and a prompt

13

report. It is suggested that the Committee on the Admission
of New Members might meet this afternoon, 9 Feburary
1971, in closed session. If there is no objection, I would
suggest that it meet at once, or with the least possible
delay. As I hear no objection, it is so decided.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PU0LlCATlONS

Uniled
Notions
publicolionr
Ihe world.
Conrull
your
or Ganwo.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PU~llCATlONS

SE PROCURER

be obtained
or write

Las pu6licalions
der
ddporitoirsr
du monde
Notions
Units,
Ssclion

Unies
ronf
Informez-vour
de1 venle$. New York

COMO

PUBLICACIONES

CONSEGUIR

Nations
entier.

from bookstores
ond dirlribulors
lo: United
Notions,
Sales
Section,

DES NATIONS

in United

Nations,

New

York

Prici:

$U.S.

UNiES

en venla
dons
les librairics
et 10% agencw
oupr&s
da volra
librai&
ou odrarrcr-vow
br
ou Genivc.

DE LAS

Los publlcocioner
de 10s Naciones
Unidar
es16n
sn lodes parfar
dal mundo.
Consulta
a LU librero
Venlas,
Nuavo
York o Ginabra.

Litho

throughout
New York

NACIONES
en vsnta
o dirijore

1.00 (or equivalent

UNIDAS
en IibrarIor
a: Nocioner

in other

’
y cotas dirfribuidoros
Unldos,
Seccibn

currencies)

de

82000-July

1973-g
