S/2015/985

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 December 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Electoral Observation Mission in Burundi
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2137
(2014), in which the Council requested me to follow and report on the electoral
process in Burundi. The report provides an overview of the conduct of the elector al
process and the political and security situations following the parliamentary
elections held on 29 June 2015. It also provides details about the closing and
liquidation of the United Nations Electoral Observation Mission in Burundi
(MENUB) following the cessation of its substantive activities. The report covers the
major developments that occurred between 29 June and 18 November, the date of
the official closing of MENUB.

II. Major developments
A.

Political developments
2.
Since the issuance of my previous report, of 7 July 2015 (S/2015/510), the
political situation in Burundi has remained volatile and dominated by sustained
political violence, including a continued confrontation between supporters of the
ruling party, the Conseil national pour la défense de la démocratie -Forces pour la
défense de la démocratie (CNDD-FDD), and supporters of opposition parties and
civil society organizations over the legality of the candidacy of the incumbent
President, Pierre Nkurunziza. This confrontation continued after the holding of
presidential polls on 21 July, which President Nkurunziza won by a substantial
margin, and laid bare deep political divisions in Burundi that increasingly took on a
violent dimension. Efforts to relaunch an inclusive political dialogue proved to be
largely unsuccessful.
3.
On 15 July, against the backdrop of the highly charged presidential polls,
Alexis Sinduhije, the President of the Movement for Solidarity and Democracy
(MSD), announced the creation of the National Council for Respect for the Arusha
Agreement and the Rule of Law coalition. On 1 August in Addis Ababa, Léonard
Nyangoma, the President of the Conseil national pour la défense de la démocratie
(CNDD), was elected as the leader of the coalition, which also included former
Heads of State and a number of dissidents from the ruling party.

15-21796 (E)

221215

*1521796*

S/2015/985

4.
Late July also saw a fracturing of the main opposition platform in Burundi,
Amizero y’Abarundi, which, despite an earlier-announced boycott, had remained on
the ballots during the elections. A faction loyal to Charles Nditije, former President
of the Union pour le progrès national (UPRONA), refused to accept the election
results, while the other prominent member of the coalition, Agathon Rwasa, t he
leader of his wing of the Forces nationales de libération (FNL-Rwasa), chose to take
up his seat in the National Assembly on 30 July, along with 18 of his loyalists. He
was subsequently elected as Deputy Speaker of the legislature.
5.
On 20 August, Pierre Nkurunziza was inaugurated for a new term as President
of Burundi. In his acceptance speech, he pledged to pursue political dialogue and
restore peace in Burundi and promised a two -month period of amnesty for the
surrender of illegal weapons to national authorities, while also indicating that the
Government would provide training to civilians to enable them to participate in
so-called mixed security committees with members of the armed forces to conduct
law enforcement operations. President Nkurunziza also announced an amendment to
the law on religious groups and civil society organizations to limit the involvement
of such groups and organizations in political matters. On 24 August, a new
Government was announced, in which Agathon Rwasa’s party received f ive
ministerial posts. On 26 August, the National Council for Respect for the Arusha
Agreement and the Rule of Law stated that it no longer recognized Pierre
Nkurunziza as President of Burundi.
6.
On 17 September, while briefing the media on the report of the Commission of
Inquiry established in May to investigate the anti-third-term demonstrations, the
Attorney General disclosed a list of 25 individuals who allegedly had organized or
supported an “insurrectional movement”, including two former Heads of Sta te,
several prominent figures of the ruling party who had defected at the height of the
crisis, and opposition and civil society representatives, some of whom were now
part of the National Council for Respect for the Arusha Agreement and the Rule of
Law. The Government indicated its intention to seek their arrest and their
extradition to Burundi. The announcement prompted strong reactions from members
of the opposition, who characterized it as a politically motivated defamation of
dissident voices in Burundi. On 25 September, the President of the Council, Léonard
Nyangoma, indicated that the Council still expected to negotiate with the
Government face to face, outside the country and in the presence of external
mediators.
7.
On 23 September, President Nkurunziza signed a decree establishing the
National Commission for the Inter-Burundian Dialogue, which would report directly
to him. The Commission was mandated to address social and political questions,
peacebuilding, security and economic development, as well as to evaluate the
Arusha Agreement, the Constitution, the ceasefire agreement and the Charter of
National Unity. On 17 October, by another decree, he appointed the 15 members of
the Commission, in accordance with ethnic and gender quotas enshrined in the
Arusha Agreement and including representatives of women, religious denominations ,
security forces and youth. However, the Commission did not include any members
of the National Council for Respect for the Arusha Agreement and the Rule of Law
or exiled members of the opposition or civil society. Members of the Commission
formally took their oath of office in a ceremony held in Gitega on 23 October, in the
presence of President Nkurunziza.

2/17

15-21796

S/2015/985

8.
As the political stalemate continued, there were several instances of
inflammatory statements. On 29 October, Révérien Ndikuriyo, the President of the
Senate, made a speech to local administrators in which he stated that opponents in
opposition-stronghold neighbourhoods in Bujumbura should be “pulverized” if they
continued to resist, and held out a promise of plots of land to those who would “go
to work”. The speech was widely condemned for its similarity to rhetoric used
during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda and its apparent encouragement of violence
against particular groups in Burundi. The Senate cabinet subsequently issued a
statement saying that the President of the Senate had been misunderstood and that
his statement had been misinterpreted.
9.
On 2 November, President Nkurunziza extended his amnesty for voluntary
disarmament and set a deadline of 7 November for civilians to surrender their
weapons, noting that those who failed to do so would be dealt with as “enemies of
the nation”. A forcible disarmament campaign began immediately after the
expiration of the deadline, in particular in neighbourhoods where residents were
generally thought to have opposed a third term. This increased tension and fear, and
many residents abandoned their homes.
10. Throughout the reporting period, relations between Burundi and Rwanda were
tense, with a series of mutual accusations that subversive activities were being
supported on their respective territories. In late September, Burundi filed a
complaint with the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, blaming
Rwanda for acts of aggression against its territory and for training rebels in the
Mahama refugee camp. On 7 October, Burundi expelled the First Minister
Counsellor of the Rwandan Embassy in Bujumbura, after having earlier raided his
residence and claimed to have discovered an arms cache.
11. The continuing crisis in Burundi strained the country’s relationship with
several international partners. On 1 October, the European Union imposed a travel
ban and an asset freeze on four high-ranking Burundian security officers and held
them responsible for the excessive violence and repression against civilians. A
spokesperson of the Government of Burundi called the measures unjust and
criticized the fact that opposition leaders were able to move freely within the
territory of the European Union. On 3 October, the ruling party, CNND -FDD,
denounced the European Union decision as illegal and tantamount to provocation,
and also accused the European Union of ethnic bias, warning that sanctions against
members of a single ethnic group could jeopardize the inter-Burundian dialogue.
The European Union addressed a letter to the Government of Burundi on 26 October
seeking consultations under article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement, which entails a
review and the possible revision of European Union assistance to Burundi. On
2 October, Belgium, Burundi’s largest bilateral donor, suspended its cooperation
programmes with the country.

B.

Security developments
12. Throughout the reporting period, the situation in Burundi, especially in the
capital, was characterized by an ongoing deterioration of insecurity and a continued
rise in violence.
13. Early in the morning of 10 July, exchanges of heavy gunfire broke out in the
commune of Kabarore in Kayanza Province, on the Rwandese border. According to

15-21796

3/17

S/2015/985

local Burundian authorities, a group of armed elements, estimated to be roughly
500 individuals, clashed with troops at an army outpost and later vanished into the
Kibira forest, where another confrontation reportedly followed. Thirty -one rebels
were reportedly killed, and Burundian authorities claimed to have made more than
100 arrests.
14. Since July, nightly exchanges of gunfire and grenade explosions, followed by
the discovery of the bodies of mutilated or executed people, have become
commonplace in Bujumbura neighbourhoods such as Ngagara, Musaga, Cibitoke
and Mutakura, which were widely regarded as hotspots for anti -third-term protests.
Numerous reports have indicated a proliferation of weapons in the hands of civilians
and the emergence of pockets of organized resistance and vigilante groups, who
have clashed with security forces in the capital. These incidents have often been
followed by the cordoning-off of the neighbourhoods by police and security forces,
ostensibly to recover arms, which on a number of occasions has led to the loss of
civilian lives. On 13 October, nine civilians, including a staff member of the
International Organization for Migration, were killed in the Bujumbura
neighbourhoods of Ngangara and Bwisa in an operation carried out by secu rity
forces following an ambush of two police officers. A staff member of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) was also killed, in a separate incident in
Bujumbura on 7 November.
15. Since the presidential elections, there have been a number of political
assassinations of and attacks on high-profile members of the ruling party, the
opposition and civil society. On 2 August, General Adolphe Nshimirimana, a close
aide of President Nkurunziza and former Chief of the National Intelligence Service,
was killed when his vehicle was struck by a rocket-propelled grenade in the
Kamenge neighbourhood of Bujumbura. The following day, Pierre Claver
Mbonimpa, a leading Burundian human rights defender, was seriously injured when
unknown gunmen opened fire on him on a street in Bujumbura. On 15 August,
Colonel Jean Bikomagu, a retired army officer who had served as Chief of Staff of
the armed forces during Burundi’s civil war, was killed outside his house in
Bujumbura by unknown assailants. On 7 September, an unid entified gunman shot
dead the spokesperson of the opposition party Union pour la paix et la démocratie,
Patrice Gahungu. On 11 September, General Prime Niyongabo, the Chief of Staff of
the armed forces who played a key role in foiling the coup d’état attem pt of 13 May,
narrowly escaped an ambush in Bujumbura during which four of his bodyguards and
three assailants were killed. Most murders, disappearances and cases of serious
violence remain unsolved, which has exacerbated an atmosphere of impunity,
tension and fear.
16. Since the failed coup d’état, there has been growing speculation about divisions
within the Burundian armed forces, the reform of which had been praised as one of
the major international peacebuilding successes following the signing of the A rusha
Agreement. Reports of the arrest of military personnel allegedly involved in the
assassinations of General Nshimirimana and Colonel Bikomagu and the attempted
assassination of General Niyongabo, as well as the use of military vehicles and
attire in those incidents, have fuelled such claims.
17. The Government’s attempts to grant amnesty for voluntary disarmament have
yielded only limited success. On 26 October, the commission tasked with
overseeing that initiative reported that 6 heavy weapons, 36 ass ault rifles, 10 pistols,

4/17

15-21796

S/2015/985

115 grenades, 4,874 pieces of ammunition and 136 magazines had been volun tarily
returned since 20 August.
18. The deterioration in the security situation has prompted several diplomatic
delegations and international organizations to evacuate their staffs from Burundi.
On 20 November, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, which
has had its headquarters in Bujumbura since 2007, said in a statement that it would
evacuate its entire staff and temporarily relocate to Lu saka.

C.

Human rights and humanitarian developments
19. During the reporting period, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) reported a surge in human rights violations and abuses,
including extrajudicial killings, arbitrary arrests and detentions and unexplained
deaths of individuals, some of whom were identified as political party members or
human rights activists. According to OHCHR, between April 2015 and October
2015 more than 221 people were killed across the country, with 55 of those deaths
occurring in the month of October alone. Records indicate that since 1 August 2015
there have been 44 politically motivated killings, including 9 CNDD-FDD
members, 5 FNL members and 13 MSD members. According to the Government,
between April and October 33 policemen were killed.
20. The bodies of victims were found mostly in the Bujumbura neighbo urhoods of
Musaga, Cibitoke, Kamenge, Jabe, Ngagara and Buterere and in the Maramvya zone
of Bujumbura Rural Province, having been shot, strangled or mutilated with knives.
Some of the victims’ bodies had their hands tied behind their backs and displayed
signs of torture. It was reported to OHCHR that many of the victims had been
arrested by the police or by intelligence agents from the National Intelligence
Service shortly before their bodies were found.
21. Security forces, mainly police and National Intelligence Service agents, have
used torture and ill treatment against arrested and detained persons and have
sometimes been assisted by the Imbonerakure, the youth wing of CNDD -FDD.
OHCHR documented 79 cases in which victims had been tortured by the security
services.
22. From 26 April to 31 October, OHCHR recorded the arrests of 2,946 persons
throughout the country. Most of them were suspected of planning to join or
participating in a rebel movement. Others arrested during police searches were
mainly members of opposition parties, accused of the illegal possession of weapons
and participation in protests or armed banditry. Those suspected of taking part in a
rebellion were generally released within a few days for lack of evidence, while
others are still in detention in various prisons in the country. Some of the arrested
and detained persons were tortured or subjected to ill treatment or theft of personal
belongings (such as cell phones and money). The vast majority of those in detention
and still awaiting trial have exceeded their legally prescribed pretrial detention
periods. During the reporting period, freedom of expression and freedom of the
media in Burundi remained severely restricted.
23. The lives of journalists remain at risk. Journalists working for private and
independent media continue to face harassment through judicial summons, arbitrary
arrest and attacks while on duty. A number of Burundian correspondents working

15-21796

5/17

S/2015/985

for international and national media have been evacuated by the diplomatic
community for security reasons. The activities of Burundian media oversight
organizations such as the Press Observatory in Burundi, the Burundian Association
of Radiobroadcasters and the Organization of Burundian Journalists were paralysed
after several of their representatives, subject to arrest warrants, fled the country. On
16 November, Antoine Kaburahe, Director of the Iwacu Press Group, one of the few
independent media outlets in Burundi, appeared before the Supreme Court in
Bujumbura for a preliminary hearing on Iwacu publications on the attempted coup
d’état. The case is still ongoing.
24. In the absence of private media, social media have emerged as alternative
sources of unverified information on security events and human rights violations,
which has contributed to a proliferation of rumours and innuendo that circulate
unchallenged.
25. The political crisis in Burundi has aggravated an already poor socioeconomic
situation, resulting in increased humanitarian needs throughout the country,
particularly in the areas of protection, food security, malnutrition and health.
Approximately 700,000 people are food-insecure and nutrition rates are reaching
emergency levels, while the fragile health system is under increasing pressure.
According to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), as at 19 November, 217,757 Burundian refugees had been documented
in neighbouring countries, the vast majority of whom had sought refuge not only in
Rwanda and the United Republic of Tanzania, but also in the Democratic R epublic
of the Congo and Uganda. UNHCR continues to report a steady flow of refugees
into neighbouring countries, in particular Rwanda and the United Republic of
Tanzania, despite strict controls in border areas. In addition, there have been serious
allegations of recruitment by armed groups in refugee camps.

D.

Regional and international efforts
26. During the reporting period, regional initiatives in support of a political
dialogue continued under the auspices of the East African Community (EAC) and
the leadership of the President of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni, who was appointed at
the Community’s third emergency summit on Burundi, held on 6 July, to facilitate
talks among the parties in Burundi. In that capacity, President Museveni travelled to
Burundi on 14 and 15 July and met with President Nkurunziza and other
stakeholders. He urged the stakeholders to negotiate intensively and continuously in
order to reach consensus on all issues at stake. He also informed the parties that
dialogue would continue under the leadership of his Minister of Defence, Crispus
Kiyonga, and would focus on all issues without preconditions.
27. The Ugandan Defence Minister held meetings with the various Burundian
political actors from 16 to 19 July. While the parties agreed on refugee issues and
the disarmament of youth militias affiliated with political parties, they could not
reach consensus on other issues, notably the electoral calendar. The participating
members of the opposition insisted on the postponement of the presiden tial
elections and the holding of new communal and legislative elections. On 19 July,
the talks were suspended sine die after the Government had failed to attend the third
session. On 28 October and again on 12 and 13 November, Minister Kiyonga visited
Bujumbura for consultations. However, the dialogue process has not been relaunched .

6/17

15-21796

S/2015/985

28. The African Union Peace and Security Council backed the EAC -led dialogue
efforts in its 17 November communiqué. In addition, several measures to address
the situation in Burundi are outlined in the communiqué, including expanding the
number of African Union human rights and military observers on the ground, calling
for members of the Burundian security forces that have been implicated in violence
not to take part in African Union missions, investigating human rights violations
with the possibility of implementing targeted sanctions, and initiating contingency
planning for the possible deployment of an African-led peace mission in Burundi.

E.

Activities relating to the Peacebuilding Commission
29. Since the eruption of the crisis in April, the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission has met nine times to discuss Burundi and has issued
four statements to encourage dialogue, warn against an escalation of viole nce and
support regional mediation efforts.
30. During his last visit to Burundi, from 1 to 3 July, the outgoing Chair,
Ambassador Paul Seger of Switzerland, warned against the increasingly polarized
environment, characterized by entrenched positions and t he muting of moderate
voices on both sides. He recommended taking a firm and principled stance with
regard to the violence and human rights abuses committed, while ensuring the
provision of incentives to all stakeholders to participate in a constructive lo ng-term
dialogue upon which the social fabric could be rebuilt. He advised that the threat of
sanctions by the international community be weighed carefully, since they could
have the adverse effect of hardening positions and closing the window of
opportunity for constructive dialogue.
31. The new Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Jürg Lauber of
Switzerland, made his first visit to Burundi, Uganda and the United Republic of
Tanzania from 9 to 14 November, to discuss opportunities for the Commission to
support the resolution of the situation in Burundi. He discussed four main issues:
the security situation and the ongoing violence; dialogue initiatives; the
socioeconomic impact of the current crisis; and partnerships at both the regional an d
international levels.
32. During his visit, the Chair appealed to all stakeholders to refrain from violence
and reiterated that the Government was responsible for the security and safety of all
the citizens of Burundi. He encouraged international and regional assistance for
de-escalation measures such as the disarmament of armed groups and cautioned
against inflammatory rhetoric, perceived or real, from any side, which could incite
hatred among different groups within Burundian society and reverse the gai ns made
towards social cohesion over the past 10 years.
33. The Peacebuilding Fund has continued its engagement in Burundi, with a
current envelope of $11.65 million to support dialogue, human rights monitoring,
social cohesion and youth engagement. However, the ongoing situation in the
country has had an impact on Fund projects and on the implementation of the
broader peacebuilding strategy in the country.

15-21796

7/17

S/2015/985

III. Elections and electoral observation
A.

Electoral environment
34. The candidature of President Nkurunziza dominated the political discourse in
the lead-up to the 21 July election. The various attempts at facilitating a solution to
the disagreement regarding Nkurunziza’s third term and the other issues identified
at inter-Burundian dialogue meetings yielded no concrete results. The street
demonstrations initially sparked by the late-April announcement of Nkurunziza’s
third presidential bid did not sustain their initial momentum in late June and July.
35. As most private radio and television stations remained closed after the failed
coup of 13 May, the media coverage of the presidential campaign by the State owned Radio télévision nationale du Burundi (RTNB) did not sufficiently provide
the voting public with a pluralistic and impartial picture of the electoral contestants.
President Nkurunziza received a disproportionate amount of coverage by RTNB
compared with the other presidential candidates. Prior to the local council elections,
security and internal affairs issues dominated RTNB programming a nd very little
airtime was devoted to the local council elections.
36. The composition and the credibility of the National Independent Electoral
Commission continued to be questioned by the opposition and civil society, despite
an efficient voter registration and candidate nomination process and a logistically
competent performance during the 29 June communal and legislative elections. The
events related to the resignation of two of its Commissioners in early June, and their
replacement (see S/2015/510, para. 35), fuelled perceptions of Commission partisanship
within the opposition and civil society. On several occasions, the Minister of the
Interior and the President of the Commission disputed those claims and ac cused
opposition parties of lacking a genuine interest in the electoral process.
37. During the presidential campaign period from 25 June to 18 July, opposition
parties held small meetings or carried out door-to-door canvassing activities instead
of holding large campaign rallies, owing to a lack of campaign funds, supporters’
fatigue after a long legislative and communal campaign period, and restrictions on
freedom of assembly. Despite this shift to more low-profile campaign activities,
some influential members of MSD and the Amizero y’Abarundi coalition were still
arrested, went into hiding or fled the country.
38. In comparison with the environment before the polls on 29 June and 21 July,
the electoral environment prior to the local council polls on 24 Au gust was less
politically charged. Owing largely to their nature, the local council elections did not
garner much political attention. This was compounded by the fact that the focus in
the country had shifted to security issues. Political developments, suc h as the
swearing-in of President Nkurunziza, had no direct impact on the pre -electoral
environment of these polls.

B.

Legislative and communal elections
39. The logistical preparations of the National Independent Electoral Commission
in advance of election day on 29 June were largely sufficient, which allowed for
polling to take place in a regular manner.

8/17

15-21796

S/2015/985

40. On election day, MENUB deployed 17 observation teams in all provinces,
covering 50 of the 119 municipalities. Overall, the Mission carried out observation
activities at 145 polling sites. The voting operations at the polling sites observed
were slow but without tension. MENUB observers reported that the established
procedures were not always followed and that voters’ understanding of the process
was rather limited. The presence of security forces, while significant throughout the
country, was evaluated as discrete at the polling centres observed. Isolated incidents
of violence were observed, especially in urban areas, but not around polling centr es.
MENUB observers did not report the presence of the agents of opposition political
parties that had boycotted the elections, whereas domestic observers from groups
considered close to the ruling party were reported to be present at the majority of
the polling sites.
41. Closing and counting took place without major incidents, despite a general
lack of knowledge shown by polling officials regarding the new counting
procedures. In the counting activities observed, a large number of invalid votes were
recorded, mainly because of a lack of familiarity with the procedures for marking
the new single ballot paper, but also because of a reported desire on the part of some
voters not to cast a valid vote. The result sheets were not posted at the polling station level, but party agents present at counting signed and received copies in the
locations observed.
42. On 2 July, MENUB issued its preliminary statement on the conduct of the
legislative and communal elections.

C.

Presidential election
43. After two postponements, the presidential election was held on 21 July.
Notably, four of the eight presidential candidates — Jean Minani of the Front pour
la démocratie au Burundi, Domitien Ndayizeye of the Rassemblement national pour
le changement, Sylvestre Ntibantunganya (independent/Ijambo) and Agathon Rwasa
of Amizero y’Abarundi — announced their withdrawal from the presidential race in
late June, claiming that the political and security environment could not guarantee
free and fair elections. They also called on the population to boycott the polls.
Despite their threat not to participate, their names remained on the ballots because,
according to the National Independent Electoral Commission, no candidate formally
withdrew.
44. The logistical and administrative preparations of the National Independent
Electoral Commission for the presidential elections were adequate and completed on
time, with significant improvements made since the legislative and communal
elections. The candidate nomination process was considered i nclusive. The
Commission and its territorial branches were able to prepare for the presidential
elections while simultaneously completing the tabulation of communal and
legislative results, adjudicating communal- and provincial-level complaints and
handling the distribution of voter cards. On the eve of the elections, some incidents
involving the burning of electoral materials and voter cards were reported in
Bujumbura Mairie. Another challenge faced by the Commission was the relocation
of a number of voting centres in Bujumbura Mairie for security reasons. The
replacement locations were often remote and contributed to the low turnout in the
region.

15-21796

9/17

S/2015/985

45. On 21 July, MENUB deployed 21 observation teams in all 18 provinces,
covering 67 of the total of 119 communes. Overall, MENUB observers were present
at 249 polling stations during opening and voting hours. The observation teams
reported a calm environment throughout the country, with no security incidents
observed. The voter turnout observed was noticeably lower than that during the
legislative and communal elections.
46. Closing and counting took place peacefully and were better organized than
those during the legislative and municipal elections. The type of election held,
together with the practice initiated on the previous election day, facilitated better
performance and expedited operations. MENUB still observed a high number of
invalid votes. While reasons such as a lack of voter education activities and the
newly introduced ballot paper were the likely causes of invalidity, some citizens
reported to MENUB that intimidation and fear had also contributed to invalid
ballot-marking. The result sheets were not posted at the polling -station level, but
party agents present at counting received copies in the locati ons observed.
47. On 27 July, MENUB issued its preliminary statement on the conduct of the
presidential elections.

D.

Local council elections
48. The overall climate that preceded the local council elections of 24 August was
not negatively affected by the major political events taking place in Bujumbura. On
election day, Burundian citizens went to the polls to elect five members of their
local councils in charge of hills (collines) and neighbourhoods (quartiers), the
smallest administrative units in Burundi. There are a total of 2,913 local councils,
including 2,814 hill councils and 99 neighbourhood councils. For local council
elections, candidates compete on a strictly non-partisan basis.
49. On 24 August, MENUB deployed 24 teams in all 18 provinces, covering 79 of
the total of 119 municipalities. Overall, MENUB observers were present at
223 polling stations, encompassing approximately 210 hill and neighbourhood
councils. The performance of polling staff was assessed as generally good. Among
the problems reported was uneven implementation of the procedures for adding
voters to the list and for assisted voting. However, neither of those issues was
assessed as causing an alteration of the will of the voters.
50. The polling stations generally closed on time or with minor delays, and
procedures were largely followed, with a few exceptions regarding the interpretation
of the rules regarding invalid votes and the compilation of tally sheets. Given the
high illiteracy rate, the decision regarding the validity of the ballots, whereby
candidates’ names had to be handwritten by the voters, was left at the discretion of
polling station officials, who generally handled the task well. The result sheets were
not posted at the polling-station level, but party agents present at counting received
copies in the locations observed.
51. On 27 August, MENUB issued its preliminary statement on the conduct of the
local council elections.

10/17

15-21796

S/2015/985

E.

Results management and tabulation
52. MENUB observed that the established procedures had not been followed in all
cases during the tabulation of the results of the legislative and communal elections,
for various reasons, including insufficient training and poorly completed result
sheets. The National Independent Electoral Commission stated that that had been a
consequence of the last-minute withdrawals of polling station staff and the fact that
their replacement had been carried out without following Commission instructions.
53. For the presidential elections, the tabulation of results at the communal and
provincial levels was conducted during the late-night and early-morning hours of
22 July by the communal and provincial independent electoral commissions,
respectively. Owing to security restrictions and, in some cases, conflicting
information received by the communal independent electoral commissions, MENUB
observers could not generally follow all the tabulation steps. The established
procedures for the announcement of preliminary results were closely followed in all
the provinces covered. Results were first announced by the communal commissions,
in relation to the communal elections; then by the provincial commissions, in
relation to the provincial elections; and finally by the National Independent
Electoral Commission, which proclaimed the provisional results.
54. The tabulation of the results and the announcement of the provisional results
of the local council elections took place at the communal level. The communal
independent electoral commissions began the aggregatio n of results immediately
after receiving the envelopes containing the results and continued it overnight.
MENUB evaluated the process as generally satisfactory. The announcement of the
results was often delayed in order to resolve candidates’ complaints be forehand.
55. None of the central tabulation activities were carried out at the previously
established data-processing centre, which was used for processing voter registration
applications.

F.

Electoral complaints
56. In respect of the legislative and communal elections, a number of complaints
were submitted by CNDD-FDD, FNL, UPRONA and the Coalition for Peace in
Africa, which requested a recalculation of the invalid votes at the provincial level.
Those complaints were in line with the inconsistent interpretations of valid votes
observed by MENUB during the counting process. In many cases, complaints were
related to the voiding of votes cast by means of fingerprint marks on the candidates’
pictures. Following a clarification issued by the National Indep endent Electoral
Commission, recounting took place in several provinces and communes. MENUB
observers noted that recounting operations had not been conducted in a consistent
manner and often addressed only the complainant’s concerns, without the conduct of
a complete recount. In a few cases, complaints were dismissed, as political party
agents had already signed the results protocol at the polling -station level. The
Commission subsequently acknowledged a procedural vacuum with respect to
determining the first-level instance of competence.
57. The Constitutional Court received three appeals regarding the legislative
results: two from UPRONA and one from CNDD-FDD. The UPRONA appeals were
considered admissible and were examined by the Court on the basis of thei r merit.

15-21796

11/17

S/2015/985

The first appeal challenged the allocation of seats for Amizero y’Abarundi in the
light of its announced boycott, and the second concerned the calculation of the
electoral quotient and questioned the interpretation by the National Independent
Electoral Commission of the vague definition of cast votes set out in the electoral
code. In the preliminary allocation, the Commission had considered only valid cast
votes acceptable for the seat allocation process, rather than all cast votes, as could
be inferred from the electoral code. On 17 July, the Constitutional Court upheld the
Commission’s decisions in both cases and confirmed the preliminary results as final.
58. No complaints were filed with the Constitutional Court with respect to the
presidential elections. The Court stated that no irregularity had been found in the
process and announced the final results with a number of minor corrections.
59. With regard to the local council elections, complaints and appeals were an
important component of the process. The communal independent electoral
commissions functioned as the first level of review, with six calendar days from the
time complaints were filed in which to adjudicate. Provincial independent electoral
commissions constituted the second and final instance of appeal. While a large
number of complaints to the communal commissions were submitted nationwide,
MENUB has not received official consolidated figures from the National
Independent Electoral Commission to date. The complaint filings observed by
MENUB often prompted vote recounts that changed the composition of local
councils.

G.

Final results
60. The preliminary results of the communal and legislative elections were
announced by the President of the National Independent Electoral Commission on
7 July and upheld by the Constitutional Court on 16 July. It was announced that the
official voter turnout had been 74.32 per cent. The information provided at the event
and later published on the Commission’s website did not contain any breakdown of
results at the municipal or polling-station level. At the National Assembly, only
three political parties and/or coalitions obtained seats: CNDD -FDD, with 1,721,629
votes (60.289 per cent), obtaining 77 seats; the independent coalition Amizero
y’Abarundi, with 318,717 votes (11.16 per cent), obtaining 21 seats; and UPRONA,
with 71,189 votes (2.49 per cent), obtaining 2 seats. The National Independent
Electoral Commission allocated 21 seats by co-optation to meet the ethnic and
gender requirements set out in the Constitution. The other co-opted delegates were
18 women, including 3 of Hutu ethnicity and 15 of Tutsi ethnicity (9 from CNDD FDD and 9 from Amizero y’Abarundi). The other three co -opted National Assembly
delegates were of Twa ethnicity. The inaugural session of the National Assembly
was held on 27 July 2015, with final results confirmed on 18 August.
61. With respect to the presidential elections, the preliminary results were
announced by the President of the National Independent Electoral Commission on
21 July 2015. In the absence of complaints, the Constitutional Court officially
declared the election of President Pierre Nkurunziza on 28 July 2015. The President
was sworn into office on 20 August at a joint session of the two chambers of
parliament.
62. With regard to the local elections, the final results were announced by the
provincial independent electoral commissions and transmitted to the communal

12/17

15-21796

S/2015/985

independent electoral commissions, with copies distributed to the provincial
Governors and municipal administrators. Each provincial commission announced
the results on a different date, according to the handling of the appeals it had
received, in any case no later than 4 September. An official swearing -in date for the
local councils is not specified in the law: governors and municipal administrators
generally took office in October.

H.

Participation of women and other marginalized groups
63. The right of women to participate in the country’s social, economic and
political life is enshrined in the Arusha Agreement and the Constitution. Burundi
has signed and ratified both the Convention on the Political Rights of Women
(1953) and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women (1979). The Constitution stipulates that women should occupy at least
30 per cent of seats in the National Assembly and the Senate as well as 30 per cent
of positions in the Government. The implementation of that provision is often
achieved through a cumbersome co-optation mechanism that does not facilitate
proactive efforts by political parties to promote a higher level of representation.
64. With respect to the legislative elections, 30 per cent of the candidates listed
were women. Although the gender quota was largely met by political parties in
terms of the composition of their candidate lists, women were rarely highly ranked.
As a result, only 25 per cent of them were directly elected, wit h the representation
of women increasing to 36 per cent by means of the co -optation mechanism. With
regard to the communal elections, some final lists of competing parties did not meet
the gender quota requirement. No female candidates were nominated for t he
presidential elections, despite the fact that two political parties were chaired by
women.
65. As for government positions, women represented 30 per cent of ministerial
appointments, as stipulated in the Constitution. This compares unfavourably with
43 per cent in 2010 and 35 per cent in 2005. Only 3 provinces out of 18 are
governed by women, another decline compared with the number of women
governors in the 2010 elections. The involvement of women in the management of
the electoral process was assessed as being balanced and in line with legal
requirements. Two of the five members of the National Independent Electoral
Commission are women, with one of them occupying the position of Vice -President.
The 30 per cent gender quota was met in the establishment of provincial and
communal independent electoral commissions as well as in terms of voter
registration and polling staff. As for the gender breakdown of registered voters, out
of a total of 3,840,920, 1,969,625 were women, representing an overall proporti on
of 51.27 per cent.
66. In the 2015 presidential campaign, female leaders and political actors were,
with very few exceptions, given very limited coverage by RTNB in special
programmes monitored by MENUB. The station devoted slightly more airtime to
female political actors during the legislative electoral campaign than during the
presidential elections. This can be explained in part by the lack of women
candidates for the presidential elections and the 30 per cent quota for the legislative
elections. Furthermore, the closure of private media that had previously aired
special programmes targeting women had a negative impact on female political

15-21796

13/17

S/2015/985

leaders throughout the electoral process. During the local council election campaign ,
women had greater access to RTNB than men, especially on the radio.

I.

Other international and national observation groups
67. The 2015 electoral process was expected to be highly scrutinized by
international and national observation groups. The events that followed the incumbent
President’s bid for a third term and the unstable security environment that ensued
changed the political landscape.
68. The international observation missions of the European Union and the Carter
Centre suspended their missions after the attempted coup in May 2015, and both
were officially terminated before the parliamentary elections. The African Union did
not deploy electoral observers. MENUB was therefore the sole international
observation mission present on the ground for the 29 June elections. For the
presidential elections, EAC and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region deployed observers: EAC deployed 25 observers in 18 provinces, while the
Conference deployed 30 observers. The conclusions of the EAC mission largely
echoed those of MENUB.

J.

United Nations technical assistance
69. UNDP managed the Project to Support the 2015 Electoral Cycle in Burundi
(PACE) through a basket fund established in late 2013. The budget for the entire
electoral cycle was estimated at $29.7 million. International donors, including
Belgium, France, the Netherlands, Norway, Switzerland, the European Union and
UNDP, pledged $19.8 million, $15.6 million of which was disbursed. In view of the
deteriorating security conditions and the lack of an environment c onducive to free
and fair elections, Belgium, Switzerland and the European Union suspended the
second disbursement of their contributions, while the Netherlands and Norway
cancelled previously announced additional contributions, leaving the basket fund
with a gap of $14.1 million. Subsequently, on 26 June, I suspended PACE.
70. Prior to the suspension, UNDP had provided technical support for the
establishment of a data-processing centre in January 2015. The centre processed the
voter registration data and produced the voters’ list in March and the voting cards in
late May. The total number of registered voters was 3,849,727 (1,970,539 women
and 1,879,188 men).
71. In addition to carrying out other activities, UNDP provided technical
assistance for the design and production of the single ballot used for the first time in
Burundi. UNDP was also responsible for the procurement of both sensitive and
non-sensitive electoral materials for the entire electoral cycle, which it purchased
and delivered on time for the 29 June legislative and communal elections and the
21 July presidential election. After the suspension of PACE, the procurement
processes relating to sensitive materials for the 24 July senatorial elections and the
24 August local and municipal elections were cancelled, and the responsibility for
procurement was transferred to the National Independent Electoral Commission.
72. UNDP and the International Foundation for Electoral Systems jointly managed
a programme for the prevention of and early response t o electoral violence. Between

14/17

15-21796

S/2015/985

November 2014 and March 2015, 275 monitors of the Episcopal Commission for
Justice and Peace were trained and gradually deployed throughout the country. The
programme reported 651 registered incidents of electoral violence and nearly
500 peace events between February and September 2015.

IV. Liquidation of the United Nations Electoral Observation
Mission in Burundi
73. In accordance with resolution 2137 (2014), the mandate of MENUB ends on
31 December. Article 55 of the status-of-mission agreement between the United
Nations and the Government of Burundi stipulates that the liquidation of MENUB
should be completed within nine weeks of the conclusion of the electoral
observation tasks and no later than 31 December 2015. MEN UB commenced its
liquidation on 1 October.
74. At the time of its liquidation, MENUB had 129 personnel (90 international
staff, 11 United Nations Volunteers and 28 national staff). Its liquidation was based
on the following timeline: (a) end of electoral o bservation activities by 28 October;
(b) submission of the final electoral observation report by 28 October; (c) closing of
the regional offices by 30 October; (d) submission of the draft report of the
Secretary-General to Headquarters by 16 November; (e) end of substantive activities
by 30 November; (f) MENUB closing ceremony by 30 November (conducted on
17 November); (g) departure of substantive staff (except some members of the
liquidation team) between 1 and 10 December; and (h) completion of liquidati on
activities by 31 December.
75. The placement of international staff at other duty stations is ongoing and will
continue through the Department of Field Support beyond December 2015. Given
the limited job opportunities in Burundi, MENUB has been working closely with
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes to absorb national staff.
76. Most of the heavy equipment and vehicles procured under the relevant systems
contracts have been transferred to the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Other equipment in good
condition will be transferred either to particular United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes or to other United Nations missions in accordance with United Nations
rules and regulations. Some vehicles have been disposed of locally, either through
sale to interested United Nations agencies or through commercial sale. Prefabricated
buildings and ablution units have been handed over to the relevant landlords of the
Bujumbura site.
77. The liquidation of MENUB has been carried out simultaneously with reporting
activities and operations. This, along with the departure of key staff to other duty
stations, has posed challenges to the Mission. However, with the administrative and
resource support of the Global Service Centre liquidation team, the Regional
Service Centre and MONUSCO, MENUB Mission Support has been able to support
the Mission’s operations and to complete the liquidation process in a timely and
efficient manner.

15-21796

15/17

S/2015/985

V. Observations
78. Elections represent a critical juncture in the democratic processes of any
country, particularly countries in post-conflict situations. As underlined in the
MENUB and EAC observation statements, despite peaceful polling days and the
adequate operational management provided by the electoral authorities, the
conditions were not in place for the 2015 electoral process in Burundi to be credible
and transparent. I urge the Government of Burundi to work with and support the
electoral authorities in creating the conditions for free, fair, transparent and credible
elections in the future. I also urge the Government to pursue reconciliation efforts
and enact the legal reforms needed to achieve that objective. Some of the options
for legal reforms are underlined in the MENUB final observation report, which will
be published separately.
79. I am deeply troubled by the continued suspension of independent and private
media. Besides the holding of regular free and fair elections, freedom of expression
and of the media is an important measure of the maturity of a democratic system.
Independent and private media have been prevented from broadcasting for almost
six months. National and international independent journalists continue to be
prevented from carrying out their basic duties. Many of them have fled the country
for security reasons. Some have been arrested, brutalized, tortured or killed. The
absence of pluralism in the media has created room for rumours to spread in an
already tense and charged environment. It is vital that the Government take the
necessary steps to allow the private and independent media to operate freely in
Burundi. In cases in which judicial proceedings have been initiated against private
and independent radio stations, I urge the Government to finalize those proceedings
expeditiously in compliance with relevant Burundian laws and international obligations
related to the media, particularly the freedoms of opinion and expression.
80. Regrettably, the legacy of the Arusha Agreement and the political an d
developmental progress that Burundi has enjoyed over the past 15 years have come
dangerously close to unravelling. The country’s peacebuilding gains have been
eroded in many areas. I appeal to the Government of Burundi and the opposition to
make every effort to return the country to the path of peace and economic and social
development for the sake of its people and the region as a whole. An inclusive and
genuine dialogue with all national stakeholders must be convened without further
delay to find a durable settlement to the crisis. The United Nations stands ready to
support all efforts for the peaceful resolution of political differences in the country.
On 9 November, I appointed Jamal Benomar as my Special Adviser. He will work
closely with the Government of Burundi, countries in the region and international
partners to ensure a coordinated approach to ending the simmering conflict in
Burundi. In addition, pursuant to Security Council resolution 2248 (2015), a team
will soon be deployed to the country to support that effort.
81. I deplore the serious violations of human rights and the increased violence that
have forced hundreds of thousands of Burundians into exile and into refugee camps,
while hundreds more have been killed. I strongly condemn all acts of violence,
human rights violations and abuses by all sides, including extrajudicial killings,
targeted assassinations and torture. I call for an end to all forms of violence and
urge the Government of Burundi to hold accountable and bring to justice all those
responsible for violations of Burundian law and international human rights and
humanitarian law. The Government of Burundi must address impunity in all its
facets in accordance with its international obligations.

16/17

15-21796

S/2015/985

82. All public statements by those within and outside the country inciting violence
or hatred towards different groups in Burundian society must stop immediately. The
continuation of ultimatums, rhetoric and inflammatory speeches by government
officials, leaders of the opposition, civil society organizations and other parties will
only continue to fuel tensions and bring Burundi closer to the brink of civil war.
Both the Government and the opposition should deplore and condemn such
language.
83. Finally, I would like to thank Issaka Souna, the Officer-in-Charge of MENUB,
for his leadership and relentless efforts to accomplish its mandate under very
difficult circumstances and uncertainties. My appreciation goes also to all MENUB
staff who served with determination and courage to fulfil the Miss ion’s mandate.

15-21796

17/17
