United Nations

A/RES/61/141

General Assembly

Distr.: General
30 January 2007

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 60 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2006
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/61/437 and Corr.1)]

61/141. Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for
Social Development and of the twenty-fourth special
session of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Recalling the World Summit for Social Development, held at Copenhagen
from 6 to 12 March 1995, and the twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly entitled “World Summit for Social Development and beyond: achieving
social development for all in a globalizing world”, held at Geneva from 26 June to
1 July 2000,
Reaffirming that the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and the
Programme of Action 1 and the further initiatives for social development adopted by
the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth special session, 2 as well as a continued
global dialogue on social development issues, constitute the basic framework for the
promotion of social development for all at the national and international levels,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration 3 and the development
goals contained therein, as well as the commitments made at major United Nations
summits, conferences and special sessions, including the commitments made at the
2005 World Summit, 4
Recalling also its resolution 60/209 of 22 December 2005 on the implementation
of the first United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (1997–2006),
Recalling further its resolution 57/270 B of 23 June 2003 on the integrated and
coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic and social fields,
Emphasizing the need to enhance the role of the Commission for Social
Development in the follow-up and review of the World Summit for Social

_______________
1
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
2
Resolution S-24/2, annex.
3
See resolution 55/2.
4
See resolution 60/1.

06-50289

A/RES/61/141

Development and the outcome of the twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 5

2.
Welcomes the reaffirmation by Governments of their will and
commitment to continue implementing the Copenhagen Declaration on Social
Development and the Programme of Action,1 in particular to eradicate poverty,
promote full and productive employment and foster social integration to achieve
stable, safe and just societies for all;
Recognizes that the implementation of the Copenhagen commitments and
3.
the attainment of the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals, are mutually reinforcing and that the Copenhagen
commitments are crucial to a coherent people-centred approach to development;
Reaffirms that the Commission for Social Development continues to have
4.
the primary responsibility for the follow-up and review of the World Summit for
Social Development and the outcome of the twenty-fourth special session of the
General Assembly and that it serves as the main United Nations forum for an
intensified global dialogue on social development issues, and calls upon Member
States, the relevant specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations system and civil society to enhance their support for its work;
Recognizes that the broad concept of social development affirmed by the
5.
World Summit for Social Development and the twenty-fourth special session of the
General Assembly has been weakened in national and international policymaking
and that, while poverty eradication is a central part of development policy and
discourse, further attention should be given to the other commitments agreed to at
the Summit, in particular those concerning employment and social integration,
which have also suffered from a general disconnect between economic and social
policymaking;
Acknowledges that the first United Nations Decade for the Eradication of
6.
Poverty (1997–2006), launched after the World Summit for Social Development, has
provided the long-term vision for sustained and concerted efforts at the national and
international levels to eradicate poverty, and recognizes that the implementation of
the commitments made by Governments during the Decade has fallen short of
expectations;
Emphasizes that the major United Nations conferences and summits,
7.
including the Millennium Summit and the 2005 World Summit, have reinforced the
priority and urgency of poverty eradication within the United Nations development
agenda;
Also emphasizes that poverty eradication policies should attack poverty
8.
by addressing its root and structural causes and manifestations, and that equity and
the reduction of inequalities need to be incorporated in those policies;
Stresses that an enabling environment is a critical precondition for
9.
achieving equity and social development and that, while economic growth is
essential, entrenched inequality and marginalization are an obstacle to the broadbased and sustained growth required for sustainable, inclusive people-centred
development, and recognizes the need to balance and ensure complementarity
_______________
5

2

A/61/99.

A/RES/61/141

between measures to achieve growth and measures to achieve economic and social
equity in order for there to be an impact on overall poverty levels;
10. Also stresses that policies and programmes designed to achieve poverty
eradication should include specific measures to foster social integration, including
by providing marginalized socio-economic sectors and groups with equal access to
opportunities and social protection;
11. Reaffirms that social integration policies should seek to reduce
inequalities, promote access to basic social services, education for all and health
care, increase the participation and integration of social groups, particularly youth,
older persons and persons with disabilities, and address the challenges posed by
globalization and market-driven reforms to social development in order for all
people in all countries to benefit from globalization;
12. Recognizes the need to promote respect for all human rights and
fundamental freedoms in order to address the most pressing social needs of people
living in poverty, including through the design and development of appropriate
mechanisms to strengthen and consolidate democratic institutions and governance;
13. Reaffirms the commitment to the empowerment of women and gender
equality and to strengthening policies and programmes that improve, ensure and
broaden the full participation of women in all spheres of political, economic, social
and cultural life, as equal partners, and to improving their access to all resources
needed for the full exercise of all their human rights and fundamental freedoms by
removing persistent barriers;
14. Welcomes the ministerial declaration, adopted at the high-level segment
of the substantive session of 2006 of the Economic and Social Council, on “Creating
an environment at the national and international levels conducive to generating full
and productive employment and decent work for all, and its impact on sustainable
development”; 6
15. Reaffirms that there is an urgent need to create an environment at the
national and international levels that is conducive to the attainment of full and
productive employment and decent work for all as a foundation for sustainable
development and that an environment that supports investment, growth and
entrepreneurship is essential to the creation of new job opportunities, and also
reaffirms that opportunities for men and women to obtain productive work in
conditions of freedom, equity, security and human dignity are essential to ensuring
the eradication of hunger and poverty, the improvement of economic and social
well-being for all, the achievement of sustained economic growth and sustainable
development of all nations and a fully inclusive and equitable globalization;
16. Also reaffirms the commitment to employment policies that promote full
and productive employment and decent work for all under conditions of equity,
equality, security and dignity, and further reaffirms that employment creation should
be incorporated into macroeconomic policies;
17. Further reaffirms the commitments made in respect of “Meeting the
special needs of Africa” at the 2005 World Summit, 7 underlines the call of the
Economic and Social Council for enhanced coordination within the United Nations
_______________
6
See A/61/3, chap. III, para. 50. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first
Session, Supplement No. 3.
7
See resolution 60/1, para. 68.

3

A/RES/61/141

system and the ongoing efforts to harmonize the current initiatives on Africa, and
requests the Commission for Social Development to continue to give due
prominence in its work to the social dimensions of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development; 8
18. Reaffirms that each country has the primary responsibility for its own
economic and social development and that the role of national policies and
development strategies cannot be overemphasized, and underlines the importance of
adopting effective measures, including new financial mechanisms, as appropriate, to
support the efforts of developing countries to achieve sustained economic growth,
sustainable development, poverty eradication and the strengthening of their
democratic systems;
19. Also reaffirms, in this context, that international cooperation has an
essential role in assisting developing countries, including the least developed
countries, in strengthening their human, institutional and technological capacity;
20. Stresses that the international community shall enhance its efforts to
create an enabling environment for social development and poverty eradication
through increasing market access for developing countries, technology transfer on
mutually agreed terms, financial aid and a comprehensive solution to the external
debt problem;
21. Acknowledges that good governance and the rule of law at the national
and international levels are essential for sustained economic growth, sustainable
development and the eradication of poverty and hunger;
22. Urges developed countries that have not yet done so in accordance with
their commitments, to make concrete efforts towards meeting the targets of
0.7 per cent of their gross national product for official development assistance to
developing countries and 0.15 to 0.2 per cent of their gross national product to least
developed countries, and encourages developing countries to build on the progress
achieved in ensuring that official development assistance is used effectively to help
meet development goals and targets;
23. Welcomes the contribution to the mobilization of resources for social
development by the initiatives on a voluntary basis taken by groups of Member
States based on innovative financing mechanisms, including those that aim to
provide further drug access at affordable prices to developing countries on a
sustainable and predictable basis, such as the International Drug Purchase Facility,
UNITAID, as well as other initiatives, such as the International Finance Facility for
Immunisation, and notes the New York Declaration of 20 September 2004, which
launched the Action against Hunger and Poverty initiative and called for further
attention to raise funds urgently needed to help meet the Millennium Development
Goals and to complement and ensure long-term stability and predictability to
foreign aid;
24. Reaffirms that social development requires the active involvement of all
actors in the development process, including civil society organizations,
corporations and small businesses, and that partnerships among all relevant actors
are increasingly becoming part of national and international cooperation for social
development, and also reaffirms that, within countries, partnerships among the

_______________
8

4

A/57/304, annex.

A/RES/61/141

Government, civil society and the private sector can contribute effectively to the
achievement of social development goals;
25. Underlines the responsibility of the private sector, at both the national
and the international levels, including small and large companies and transnational
corporations, regarding not only the economic and financial but also the
development, social, gender and environmental implications of their activities, their
obligations towards their workers and their contributions to achieving sustainable
development, including social development, and emphasizes the need to take
concrete actions on corporate responsibility and accountability, including through
the participation of all relevant stakeholders, inter alia, for the prevention or
prosecution of corruption;
26. Invites the Secretary-General, the Economic and Social Council, the
regional commissions, the relevant specialized agencies, funds and programmes of
the United Nations system and other intergovernmental forums, within their
respective mandates, to continue to integrate into their work programmes and give
priority attention to the Copenhagen commitments and the Declaration on the tenth
anniversary of the World Summit for Social Development, 9 to continue to be
actively involved in their follow-up and to monitor the achievement of those
commitments and undertakings;
27. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session
the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for
Social Development and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly”, and requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the question to
the Assembly at that session.
81st plenary meeting
19 December 2006

_______________
9
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 6 (E/2005/26), chap. I,
sect. A; see also Economic and Social Council decision 2005/234.

5
