th
MEETING: 8 JULY 1967

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1365/Rev. 1) . . . , . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Statement by the President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . a . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902);

1

Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907);
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/79 IO);
Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics addressed to the’ President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military action by Israel and
withdrawal of the Israel forces from those parts of the territory of the United
Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of an
aggression” (S/7967);

6

Letter dated 8 July 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Arab
Republic addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8043);
Letter dated 8 July 1967 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/8044) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

<,’

S/PV. 1365 .“-

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol $1. . ,) are non itally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FIFTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Saturday, 8 JuIy 1967, at 6 p.m.
Presideni: Mr. Endalkachew MAKONNEN

(Ethiopia).

distributed in document S/8043. Shortly afterwards I
received a letter from the representative of Israel requesting
an urgent meeting of the Security Council. That letter has
been reproduced and circulated in document S/8044.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan; Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

3. On receipt of that information I immediately undertook consultations with all the members of the Council in
order to fix a time for the meeting. It is in accordance with
the results of these consultations that I have convened this
meeting.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l365/Rev.l)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
Adoption of the Agenda

2. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).

4. The PRESIDENT:
The provisional agenda for this
afternoon’s meeting is before the Security Council in
document S/Agenda/l365/Rev.l,
If there is no objection, I
shall take it that the agenda is adopted.

3. Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).

5, Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President, you have just told
the Council that the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Republic, Mr. El Kony, has addressed a letter
to you (S/80431 requesting that an emergency session of
the Council should be convened to consider the question of
a violation by Israel forces of the cease-fire decision. In
your consultations with members of the Security Council,
including the Soviet delegation, you indicated that the
intention was to convene an urgent meeting of the Security
Council, specifically in connexion with the request by the
representative of the United Arab Republic.

4. Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910).
5. Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military
action by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces
from those parts of the territory of the United Arab
Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as
the result of an aggression” (S/7967).

6. May I remind you that in our conversation with you we
gave our consent specifically in connexion with this request
by the United Arab Republic, and agreed with you that an
emergency meeting of the Security Council should be held
at 6 p.m. today, as indeed has happened. But in spite of all
this, the provisional agenda for the 1365th meeting of the
Security Council-that is, document S/Agenda/l365/Rev.l,
to which you have referred-contains every imaginable
thing except the actual request by the Permanent Representative of the United Arab Republic for an urgent
meeting of the Security Council to consider a specific and
definite question, namely, a violation by Israel forces of the
cease-fire decision.

Statement by the President

1. The PRESIDENT: This morning at about 11 o’clock I
received a telephone communication
from the representative of the United Arab Republic informing me that he
had received instructions from his Government to request
an urgent meeting of the Security Council. At about 12
noon the representative of Israel called me on the telephone
to inform me that his Government likewise had instructed
him to request an urgent meeting of the Security Council.

7. In this connexion, Mr. President, we should like to ask
you a question. Why is a completely different agenda being
submitted to us, and why is there no reference to the
request by the United Arab Republic on the substance of
the question which we have been convened to consider
today?

2. This afternoon I received a letter from the representative of the United Arab Republic requesting an
emergency meeting of the Council. This letter has now been
1

8. As we see it, our agenda should be very simple. It
should contain one item-letter
dated 8 July 1967 from the
Permanent. Representative of the United Arab Republic
addressed to the President of the Security Council
[s/8043/,
requesting a meeting to consider the question of
a violation of the Security Council’s cease-fire decision by
Israel forces.

to the history of a question and, if you are going to go into
the history, you should have some reason for starting al a
given point. We should, in fact, think of history in terms of
periods. In other words, the question to which we have
devoted many meetings has a long history; and, to be
logical, one should trace this history back to a much earlier
period than that which begins with item 2: “Letter dated
23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of
Canada and Denmark addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7902)“. You and I are well awarethat
the history of the matter does not by any means begin tit11
this letter. This is only one of the episodes. So then, when
speaking of tradition, one should also remember logic and
the facts of history. This would take US very far afield, and
I hardly think that we need to engage, here and now in the
Security Council, in historical investigations. Accordingly,
Mr. President, I should like to draw your attention to the
fact that we have been convened today, as you have been
kind enough to tell us, to consider a specific matter relating
to a request which the United Arab Republic has made for
a quite definite reason.

9. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the attention
of the representative of the Soviet Union to the statement I
made at the beginning of the meeting. In that statement I
attempted to give a full description of and full information
on the way in which requests were made for a meeting of
the Security Council this evening. I said that I had done my
very best to follow the traditions of the Council in
contacting other members of the Council and getting their
advice and views on the time of the meeting, and so on. I
do not think I left anything out; I think that all the
information on the point was contained in that statement.
10. With regard to the provisional agenda contained in
document S/Agenda/l36.5/Rev.l,
I should like to say this: I
approved that agenda in accordance with rule 7 of the
Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure. That rule
states, in part, that:

15. Secondly, as is well known, several meetings have been
held already on the items listed in the provisional agenda.
Draft resolutions of various kinds have been considered and
put to the vote, and a situation ‘has arisen which, if I may
say so, has obliged us now to seek other waysof devising a
more fruitful solution to the problem. It is hardly necessary
for me to recount what happened when we left this table
and moved to another conference room to discuss the
problem at the General Assembly’s fifth emergency special
session.

“The provisional agenda for each meeting of the
Security Council shall be drawn up by the SecretaryGeneral and approved by the President of the Security
Council.”
I approved the agenda in document S/Agenda/l365/Rev.l
for two main reasons. First, the items appearing on it are
the i’tems before the Council. It is, of course, for the
Council to dispose of them as it wishes. However, so long as
they are inscribed as items, they are before the Council.
Secondly, the two communications-one
from the delegation of the United Arab Republic [S/8043/, and the
other from the delegation of Israel [S/8044/ -that have led
to the meeting today arise out of the items already
inscribed on the Council’s agenda.

16. Consequently, there is no reason now to revert to all
these questions. It was not for this that the Council was
convened today. We cannot now allow ourselves to be
distracted by other problems. We must concentrate our
attention on a specific matter-a violation of the Security
Council’s decision calling for a cease-fire.
17. Thirdly, as you will I hope have noted, the last part of
Ambassador El Kony’s letter of 8 July [S/8043/ contains a
sentence stating that “upon instructions from my Government, I have the honour to request that an emergency
session of the Security Council be convened” on the very
question referred to in his letter.

11. At the same time, I have taken very great care to
inform
the Security Council that those two communications are before it, in just the same way as the other
items that have not yet been disposed of. Hence, in my
view, these two items have the same standing as the other
items and are inseparably related to the provisional agenda
for this meeting, as preparbd by the Secretary-General and
approved by me.

18. Consequently, Mr. President, we should like to say
again that we do not see any reason, on the basis of what
you have described as “tradition”, to include in the agenda
a whole list of questions which could be continued
indefinitely. Our agenda should be drafted in accordance
with the request by the United Arab Republic, and
should mention the document to which we have been
referring-the letter dated 8 July by the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic, Ambassador
El Kony. This is, in fact, the subject we are to discussat the
Security Council’s emergency or extraordinary meeting.

12. I have said what I have only by way of explaining why
the Secretary-General and I have presented the provisional
agenda as it now stands. I wish to make it absolutely clear
that the matter of approving the agenda is in the hands of
the Council.
13. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Thank you, Mr. President, for the clarification you have given. But I shouId
Iike to make some comments on this point.

19. The PRESIDENT: The Soviet representative has referred to my use of the word “tradition”, Perhaps he has not
quite correctly understood the sense in which I used tllat
word. I did not use it in connexion with any action that has
to be taken in strict accordance with the rules of procedure.

14. First, you have referred to tradition. The idea of
tradition is, if I may say so, very elastic. Tradition is related
2

Obviously, there are certain matters where the rules strictly
apply; there are other matters such as the one to which I
referred-namely, that of consulting members before a
meeting takes place-where there is undoubtedly a tradition. Perhaps one should use some word other than
“tradition”, but there is this practice of consulting members. This is only to try and determine the correct and
appropriate conditions on the basis of which the Security
Council can best conduct its business. When I used the
word “tradition” I was referring only to the consultations
earlier today.

24. I am sure, Mr, President, that furthest from your mind
and from the mind of any member of the Council was any
intention
to prejudice anybody’s assertions about the
necessity of convening an emergency special session of the
General Assembly. We have a.ll had our say about that, and
it is not necessary to repeat that “say” here. The plain fact
of the matter is that when we last adjourned the Security
Council, several delegations, including the representative of
the United Arab Republic, Mr. El Kony, pointed out
specifically, and I quote him:

20. As regards the provisional agenda that is before the
Council, I have already drawn the attention of the Council
to the first paragraph of rule 7 of the provisional rules of
procedure, which clearly states that:

“I believe that we have a draft resolution submitted by
the United Arab Republic on 31 May [S/7919/. For the
time being, we are not going to insist upon having it put
to the vote, but I should like to say it is still before the
Security Council.” (1361st meeting, pnra. 136, /

“The provisional agenda for each meeting of the
Security Council shall be drawn up by the SecretaryGeneral and approved by the President of the Security
Council ,”

Similar statements were made both by other representatives
on the Council and by parties to the present problem.
25. Therefore, in our view, Mr. President, you have
proceeded entirely in accordance with the rules. You have
called to our attention two complaints about violations of
the cease-fire, and two requests for an emergency meeting.
You have consulted with all of us; we have agreed upon the
time of a meeting to consider urgently the complaints
about a violation of the cease-fire.

21. I approved the provisional agenda as it stands for the
two reasons that I stated before. I should like to state them
again for the sake of clarification. First, the provisional
agenda for today’s meeting is exactly the same as that of 14
June 1967, contained in document S/Agenda/l361. To my
knowledge, the Council has not in any way disposed of
these items that are before it on the same subject, namely,
the crisis in the Middle East, Secondly, the two communications that were received by me this morning, and
were circulated to members of the Council, arise out of the
same problem and situation. That is the reason why I felt
that a discussion of these two submissions within the
context of the items on the agenda, which the Council has
not disposed of, would be the best way of dealing with the
matter.

26. If we keep haggling over procedure, this meeting will
not look very much like an emergency meeting.
27. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist RepubIics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, I should
like to thank you again for your explanation. But I must
say that I am not convinced that the agenda has been
prepared correctly. The matters listed in the agenda have
already been the subject of discussion in the Security
Council. And, who knows, sooner or later, they may receive
attention from the Security Council again. We do not in the
least exclude the possibility that we may at some time
revert to one .or another of the questions listed in this
agenda.

22. But I have said before, and I repeat, that this matter
should not be a cause for controversy between the
President and members of the Council. This is in fact a
matter in the hands of the Council. It is the Council’s right
to decide which items it wishes to discuss at any meeting.
Therefore, I leave it to the Council, as is its right, to change,
add to or subtract from the items to be discussed at any
meeting. The President did what he thought best in the
light of his own understanding. But it is for the Council to
decide upon its own agenda.

28. But I ask you, Mr. President, why is there no reference
in the agenda to the request made by the United Arab
Republic in its letter of 8 July (S/8043]. Is it not for this
that we are meeting today-to consider this appeal, this
request? Is this not the cause and purpose of our meeting
today? As I see it, there simply cannot be any disagreement between us on this point. It is precisely this
which we are to discuss at the Security Council’s emergency
meeting, In that case, where is the logic?

23. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): My
delegation certainly supports the action of the SecretaryGeneral in preparing the provisional agenda, and the action
of the President in approving that provisional agenda.
Several emergency meetings have been convened with an
agenda prepared in a form identical to that of the
provisional agenda in document S/Agenda/l365/Rev.l.
Those emergency meetings have dealt with complaints
similar to the complaints we now have before us from the
representative of the United Arab Republic and the
representative of Israel about violations of the cease-fire.
We have dealt with them under the same provisional
agenda, without any change. I do not know anything that
has happened that has introduced any change into the
previous situation.

29. If we have been invited to today’s meeting of the
Security Council to consider a quite specific question, why
does it not appear on the agenda? Why does the provisional
agenda contain other questions-the letters which are listed
in the agenda-but not the question which we have been
convened to consider today? Why is this so? I must say I
find this absolutely unintelligible.
30. I would not wish at this stage to make disgressions and
to pass judgement on the person who prepared the agenda,
and how it was done. This is not the question. I would not
3

persistently since the Security Council adopted its resolutions 233 (1967),
234 (1967), 235 (1967) and
236 (1967) on the cease-fire,” [S/8043./

wish to say, either, that we are over-concerned with the
procedural aspect of the matter. Not at all. But this is a
matter of substance, because it is precisely for this that we
have come to the Security Council. We come here because
of a request made by the United Arab Republic concerning
a violation by Israel forces of the Security Council’s
cease-fire resolution and we find that this question does not
appear on the agenda. What would your reaction be, Mr.
President, if you or your country had addressed a similar
request to the Security Council, and if you took your seat
and discovered that the agenda contained no mention of
the very request which you had addressed to the Security
Council?

Thus, the United Arab Republic is asking for a discussion
on a violation, one specific violation, of the cease-fire, as
indeed my colleague from the Soviet Union pointed out a
moment ago.
36. Now let us look at the provisional agenda which has
been submitted to us today. Item 2 is a letter dated 23 May
1967 when, as you will remember, the aggression had not
yet taken place. Item 3 is a letter dated 27 May 1967 from
the representative of the United Arab Republic, entitled
“Israel aggressive policy, its repeated aggression”-there is
no question of a violation-“threatening
peace and security
in the Middle East and endangering international peace and
security”; and the aptness of this title was subsequently
confirmed by Israel’s aggression. Item 4 is the letter dated
29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom addressed to the President of the Security
Council. At that time there was no question of a cease-fire,
as the aggression had not yet taken place. Item 5, similarly,
is a letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the Soviet Union, calling for a cessation
of military action by Israel, There is no question here,
either, of a violation of the cease-fire.

31. This is why we are asking you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Council, why is it that the agenda does not
include this item, the letter from the Permanent Representative of the United Arab Republic?
32. The PRESIDENT:
I believe I have already, at very
great length, explained the President’s understanding of the
situation. As for the communications
that have been
received from the Governments of the United Arab
Republic and Israel, through their accredited representatives here at the United Nations, it is obvious that
these two communications are before the Council and have
been distributed to the members, I have already said that
they have been distributed, respectively in documents
S/8043 and S/8044.
3 3,

37. In short, in the provisional agenda prepared by the
Secretariat and approved by you, Mr. President, there is no
question of any violation of the cease-fire, and certainly no
question of the particular violation committed this very
day. But the United Arab Republic requested that the
Council should be convened to consider the violation of the
cease-fire which has been committed today. There might, of
course, be some reference to other violations in the course
of the discussion, but the question before US now is the
violation committed today.

Mr.

T ARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
Mr. President, we are quite sure that when you
approved the provisional agenda drafted by the Secretariat,
you were indeed intending to include the discussion of the
letter from the representative of the United Arab Republic
which is the subject of this afternoon’s meeting. But 110~
that we have come to the meeting, we see that the item on
which the United Arab Republic has requested a discussion
does not appear on the provisional agenda prepared by the
Secretariat.

Fremh):

38. We note that the letter from the representative of
Israel [S/8044/ also requests that the question of the
violation of the cease-fire should be discussed today.

34. It is quite clear, of course, that the Security Council,
like all United Nations bodies, is master of its procedure
and consequently of its agenda, It can alter the agenda with
the co-operation of the President or on its own initiative.
But, Mr, President, may I remind you that when you
telephoned me early this afternoon, you told me that there
was a letter from the United Arab Republic requesting an
emergency meeting of the Security Council, and I think we
agreed that the matter raised by the representative of the
United Arab Republic, in the letter he sent you after his
telephone call, was a violation of the cease-fire.

39. I believe, therefore, that we should take the letter
from the United Arab Republic into ‘consideration in the
discussion on Israel’s violation of the cease-fire, or that this
letter should at least be placed within the context of the
discussion. But I repeat that, since this letter asks for a
discussion on the question of the violation of the cease-fire
(which has not hitherto been discussed by the Security
Council as an item on its agenda, though it may of course
have been discussed in statements by representatives here or
in some other context) that is to say, the particular
violation committed today which has not yet been discussed, I believe that the letter from the United Arab
Republic should, contrary to the views expressed by certain
speakers, appear on the agenda as the document requesting
that the Security Council should be convened to consider
the particular violation of the cease-fire which has been
committed today, and even to consider violations of the
cease-fire in general. I believe that this could be done quite
easily by adding to the agenda a reference to the letter from
the United Arab Republic, which has requested that this
question should be discussed by the Security Council. I

35. A few minutes ago we heard the representative of the
United States telling us-and this is why I asked to
speak-that he agreed with you and the Secretariat that the
provisional agenda which the latter had prepared dealt
precisely with the questions included in the letter from the
Permanent Representative of the United Arab Republic.
Let me turn, then, to the letter sent this afternoon by the
representative of the United Arab Republic. What does this
letter say? It says that there has been a violation of the
cease-fire. It says:
“This latest violation
one of a premeditated

by Israel of the cease-fire is but
series of violations carried out
4

J

believe that this could be done at once, and then we could
continue our discussion on this question,

45. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I do not
need to take the floor because the representative of
Denmark has stated exactly what I had in mind to say.

40. Mr. TABOR (Denmark): I am sorry that I have to ask
for the floor on this procedural matter, Mr. President, but
as you have clearly said, in accordance with rule 7 of the
provisional rules of procedure you have approved the
provisional agenda submitted to you by the Secretary
General, and you have submitted this provisional agenda to
the Council for approval. In doing so you stressed that we
should consider urgently the question of violation of the
cease-fire. I agree that we should consider that urgently and
I agree with the provisional agenda you have drawn up.

46. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, both you and
other speakers in their statements have referred to the
Security Council’s r&es of procedure. This is, of course, a
sound practice-to be guided by the provisional rules of
procedure in our Council. But, if such references are made,
they should be complete and objective, and not partial and
subjective.
47. One speaker who has just addressed the Council
preferred to mention rule 10. Obviously, this rule is more in
line with his own way of thinking. But for some reason he
preferred to overlook the very rule to which you referred,
Mr. President-namely rule 7. And, since you have referred
to this rule, I in turn should like to draw your attention to
the fact that the second paragraph of this rule reads as
follows:

41. However, objection has been raised to this provisional
agenda, in particular because no mention has been made of
one of the letters before the Council concerning the
violation of the cease-fire. I suppose that the decision of the
Council would have to be taken on the basis of the
provisional rules of procedure and on the basis of established practice. As far as the provisional rules of procedure
are concerned, we read in rule 10:

“Only items which have been brought to the attention
of representatives on the Security Council in accordance
with rule 6, items covered by rule 10, or matters which
the Security Council has previously decided to defer, may
be included in the provisional agenda.”

“Any item of the agenda of a meeting of the Security
Council, consideration of which has not been completed
at that meeting, shall, unless the Security Council
otherwise decides, automatically be included in the
agenda of the next meeting.”

48. So what is the picture now? The provisional agenda,
as it has now been prepared, contains only items mentioned
in the last part of the paragraph, the phrase in the last part
beginning with the words “or matters which the Security
Council has previously decided to defer”. But where are the
items which have been brought to our attention? In this
particular case, where is the item to which the United Arab
Republic has drawn attention, and to which we are drawing
attention? Where is this item?

This is exactly what you have done, Mr. President.
42. As to the practice, I may perhaps draw your attention,
Mr. President, and that of the members of the Council to
the practice which we followed during the hectic month of
June, It may be that I have set a bad precedent. If so, I
apologize, but I take the responsibility, together with ail
the members of the Council.

49, If we are to follow the rules of procedure, we must
comply strictly with these rules. You have preferred to
prepare an agenda based on the last part of the paragraph.
But this is not enough, Mr. President. Let us comply with
the rules of procedure in their entirety and include the item
which is being brought to the Council’s attention now.
Accordingly we repeat that .the letter dated 8 July
[S/8043/ from the Permanent Representative of the United
Arab Republic should be included in the agenda for the
present meeting of the Security Council.

43. During that month we took a decision calling for a
cease-fire. Unfortunately, on several occasions that ceasefire was violated. The Council received several letters in
which its attention was drawn to particular violations of the
cease-fire, and emergency meetings were called to consider
those particular violations. Never were the letters mentioned in the provisional agenda or in the agenda adopted
by the Council. No objection was raised. I do not have aI
the examples before me, but I shall just take one example:
a letter dated 10 June 1967 [S/7970/ from the Permanent
Representative of the USSR, in which he asked for an
immediate meeting of the Security Council to consider the
question of “the flagrant violation by Israel of the Security
Council’s decisions calling for the cessation of military
activities”. If I remember correctly, that letter was not
included in the agenda. The agenda was identical with the
one we have before us today. No objection wasraised to it
and we discussed, of course, the question of the violation of
the cease-fire, I agree with the representative of the Soviet
Union that we have to concentrate on that question, the
violation of the cease-fire, as you, Mr. President, so rightly
said in your introductory remarks.

50. Now, Mr, President, with regard to certain references
to the past, particularly those made by our colleague
Ambassador Tabor, I should like to point out that, when
we bring a matter to the attention of the Security CO~C&
we decide which letter should be included in the agenda,
and which does not need to be included. And the matter to
which our colleague from Denmark is referring wasentirely
within the context of our meetings; and there was no
special need, at least in our view, to include it in the
agenda. So this is no reason for referring to earlier practices.
It is no reason for transforming a past fact into some kind
of precedent in order to support one’s own point of view.
Let us decide ourselves when a given request or letter
should be included, and when it should not. Each of US has
a right to do this.

44. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of the United States.
5

5 1. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): We have met here on
an urgent basis, and it does not behove us to spend time on
procedural matters. Procedure is important, and I agree
with the representative of the Soviet Union that it
sometimes touches the heart of the substance, Nevertheless,
at this moment what we need to do urgently is to consider
grave violations of the cease-fire imposed by this Council.

representatives of Lebanon, Iraq, Morocco, Saudi Arabia,
Kuwait, Tunisia, Libya and Pakistan to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber in
order to participate, without vote, in the Council’s discus.
sion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. Rafael (Israel),
Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. G. J.
Tomeh (Syria) and Mr. M. H. El-Farra (Jordan) took places
at the Council table, and Mr. G. Hakim (Lebanon), Mr- A,
Pachachi
(Iraq),
Mr. A. T. Benhima (Morocco),
Mr. J. M. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia), Mr. R. Al-Rashid
(Kuwait), Mr;M. Mestiri (Tunisia), Mr. W. El Bouri (Libya)
and Mr. A. Shahi (Pakistan) took the places reserved for
them.

52. I would therefore suggest that documents S/8043 and
S/8044 be added to our agenda. It is of course understood
that we are not trying to move questions from the General
Assembly to the Security Council. The Assembly is still
discussing the item before it, and consideration here in the
Council of violations of the cease-fire should not prejudice
the competence of the Assembly.
53. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of India has
formally moved that the letters from the representatives of
the United Arab Republic and Israel contained, respectively, in documents S/8043 and S/8044, should be
included in the agenda. Is there any objection to that
motion? There being no objection, J declare those two
documents inscribed on the agenda.

55. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now resume its
consideration of the items inscribed on its agenda. Before I
call on the first speaker, I give the floor to the SecretaryGeneral, who has expressed the wish to make a statement.
56. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
It is a matter of great
regret to me that I am not in a position to provide the
members of the Council with the needed information about
the reports of a new outbreak of fighting today, 8 July
1967, between the armed forces of Israel and of the United
Arab Republic in the Suez Canal sector, information which
would be based on observations and investigations by
United Nations observers. I was similarly unable to give the
Council any information about the previously reported
fighting in the Canal sector on 1 July as called to the
attention of the Council in the letters asserting violations
and breaches of the cease-fire presented by the Permanent
Representatives of the United Arab Republic, in document
S/8025, and of Israel, in document S/8026. The members
of the Council will realize, of course, the reason for my
inability to give them such information. As I reported to
the Council on 4 July 1967 in document S/7930/Add.19,
paragraph 3, no United Nations mihtary observers are
stationed in the Suez area, and therefore I receive no
verified information about hostile activities there.

The agenda, as revised, was adopted.
Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902);
Complaint
of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (S/7907);
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910);
Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military action
by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces from those
parts of the territory of the United Arab Republic,
Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of
an aggression” (S/7967);

57. The Council’s resolution adopted on 12 June 1967,
resolution 236 (1967), relating exclusively to the cease-fire
between Israel and Syria, in its paragraph 5 explicitly
invoked the assistance of the Chief of Staff of UNTSO and
the UNTSO military observers in the implementation of the
cease-fire it had demanded, The Council’s resolution of 9
June 1967, resolution 235 (1967), also relating to the
cease-fire between Israel and Syria, in its paragraph 3
invoked the assistance of the Secretary-General in achieving
compliance of the parties with the cease-fire.Unlike those
two resolutions, however, the Security Council’s general
cease-fire resolutions of 6 and 7 June 1967, resolutions 233
(1967) and 234 (1967), which are applicable to the
cease-fire between Israel and the United Arab Republic,
request the Secretary-General to keep the Council informed
about the situation, but make no provision for mY
assistance with regard to implementation of the cease-fire.

Letter dated 8 July 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/8043);
Letter dated 8 July 1967 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8044)

54. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, I shall now, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Israel,
the United Arab Republic, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Jordan to take places at the Council table, and the

58. Realizing that I could not discharge my reporting
responsibility under these latter two resolutions without
any means of obtaining reliable information, and, more
important, that a cease-fire without any observation or
6

Israel fl,XCS
meeting. This morning, at 10.15, local time% air-t of Purt
again attacked our forces in the soutllern
l?
Fouad with heavy artillery, and bolnbarded
*md destrQYed
control stations for navigation on the carlal :tt El Tilfa,
Ras EI’Ish and El Kap. Moreover, the erlerny 1laS t~lJ~rl~(l
fire from the eastern bank of the ~a11d c)11 lje:tvily
populated areas on the western bank,
call alo116 tile i\nQ
between El Kantara and Ras El’Ish.

policing assistance in its implementation
is inevitably
vulnerable, I decided on 4 July to take an initiative towards
a possible alleviation of this situation. On that date I
undertook two exploratory talks. In an afternoon meeting
with Mr. Mahmoud Fawzi, Deputy Prime Minister of the
United Arab Republic, I inquired of him what the reaction
of his Government would likely be to a suggestion from me
that United Nations military observers might be stationed
in the sector of the Suez Canal where there is now
confrontation between the armed forces of the United Arab
Republic and those of Israel. Such observers, of course,
would have to be stationed on both sides, as has been done
in the sector where the forces of Israel and Syria are in
confrontation. This, I explained, would be especially
necessaryif the Secretary-General is to be enabled to fulfil
his reporting responsibilities under Security Council resolutions 233 (1967) and 234 (1967) of 6 and 7 June 1967.
Mr. Fawzi advised me that he would bring this idea to the
attention of his Government and obtain their reaction to it.
Immediately following the meeting with Mr. Fawzi I had a
similar discussion with Foreign Minister Abba Eban of
Israel and advanced the same suggestion to him. The
Foreign Minister also assured me that he would seek
his Government’s reaction to this idea,

65. This additional wanton aggression by krd
is ir~dic~~*
tive in the sense that for the first time since tile cease-fire
orders of the Secutity Council, Israel air forces have t;lken
part in the operation and in&aoriminately
bo&arded
heavily populated areas, causing Immarl
suffering
and
damage to property, w&out any provocation
dlatsoever.
Because of the mere fact that the Israel air forces took part
in this latest aggression, the Israel authorities
C~III
no lOlWr
deny that they have violated, as they have previo1fsly,
the
resolutions of the Security Council. Even the representtztive
of Israel cannot this time deny, as he always has dOIle, that
they have planned and committed this unprovoked
aggression, since his own sources have ;rlready freely admitted
the
participation of Israel Mirage planes in the bombardment
of
the areas I have mentioned.

59. As of now, I have had no word about the reaction of
either Government to this suggestion, which I consider to
be constructive and helpful in the light of the prevailing
circumstances and in the reporting context of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

66. It should be clear by now that by this action hrnel
iS
determined to escalate the military operations
in the Middle
East, thus increasing tension and contributing
to the
deterioration of a situation which is already fraught with aI1
the symptoms of a threat to the peace and security of the
whole world.

60. If it should be agreed that United Nations observers
should proceed to Sinai and the Suez sector, this could be
quickly done, according to information from the Chief of
Staff, General Bull, within his present observer strength,
but it would be necessary to increase the number of
observersavailable to him at a very early date thereafter.

67. ‘Basing oneself on the persistent behaviour
of lsrucl,
and the volume and scope of its latest violations
of the
cease-fire orders, one cannot but draw
the inevitable
conclusion that it is an over-all scheme supported
imd
encouraged by certain Powers which would like to inffalne
the Middle East to such a point that nobody
could reiiily
visualize its disastrous and far-reaching impact
on international peace and security.

61. The PRESIDENT: I wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement. I now call upon the first speaker
XI my list, the representative of the United Arab Republic.

68. The Security Council, which is the principal
organ,
according to the Charter, responsible for the maintenance
of peace and security, cannot condone
such nggressivc
actions of a so-called Member State which claims that its
security is imperilled while the truth of the matter
is that
the security not only of the countries in the Middle
East,
but even of all other nations as well, would
be in real
jeopardy if the Israel Government were allowed
to continue
to challenge this world Organization
and to defy international public opinion by its continuous
disregard
of and
disrespect for the various resolutions
of this iInportant
body.

62. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): Mr. President,
I would like to express to you, and to the members of the
Security Council, my thanks for your prompt action in
convening an urgent meeting of the Council to act up.on the
contents of the letter which I have already communicated
to you regarding the latest aggression of Israel and its
multiple violations of the cease-fire resolutions of the
Security Council.
53. Before proceeding any further, let me say that I owe
IOUand my colleagues around the Council table an apology
‘or disturbing your weekend; but, as is clear from the letter
vhich I sent you this morning, a grave situation has
developedas a result of a premeditated aggression by Israel
brces against civilian-populated areas and against United
lrab Republic forces on the banks of the Suez Canal.

69. The purpose and intent of the Israel
autlloritics’
*.benavlour
*
a not neea,4 on my part, any elaboration
cto
or
proof-especially
if the members of the
CoLlncil
are
cognizant of the policies of the Israel authorities,
wllicll :lre
timed at disturbing international peace. Mr, Ebarl stilted in
of a struggle and
Tel Aviv: “we are still in the beginning
tension must not be relaxed”. I am sure that a]1 of us
cannot but draw the conclusion that Israel is still determined to carry out its aggressive designs.

54, In connexion with the suggestion of our Secretaryleneral, mentioned just now by him, may I refer the
Council to the letter by which J requested this emergency
7

70. Such a statement cannot be ignored or overlooked
because it reflects the true aim of Israel. That statement is,
in our opinion, not an isolated one, but should be taken in
conjunction with similar statements and actions by the Israel
authorities. They are sufficient to prove that Israel, bent on
aggression and expansion and encouraged by certain
Western Powers, is trying to implement a very-well-planned
s&eme for disturbing peace in the area.

77. It may be that Israel has interpreted the most
unfortunate inaction of the General Assembly in checking
the aggression and condemning the aggressor as an open
invitation for it to continue to disregard all ethics of
international behaviour. It would be most unfortunate,
indeed, if the United Nations, either in the General
Assembly or in the Security Council, were not able to take
serious and decisive action against the aggressor who,
because of his ruthless behaviour a; d the support of certain
Western Governments, above all the United States, is
endangering the very existence of this world Organization
as an effective instrument for establishing and maintaining
international order.

71. No one can really suggest that Israel, which professes
its peaceful intentions, could alone continue to commit all
these aggressions, flouting international public opinion,
disregarding the orders of the Security Council and coming
out repeatedly and openly with such aggressive and
provocative statements, unless there were an unprecedented
collusion between Israel and certain Powers which hypocritically are trying to remain disguised. In this respect it is
painful to recall the participation of the United States and
the United Kingdom Governments in the infamous Israel
aggression of 5 June.

78. For the preceding reasons, I feel that it is incumbent
upon me to draw the attention of the Security Council to
the grave situation resulting from the Israel aggression, with
which we hope the Council will cope unhesitatingly, in
condemning Israel and calling upon it to desist from further
provocation and aggression.

72. It is not conceivable that Israel on various occasions
could challenge world public opinion unless it was sure that
it was acting in consonance with instructions from and in
agreement with those same Powers which have acted,
visibly and invisibly, in support of Israel during the military
operations which started on 5 June 1967 and even after the
adoption by the Security Council of the various resolutions
on the cease-fire.

79. The Council should not, in our opinion, adjourn
before coming to a conclusive decision dealing once and for
all with the repeated violations by Israel of the various
resolutions of the Security Council on the cease-fire, and in
particular Security Council resolutions 236 (1967).
80. It is abundantly clear that as long as Israel armed
forces occupy the territories of Arab countries, there are
bound to be such violations of the cease-fire resolutions of
the Security Council as have taken place in the last
twenty-four hours and before. In this connexion, and by
way of precaution, I ask leave to mention to the Council
the not unprecedented possibility of Israel claiming that it
was the United Arab Republic which perpetrated those
actions. This, I beg to repeat, I am mentioning by way of
precaution.

73. To illustrate this, it is germane to refresh the memories
of the members of the Council by quoting the following
statement of Mr. Eban: “If the General Assembly votes
w%h a majority of 121, Israel will not heed world public
opinion as represented in the Assembly”.
74. In this connexion, no one can logically argue that
Israel was not encouraged by the United States even to
flout the unanimous decision of the General Assembly at its
fifth emergency special session regarding Jerusalem. Not
only that, but the Council may recall that, at that special
sessidn, even after the representative of Trinidad and
Tobago, on behalf of the sponsors of the Latin-American
draft resolution, had made it clear that Israel should
withdraw promptly from all areas it occupied, including
Gaza, Israel’s Defence Minister reacted by declaring the
annexation of the Gaza Strip to Israel.

81. I am sure that members of the Council are all aware
that time is passing and running short, and the situation in
the Middle East cannot sustain any further disequilibrium
resulting from further aggressions on the part of Israel and
its supporters. I have no doubt that the world at large is
watching the Security Council and is expecting prompt
action against the aggressor, who has shown complete
disregard for the Council, the Charter of the United Nations
and world public opinion.

75. All these acts, violations and provocations are real
testimony as to the aggressive policies of Israel and its
supporters which, since 1948, have been pampering Israel
and encouraging it to impinge on the security and sovereignty of the Arab countries.

82. The PRESIDENT: I call on the next speaker on my
list, the representative of Israel.
83. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): May I first take the opporfunity of expressing a word of sincere appreciation to
Ambassador Tabor, last month’s President, who carried
such a heavy burden. He guided the discussions, in which
my Government was vitally interested and concerned, with
exemplary firmness and souplesse, and with impartiality
and open-mindedness.

76. The recent violation by Israel is a new and serious act
of aggression. The Security Council cannot and should not
condone such violations of its decisions. The Security
Council is duty bound to call upon the Israel authorities,
who are continuously acting in the most provocative and
unscrupulous way, to refrain from those unlawful acts. The
Security Council and its members are under an obligation
to see to it that Israel should not further disturb a peace
which is already tom by the very action of a Government
which claims it has peaceful intentions.

84. At the same time, I wish to extend the best wishesof
my delegation to Ambassador Makqnnen, this month’s
President, whose diplomatic experience, skill and distinction assure the best possible direction of our deliberations.
8

85. I wish to express my particular appreciation to you,
Mr, President, for acting SOexpeditiously upon the request
of my Government to convene an urgent meeting of the
Security Council.

94. On 2 July, the next day, the incidents in the same area
were repeated. At 0455 hours local time, mortar and
direct-trajectory fire was opened by United Arab Republic
forces stationed on the west bank of the Suez at approximately one kilometre north of El Kantara. Fire was
returned, and the Egyptian fire ceased.

86, A chain of incidents which have occurred along the
Israel-Egyptian cease-fire line in the course of this week
causes grave concern to my Government. More than forty
Israel soldiers have been killed or wounded as a result of
these incidents. These incidents also constitute a threat to
the cease-fire established by the Security Council and
agreed to by both Israel and the United Arab Republic.

95. At 13 15 hours, Egyptian fire was resumed near
El Kantara, when 120-mm mortars shelled the Israel forces.
Fire continued for fifteen minutes until 1330 hours.
96. At 1400 hours, 12Omm mortar fire was resumed
against Israel forces at El Kantara, and later, when Israel
forces were in the area of Ras El’Ish, by mortars and by
tanks. Fire was returned, and the Egyptian fire ceased at
1445 hours, local time.

87. Let me say at the outset that it is the policy of the
Government of Israel not only to preserve the cease-fire but
to do its best to see it reinforced. But from the repeated
armed attacks carried out by the military forces of the
United Arab Republic during the past week, it appears that
the Government of the United Arab Republic, for reasons
of its own, is set on eroding the cease-fire away. This seems
to be another round in Egypt’s old established policy of
belligerency, adapted to the new circumstances, Accompanying these armed attacks there have been a number of
strident and bellicose statements announcing that the
hostilities are not terminated, but are to be continued.

97. On 3 July 1967, at 0535 hours, and again at 0730
hours, the Egyptian army opened fire with mortars and
machine-guns on Israel forces north of El Kantara. In both
incidents, fire was returned, and the exchange of fire
continued for a short while.
98. Now, all was quiet along the Suez line for four days,
untiI this morning, when Egyptian forces again abruptly
broke the cease-fire. This is what happened this morning:

88. The representative of the United Arab Republic
referred to a statement made by Foreign Minister Eban. I
want to set his mind at peace. Mr. Eban referred to the
political struggle whose aim is to achieve a lasting peace. In
this effort, we shall not relax.

99. At approximately 0925 hours, local time this morning,
fire was opened by United Arab Republic forces on Israel
troops stationed in the area of Ras El’Ish, some fifteen
kilometres south of Port Said. In addition to artillery
shelling, other direct-trajectory weapons, mainIy recoilless
guns, were used from gun emplacements in the area of Port
Said and Port Fouad. Fire was returned. The exchange of
fire continued until 1130 hours.

89. Let me recall briefly the sequence of events of the last
week. The incidents in this area started on 1 July 1967,
when, at about midday, an Egyptian force of approximately company-strength was found to have crossed the
Suez Canal near Ras El’Ish, approximately fifteen
kilometres-ten
miles-south of Port Said, and to have
penetrated the Israel cease-fire positions in Sinai. The force
was equipped with half-track armoured vehicles.

100. At 1130 hours, the United Arab Republic forces
directed fire on Israel troops at El Kantara, and thus
extended the area of the incident.
101. Follow&g that, a United Arab Republic armoured
column moved from Port Said in a southerly direction on
the west bank of the Suez Canal and opened fire on Israel
troops on the east bank of the canal-mainly mortar fire.
As’ a result, more heavy casualties were caused to the Israel
forces, bringing the total at the end of the day to five
killed and thirty-one wounded.

90. During the course of the afternoon of the same day,
two boats, carrying reinforcements of troops and weapons,
were seen crossing the canal at that point.
91. No Egyptian forces were in that area at the end of the
fighting, when the cease-fire was accepted.

102. In order to repel these continuing attacks and to
protect the safety of the Israel troops, a limited number of
Israel planes took action against the Egyptian gun positions,
which inchrded naval guns outside Port Said from which
fire had been directed against the Israel troops.

92. At approximately
1900 hours, the United Arab
Republic unit opened mortar fire on Israel forces in the
vicinity, which took action to defend themselves and to
prevent any further penetration behind their positions. This
incident was reported by me to the Security Council in my
Ietter of the same day [S/8026]. The incident itself was
concluded when, at midnight of the same day, the Egyptian
force was driven back to the west bank of the canal, leaving
behind five 82-mm mortars, a number of machine-guns, a
recoilless gun, and communications equipment. As a result
of that incident, seven Israel soldiers were wounded.

103. Egyptian fire continued intermittently, especially in
the area of Ras El’Ish, until 1500 hours. At 1540 hours,
Egyptian fire was resumed at Ras El’Ish; and, at 1545, at
El Kantara. Fire ceased in the area of the incidents at
approximately 1815 hours, local time.

93. It was subsequently established that Commando Battalion No. 503 had crossed the Suez Canal on the night of
30 June-l July and secured a bridgehead on the east bank
of the canal in the area of Ras El’Ish.

104. The version of events which we have heard from the
representative of the United Arab Republic is, to say the
least, remote from the facts. On none of these occasions did
Israel forces take any initiative to break the cease-fire, In no
9

would propose that the meeting be suspendedfor half an
hour.

instance were the Israel forces the first to open fire. The
Israel forces went into action only in response to the armed
attacks of the United Arab Republic forces and after their
cease-fire positions were threatened, and when the safety of
the Israel forces was endangered.

110. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Mali has
proposed a suspension of this meeting for half an hour
under rule 33 of the provisional rules of procedure, This
rule, in its last paragraph, provides that “Any motion for
the suspension or for the simple adjournment of the
meeting shall be decided without debate”. Since the
Council appears to be agreeable to this proposal by the
representative of Mali, the meeting is suspended until 8.45
p.m.

105. The topographical features of the area in which the
Egyptian forces chose to launch their attacks are decisively
advantageous to them. They permit them to concentrate
heavy artillery fire against Israel forces, which are prevented
by the general lay of the land from replying effectively with
ground weapons.

The meeting WRSsuspended at 8.15 p.m. and resumed ar

106. After the Israel forces had been exposed to such an
artillery barrage for many hours and had suffered heavy
casualties, there was no alternative to sending aircraft
against these gun positions. The few aircraft which carried
out that mission were under the strictest orders to avoid all
non-military
targets and to limit their action to those
specified gun positions from which lire was being directed
against the Israel forces. These orders were fully complied
with.

9 p.m.

111. The PRESIDENT: Since I have no more speakers for
tonight, and on the basis of the consultations that have
been going on during the past half-hour, I should like to
propose that we now adjourn tlris meeting until 4.30
tomorrow afternoon.
112. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian J: We have no intention of
opposing your suggestion that the Security Council should
continue its work tomorrow, Sunday, at 4.30 p.m. We
merely wish, with all the respect, to draw your attention to
the fact that we are not concluding our worknow because
there are no more representatives wishing to speak at the
present time, but because you have been kind enough to
hold consultations, and as a result of these consultations an
understanding has been reached that we should conclude
our work now and continue it tomorrow at 4.30 p.m.

107. It seems clear that today’s events had been carefully
planned by the Egyptian authorities. The area had been
quiet for several days and nothing whatsoever had occurred
to prompt this violent Egyptian military action. It is
significant that the Egyptian bombardments today were
more intensive and concentrated than before. The fact that
long-range guns stationed near Port Said were brought into
action shows that today’s action was planned on a more
extensive scale. Today’s action and the incidents which
preceded it give us reason to believe that Egypt has not
changed its policy of belligerency and is still carrying it out
by initiating armed action despite its acceptance of the
cease-fire. The continuation of this belligerent policy and
practice has, of course, ominous implications.

113. The PRESIDENT: I wish to thank the representative
of the Soviet Union for the clarification he hasmade. As a
matter of fact, I said that there were no speakers for
tonight; I did not say that there were no speakers at all. A
number of speakers who had inscribed their names to speak
tonight have agreed to speak when the Council meets again.
I had thought that the expression I used that there were
“no more speakers for tonight” would cover the point that
the representative of the Soviet Union has sought to clarify,
but I thank him, all the same, for the clarification he has
made.

108. As I said at the beginning of my statement, my
Government is anxious to see the cease-fire faithfully
maintained and strictly observed. We hope that the United
Arab Republic has similar intentions. My Government
shares the desire of the Council that the cease-fire instituted
by the Security Council should be effective. I can assurethe
members of the Council that Israel will continue to
co-operate with the Council to that end.

114. As I hear no objection to the proposal I have made
for adjournment until tomorrow at 4.30 p-m-, I shall take it
that this is acceptable to the Council and adjourn tlus
meeting accordingly.

109. Mr. KEITA (Mali) (translated porn FrenchJ: After
hearing the statements which have just been made, my
delegation believes that it might be useful for the Council
to suspend its debate for half an hour in order that WC
could consult one another as to how to proceed, Therefore,
under rule 33 (l), of the provisional rules of procedure, I

The meeting rose at 9.5 p.m.

10
Litho

in U.N.

Price:

$U.S.

0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

139 15-December

1970-2,100
