A/61/PV.102

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

102nd plenary meeting
Friday, 25 May 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al-Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 42 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Draft resolution (A/61/L.59)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a debate on this agenda item at
its 47th plenary meeting, on 3 November 2006.
I give the floor to the representative of Sweden to
introduce draft resolution A/61/L.59.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): On behalf of the
Committee for the United Nations Population Award, I
am pleased to present to the Assembly draft resolution
A/61/L.59, on the United Nations Population Award,
which has been sponsored by all members of the
Committee, namely, Algeria, Bangladesh, the Czech
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Haiti, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Malaysia, Peru,
Sweden and Tanzania. Belarus has also asked to be
added to the group of sponsors.
The purpose of the draft resolution is to ensure
sustainable funding for the United Nations Population
Award.
The General Assembly established the United
Nations Population Award as well as the United
Nations Population Award trust fund to finance the
Award in 1981 by its resolution 36/201. It was then
stipulated that the trust fund would be based on
voluntary contributions by Member States. Since the

Award’s inception, awards have been given to 26
individuals and 21 institutions.
In recent years, however, the interest income
from the trust fund has fallen below the monetary value
of the Award and related expenditures, which has
resulted in an urgent need to mobilize additional
financial resources.
The draft resolution before the Assembly invites
voluntary contributions from Member States. It also
welcomes additional contributions from foundations,
individuals and other sources. The aim is to strengthen
the fund to make it possible to generate adequate
interest income and sustain the Award.
By adopting this draft resolution, the General
Assembly will be reinforcing the original objective of
the Assembly in 1981: to increase recognition of the
linkages between population issues and sustainable
development, as well as generating further support for
the important contribution of population issues to the
achievement of the internationally agreed development
goals, particularly the Millennium Development Goals.
I hope it can be adopted by consensus.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/61/L.59, entitled “United
Nations Population Award”. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/61/L.59?
Draft resolution A/61/L.59
(resolution 61/268).

was

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-36220 (E)

*0736220*

adopted

A/61/PV.102

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
42.
Agenda item 44 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/61/L.60)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a debate on this agenda item at
its 47th and 48th plenary meetings, on 3 November
2006. Members will also recall that, under this item,
the Assembly adopted resolutions 61/45, 61/221 and
61/255 on 4 and 20 December 2006 and 26 January
2007, respectively.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Philippines to introduce draft resolution A/61/L.60.
Mr. Davide (Philippines): On behalf of the two
main sponsors, Pakistan and the Philippines, and the
other sponsors, I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/61/L.60, entitled “High-level Dialogue on
Interreligious and Intercultural Understanding and
Cooperation for Peace”, which is now before the
Assembly.
Before proceeding any further, allow me to
convey the profound appreciation of the main sponsors
to all those who laboured for many hours during the
series of informal consultations which finally gave
birth to the draft resolution. Their highly commendable
constructive spirit pervaded the deliberations.
The draft resolution under consideration provides
general modalities for implementing paragraph 14 of
General Assembly resolution 61/221, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”, by which
the Assembly decided to convene this year a high-level
dialogue on interreligious and intercultural cooperation
for the promotion of tolerance, understanding and
universal respect on matters of freedom of religion or
belief and cultural diversity, in coordination with other
similar initiatives in this area.
The envisioned high-level intergovernmental
dialogue is to be enriched by the proposed interactive
hearings between Governments and civil society,
including
representatives
of
non-governmental
organizations and the private sector, to be chaired by
the President of the General Assembly, within the time

2

frame of, but not distinct from, the high-level dialogue.
In this connection, we also look forward to interacting
with religious leaders to reinforce the common and
continuing quest for durable peace by all stakeholders,
be they secular or sectarian.
It is hoped that the interfaith and intercultural
initiatives of Pakistan and the Philippines will
contribute to the attainment of this mission of the
United Nations, as solemnly enshrined in the Charter:
“to practice tolerance and live together in peace with
one another as good neighbours, and to unite our
strength to maintain international peace and security”.
The practice of tolerance and peaceful
coexistence can be neither enforced nor legislated; it
can only be voluntarily imbibed and practiced and
made part of life by a person primarily on the basis of
religious precepts and adherence to rich cultural
values. Here lies the necessity of expanding the scope
of partnership for the promotion of the culture of peace
to include faith communities and non-governmental
organizations that champion pluralism and revered
cultural values.
Consequently, the building, promotion and
enhancement of the culture of peace should encourage
the mutual inclusiveness of, and mutual reinforcement
by, related initiatives such as Pakistan’s Enlightened
Moderation, Iran’s Dialogue among Civilizations, the
Alliance of Civilizations of Spain and Turkey, and
other noteworthy interfaith and inter-ethnic initiatives
of several countries, including Albania, Indonesia,
Kazakhstan, New Zealand, the Russian Federation and
Senegal, as well as the Asia-Europe Meeting and the
Asia-Pacific Interfaith Dialogue forums for the
promotion of peace, development and human dignity.
I therefore humbly petition the General Assembly
to adopt this draft resolution by consensus so that the
logistical and substantive preparations for the highlevel dialogue may commence forthwith.
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft resolution A/61/L.60, entitled “Highlevel Dialogue on Interreligious and Intercultural
Understanding and Cooperation for Peace”. Before
proceeding to take action on the draft resolution, I
should like to announce that since the issuance of the
draft resolution, the following countries have become
sponsors of A/61/L.60: Armenia, Belarus, Cameroon,
China, Egypt, El Salvador, Guatemala, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Mongolia, Somalia, Thailand and Uzbekistan.

07-36220

A/61/PV.102

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/61/L.60?
Draft resolution A/61/L.60
(resolution 61/269).

07-36220

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
44.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

3
