ll2

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Noting also the report of the Secretary-General on
the progress acbieved towards the establishment of the
Intemational Researcb and Training Institute for tbe
Advancement of Women, 68
1. Endorses the decision of the Economic and
Social Council to create an Intemational Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women;
2. Endorses the guidelines set out in Economic and
Social Council resolution 1998 (LX) regarding the activities of the lnstitute, in particular the necessary close
collaboration with the regional centres and institutes
which have similar objectives;
3. Accepts with appreciation the offer of the Government of Iran to act as host for the lnstitute;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to expedite the
substantive preparations for the early establishment of
the Institute and, to this end, to seek actively financia!
resources through voluntary contributions as well as
technical support for it;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-second
session on the progress achieved.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/136.

United Nations Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Considering that in its resolution 3520 (XXX) of
15 December 1975 it proclaimed the period from 1976
to 1985 United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace, to be devoted to effective and
sustained national, regional and international action to
implement the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the Intemational Women's
Year, 69 and related resolutions 70 adopted by the World
Conference of the International Women's Year, held
at Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July 1975,
Aware of the importance of developing and implementing without delay a programme of concrete action
for the Decade,
Considering further its decision to convene in 1980 a
world conference to review and evaluate progress made
and, where necessary, readjust existing programmes in
the light of new data and research available,
N oting with satisfaction the Programme for the
United Nations Decade for Women as adopted by the
Commission on the Status of Women at its twentysixth session and transmitted to the General Assembly
by the Economic and Social Council at its resumed
sixty-first session, 71
-· 1. Approves the Programme for the United Nations
Decade for Wornen, which focuses on the first half
of the Decade, 1976 to 1980;
2. Urges Governments and United Nations bodies
to take all necessary steps to give effect to the Programme for the Decade and to give it priority in view
of the real need to attain the goals of the Decade;
6SA/3l/310.
69 Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.1), chap. 11, sect. A.
10 Ibid., chap. 111.
71 E/5894.

3. Calls upon Govemments to take measures to
ensure equal and effective participation of women in
political, economic, social and cultural lüe and in policymaking at local, national, regional and intemational
levels, thereby increasing their role in intemational cooperation and in the strengthening of peace;
4. Recommends that Governments should establish
machinery, where appropriate, which could include governmental and non-governmental agencies, bureaux and
commissions, in order to ensure the effective implementation and evaluation of the World Plan of Action and
of the Programme for the Decade within the framework
of national development plans and regional policies;
5. Recommends further that Govemments, in cooperation with the Secretary-General, the specialized
agencies, the regional commissions, appropriate regional
and international research centres and institutes as well
as appropriate intergovernmental bodies, should undertake the organization of training courses and seminars
whereby officials responsible for the formulation and
implementation of national development plans would
study multidisciplinary techniques and methods which
can be utilized in effectively integrating women in development;
6. Invites, as a matter of priority, Governments and
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system
as well as all governmental and non-governmental organizations concerned and the mass media to undertake
massive public information programmes with a view to
making all sectors of the population aware of the need
to implement fully the Programme for the Decade;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to take fully into
account the financial and staff needs required to implement effectively the World Plan of Action and the
Programme for the Decade;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, for
the consideration of the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session, a report on the measures taken to implement the present resolution, in particular paragrapbs 4, 5
and 6 above, as well as a progress report on otber measures taken to implement the World Plan of Action and
the Programme for tbe Decade.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/137.

Pledging conference for the United
Nations Decade for W ornen

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, in which it proclaimed the period from 1976
to 1985 United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace,
Recalling further that in its resolution 31/136 of
16 December 1976 it endorsed the Programme for the
United Nations Decade for Women,
Noting that it decided at its thirtieth session that the
voluntary fund for the International Women's Year,
cstablished by Economic and Social Council resolution 1850 (LVI) of 16 May 1974, should be extended
to cover the period of the Decade,
Aware that in its resolution 31/133 of 16 December 1976 it adopted the criteria and arrangements for
the management of the Voluntary Fund for the United
Nations Decade for Women,
