S/PV.9365

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9365

th meeting
Friday, 30 June 2023, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Nusseibeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Hauri
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Mali

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-18834 (E)
*2318834*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9365

The situation in Mali

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2023/480, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, Ecuador, France, Gabon,
Ghana, Japan, Malta, Mozambique, Russian
Federation, Switzerland, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2690 (2023).
I shall now give the floor those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): The group of three African
members of the Security Council (A3) is of the view
that the resolution just adopted (resolution 2690 (2023))
marks a significant milestone in the international
community’s engagement with the people of Mali as
they strive towards the restoration of peace, security
and stability in their country. We believe that, since the
establishment of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
on 25 April 2013, the Mission has played an important
role in facilitating the political processes in the country,
carrying out security-related tasks and stabilizing Mali.
We underline that MINUSMA has played a crucial role
in securing Mali in the face of the immense security
challenges that the country is facing.
2/9

30/06/2023

Today, however, in line with the wishes of the
Malian transitional authorities, the Security Council
has terminated the Mission and set out processes for the
withdrawal of the United Nations troops from Mali. We
take this opportunity to express our deep appreciation
to all troop- and police-contributing countries for
their roles in helping to maintain the integrity of Mali.
We pay special tribute to all peacekeepers and other
personnel who lost their lives for the cause of peace.
The withdrawal of MINUSMA, however, should
not be the end of the international community’s
engagement with Mali. The people of Mali will continue
to need the solidarity and support of the international
community as they enhance their security capabilities
to fill the gaps that will be created with the departure
of the international presence, as well as in sustaining
the implementation of the Algiers Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali and the transitional road
map, especially the realization of the March 2024
electoral timetable.
While Mali confronts immense security challenges,
the solution is not wholly military, but rather a mixture of
responses that also includes sustained efforts at national
reconciliation, improvements in inclusive governance
and State administration and better integration of
Mali’s interests with its neighbouring region.
We believe the penholder diligently worked to
ensure that the resolution we adopted contain the
elements necessary to work out practical arrangements
for a safe and orderly withdrawal, in cooperation with
Mali’s transitional authorities. We cannot risk creating
vulnerabilities during the withdrawal period that would
embolden terrorists and violent extremist groups to
further destabilize Mali. Neither can we jeopardize the
safety and security of the United Nations personnel or the
protection of civilians, including humanitarian actors.
We therefore urge a coordinated implementation
of the withdrawal of the Mission within the six-month
period and in a way that does not erode the gains made
on the security front. The cooperation of the authorities
of Mali is important to ensure a seamless transfer of
tasks, effective 1 July, in accordance with paragraph 2
of the resolution, while being mindful of the obligations
to respect the status of forces as called for by paragraph
4. Timely approvals of flights and customs clearances
would be particularly important in that regard to ensure
that set timelines are met.
23-18834

30/06/2023

The situation in Mali

In concluding our explanation as to why the A3
supports the resolution, I must highlight that the
withdrawal of MINUSMA from Mali changes the
way that the region and the international community
must implement the strategies for stabilizing the Sahel.
Already, the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel, which benefits from MINUSMA’s presence in
the region, will be affected by the withdrawal of the
Mission’s support, as well as other assurances that have
been built into regional security initiatives to deter,
detect and disrupt terrorist and violent extremists’
activities in the Sahel. We will therefore need to engage
constructively with other processes that are in the
pipeline to stabilize the region.
Finally, we urge good-faith commitment, close
cooperation, mutual respect and open and frank
discussions between the United Nations and Mali to
ensure the effective management of the withdrawal
phase of MINUSMA in a manner that will limit any
unintended consequence for the stability of Mali and its
immediate region.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to first thank France, as the penholder, for
its work on this resolution (resolution 2690 (2023)).
While we deeply regret the transition Government’s decision to abandon the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) and the harm that that will bring to the
Malian people, we voted in favour of the resolution,
as we are ultimately satisfied with the drawdown plan
that the Security Council has just adopted. We call on
all signatory parties to continue their cooperation and
avoid any actions that would jeopardize the ceasefire.
We note that, despite the loss of MINUSMA’s assistance, the transition Government must continue to adhere to its agreement with the Economic Community
of West African States to transition to a democratically
elected civilian-led Government by March 2024.
The resolution that we adopted today clearly
reinforces the transition Government’s obligation to
cooperate fully with the drawdown, withdrawal and
liquidation of MINUSMA and ensure that those processes
are carried out safely and orderly, with the utmost
care for the safety and security of peacekeepers. The
transition Government also has an obligation to respect
its commitments under the status-of-forces agreement,
which remains in force until the final MINUSMA
element leaves Malian soil. That means guaranteeing

S/PV.9365

unimpeded access to United Nations facilities and the
full freedom of movement of MINUSMA, its personnel
and equipment throughout Mali and full cooperation in
the redeployment and export processes, including by
granting visas, as necessary, to all personnel required
for drawdown and liquidation. Steps taken by the
Malian transition authorities in recent days to block
MINUSMA’s imports can impede the drawdown process
and undermine the safety and security of peacekeepers
and, as such, are unacceptable. We are concerned about
statements from some domestic actors calling for the
harassment of peacekeepers. Actions that threaten the
security of peacekeepers are unacceptable, and we call
on the transition Government to ensure the safety of all
MINUSMA personnel.
We welcome the resolution’s clear directive to
MINUSMA to ensure that all assets be handed over
in full compliance with United Nations practices and
regulations. We urge the Mission to take all necessary
steps and precautions to ensure the safe and orderly
transfer of United Nations facilities and equipment
to designated entities. The United Nations has a
responsibility to minimize the risk that its assets fall
into the hands of those looking to destabilize Mali or
bring harm to its people, including violent extremist
organizations and the Wagner Group.
Finally, I would like to applaud the resolution’s
reaffirmation of Mali’s primary responsibility to
protect its civilians, consistent with its obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. The international community will
continue to monitor the human rights situation in Mali
and speak out against violations and abuses. While the
resolution marks the end of MINUSMA, the United
States commitment to the Malian people remains strong
and lasting.
I would like to conclude by expressing the profound
gratitude of the United States to MINUSMA for its
service over the past decade, especially the troop- and
police-contributing countries, whose peacekeepers
have risked and sacrificed their lives for Mali’s peace
and security.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): At the outset, let me
reiterate Japan’s profound appreciation for the efforts
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) over the
years and applaud the bravery of its personnel, including
those who made the ultimate sacrifice.

23-188343/9

S/PV.9365

The situation in Mali

Japan voted in favour of the resolution
(resolution 2690 (2023)), albeit with reservations. It is
regrettable that MINUSMA has to withdraw at this time
despite the many challenges Mali and the region continue
to face. We call on the transitional Government of Mali
to cooperate fully with the United Nations to ensure
the orderly and safe withdrawal of the Mission over the
coming months, while respecting all the provisions of
the status-of-forces agreement until the departure of
the final elements of MINUSMA from Mali. We also
stress the importance of ensuring a smooth and proper
transfer of MINUSMA’s tasks. Japan emphasizes that all
operations by security forces, including those conducted
jointly with foreign security personnel, should be carried
out in accordance with international obligations. That
includes any operations designed to ensure the protection
of civilians.
Furthermore, Japan underscores the need for the
Security Council to continue its engagement with
Malian parties and regional actors to implement the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, as well
as the importance of achieving a political transition and
ensuring the return to constitutional order by March
2024, which are indispensable for sustainable peace
in Mali and beyond. Japan reaffirms its commitment
to contributing to peace and security in Mali and the
Sahel region.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Brazil entered
negotiations hoping for the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), as we still
had a positive assessment of its contribution to the
situation in Mali. Nevertheless, we acknowledge the
concerns raised by the Malian transition authorities
and the fact that the consent of the host Government is
essential to any peace operation.
As the Security Council comes together to formally
terminate the MINUSMA mandate, we would like to
pay tribute to both the peacekeepers and civilians who
perished while risking their lives to fulfil their duties to
help protect the lives of United Nations personnel and
the people of Mali. My delegation also thanks Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wane for his
efforts and energy dedicated to leading the Mission and
reiterates its support for his work as the United Nations
starts the drawdown.
We hope that the engagement with the Malian
authorities to prepare the transfer of MINUSMA tasks
and its withdrawal will be constructive and enable Mali
4/9

30/06/2023

to continue its political transition process and the pursuit
of durable peace. In that vein, we would like to reiterate
our support for the leadership of Algeria in the mediation
process to overcome the present impasse, and we urge
all Malian political forces to remain engaged in dialogue
and redouble efforts aimed at the full implementation of
the peace agreement.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks France for its efforts as penholder
of the resolution (resolution 2690 (2023)) on the
withdrawal of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
from Mali.
Switzerland acknowledges and respects the
decision of the Malian authorities to request the
immediate withdrawal of MINUSMA. We regret that
we have come to this point. For us, the decision appears
to have been hastily made. The environment for an
immediate withdrawal is unsuitable. The situation in
Mali continues to threaten international peace and
security. Switzerland would have liked to have seen
a more gradual transition period, while taking into
account the situation on the ground. In a spirit of
compromise and consensus, we voted in favour of the
resolution submitted to us. Nevertheless, we would like
to make the following points to clarify our position.
We are concerned about the future of the people
of Mali. MINUSMA’s withdrawal will have a direct
impact on the Malian people, which is of concern to
a wide range of actors active in the field of civilian
protection. It is first and foremost the responsibility
of the Malian State to protect its population. We are
therefore counting on the authorities to take appropriate
measures to protect the civilian population — without
discrimination — at every stage of the Mission’s
withdrawal and beyond, and to engage in dialogue with
the parties. We also call on all parties to respect their
obligations under international human rights law and
international humanitarian law.
The modalities and duration of the Mission’s
withdrawal are of particular importance to Switzerland.
We take note of the reasons that led to the goal of a
withdrawal in such a short time frame. Nevertheless,
we reiterate that, from a logistical point of view, six
months is not sufficient for a responsible withdrawal
of a peacekeeping operation of MINUSMA’s size. The
withdrawal must take place in an orderly and secure
manner. The lessons learned from other transitions, as
well as the recommendations contained in resolution
23-18834

30/06/2023

The situation in Mali

2594 (2021), should serve as guidance. We therefore
call on the Malian authorities to work closely with
MINUSMA and to respect the status-of-forces agreement
until all MINUSMA personnel have been able to leave
Mali. That also means that permission to import the
equipment needed for the Mission’s departure, such as
fuel, must be granted as soon as possible. The security
of personnel must be guaranteed at all times.
The Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali remains a crucial instrument for peace, stability
and development in the country. Switzerland therefore
calls on all parties to resume dialogue and to respect
their obligations under the agreement. Furthermore,
it is important that the Secretary-General propose
concrete measures to ensure the continuity of the
tasks currently covered by MINUSMA as part of the
agreement’s implementation. It is essential to preserve
the gains of recent years and to resume the diligent
implementation of the agreement, which is also in the
interests of stability and security throughout the region.
MINUSMA has made an important contribution to
peace and security in Mali and the region. Switzerland
offers its sincere condolences to the families and troopcontributing countries that have suffered casualties.
We reiterate our full support for MINUSMA and all
its staff, who have worked tirelessly since the Mission
began, and express our gratitude for their commitment.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): Malta thanks France, as
the penholder, for its extensive efforts on this file. We
also thank Special Representative Wane and his team
at the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), and we
pay tribute to those peacekeepers who have served the
Mission since its inception 10 years ago. Today we also
remember those who paid the ultimate price.
Following today’s adoption (resolution 2690 (2023)),
Malta strongly underlines the importance of a safe and
orderly withdrawal in accordance with international
obligations, such as international human rights law
and international humanitarian law and the protection
of civilians. The safety of peacekeepers in the coming
months remains of the utmost importance. It is crucial for
the drawdown, withdrawal and liquidation to be fulfilled
in full cooperation between the Malian transitional
Government and the United Nations. Cooperation
should extend to respect for the freedom of movement in
accordance with the status-of-forces agreement.

S/PV.9365

Malta urges the Malian authorities to keep the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali as
a priority of the transitional Government, and to
give due consideration to the work and contributions
offered by the United Nations country team and
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel in the transfer of MINUSMA’s tasks. At the
same time, we call for a renewed approach, based on
concrete confidence-building measures that will help
to re-establish open dialogue between the signatory
parties in order to deliver tangible results. Malta
reiterates the importance of the Malian transitional
Government fulfilling its commitment to hold free
and fair presidential elections in February next year,
with the sole aim of returning to democratic rule by a
civilian-led Government.
We look forward to updates being shared with the
Council in a timely manner.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I join others in thanking France for its work on this
file. I also pay tribute to Special Representative Wane
and the dedication and service of United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) personnel. We offer our condolences
to those who paid the ultimate price.
As we know, the transitional Government of Mali
requested MINUSMA’s departure. The United Kingdom
would not have chosen to withdraw MINUSMA at this
moment, when Mali and the wider Sahel are facing
increasing instability and humanitarian needs. We do
not believe that partnership with the Wagner Group
will deliver long-term stability or security for the
Malian people.
We are particularly concerned about the impact
that MINUSMA’s withdrawal could have on the future
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
emanating from the Algiers process. We underline the
obligations of all signatory parties to adhere to the
agreement. As part of MINUSMA’s transition plan,
we urge the United Nations to consider establishing
an appropriate entity to support ongoing dialogue
and implementation.
Nevertheless, the United Kingdom welcomes the
adoption of the resolution today (resolution 2690 (2023)),
which emphasizes the need for MINUSMA to withdraw
in a safe and orderly manner. We regret, however, that
it was not possible to adopt a resolution allowing for a
more prudent withdrawal timeline and a mandate that

23-188345/9

S/PV.9365

The situation in Mali

would have enabled MINUSMA to continue providing
support during its drawdown. We are also concerned
that the Mission’s mandate to protect civilians will be
discontinued from October.
The resolution sets an objective of withdrawal by
31 December, but it also requests that the SecretaryGeneral keep the Council regularly informed on
progress. We believe the Council should stand ready to
revise that timeline, if needed, to allow time for a safe
and orderly withdrawal.
MINUSMA’s withdrawal will be a major logistical
undertaking, and it will not be without risk. The
resolution underlines Mali’s obligation to cooperate with
the United Nations during MINUSMA’s exit process
and to respect the status-of-forces agreement until its
departure. MINUSMA’s freedom of movement must
be upheld for the safety and security of its personnel.
In that regard, we urge Mali to end restrictions on
MINUSMA’s imports.
The United Kingdom remains committed to
supporting the Malian people. We call upon the
authorities to deliver on their commitment to the political
transition with free and fair presidential elections in
February 2024. We also urge them to fulfil their primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians and their
obligations under international human rights law and
international humanitarian law.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): Albania voted in favour
of the resolution requesting the drawdown and
withdrawal of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
(resolution 2690 (2023)), as requested by the transitional
Government of Mali. We thank the France as the
penholder for its work.
We regret the turn of events in recent weeks and
praise MINUSMA peacekeepers and personnel, under
the leadership of Special Representative Wane, for their
unwavering dedication and commitment. We pay tribute
to those who lost their lives in the line of duty.
The situation in Mali is fragile and precarious, with the
country facing a multidimensional crisis. We encourage
the authorities to work towards credible and inclusive
elections, leading to the restoration of constitutional
order by March 2024, and to focus on implementing
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
emanating from the Algiers process, which remains
central to achieving lasting peace across Mali.
6/9

30/06/2023

It is imperative that Mali uphold its international
obligations, including ensuring the protection of civilians
and conducting military operations in line with human
rights and international humanitarian law. The presence
of the Wagner Group and its disregard for international
law constitutes a serious threat to the Malian people.
In conclusion, we urge the transitional Government
of Mali to fully cooperate with MINUSMA and respect
the status-of-forces agreement and to guarantee the
Mission’s freedom of movement in facilitating a safe
and orderly drawdown, withdrawal and liquidation,
including the transfer of any assets. It is crucial that
risks associated with the withdrawal be mitigated as best
as possible.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Ecuador voted in favour of resolution 2690 (2023), but
regrets the decision of the transitional Government of
Mali to request the withdrawal of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). We hope that the transitional
Government will cooperate to ensure that the
withdrawal of the Mission’s personnel is carried out in
an orderly and, above all, safe manner. We also recall
the responsibility of the Malian State to protect its
population, in compliance with international law, human
rights and international humanitarian law. We trust that
the transitional Government will respect the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, including the
political process that will crystallize with the holding
of transparent, free and inclusive elections in February
2024. Ecuador will always support the people of Mali
and wishes for their lasting peace, economic recovery
and social reconciliation.
Finally, I thank France for facilitating the
consideration, in the resolution, of all the necessary
elements for MINUSMA’s withdrawal.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation voted in favour
of resolution 2690 (2023), prepared by the French
delegation, on the withdrawal of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA).
We think it is important that the Council responded
unanimously to the request of Mali, which took a
sovereign decision on further parameters of ensuring
the security and protection of the civilian population
in the country. We reiterate our support for Bamako in
its aspiration to assume full responsibility for, and the
leading role in, stabilizing the situation in Mali.
23-18834

30/06/2023

The situation in Mali

We also thank the peacekeepers and civilian
personnel of MINUSMA for their service and work
in support of the Malian people. Russia honours the
memory of peacekeepers who sacrificed their lives for
the sake of peace and security in Mali.
The withdrawal of MINUSMA should proceed in an
orderly and well-organized manner, in close coordination
with the host country. We believe that the resolution
adopted today sets out the necessary framework to
achieve that.
Russia will continue to provide comprehensive
bilateral support to Mali in order to normalize the
situation in the country.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Security Council just unanimously adopted
resolution 2690 (2023), which terminates the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and makes
specific arrangements for its drawdown and withdrawal.
China voted in favour of the resolution and expects
the Secretariat to develop a practical and feasible plan for
steps, such as the withdrawal of MINUSMA personnel
and the liquidation of its assets, in accordance with the
Security Council’s request, so as to ensure the Mission’s
safe, orderly and timely withdrawal.
China appreciates the long-standing efforts made by
the troop- and police-contributing countries to support
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. In order to ensure a safe and
orderly withdrawal of the Mission and safeguard the
security of peacekeepers and United Nations assets,
MINUSMA and the Secretariat should continue to work
closely with the Malian Government.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are
important means for the Security Council to fulfil its
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security. Experience has proven that peacekeeping
operations must follow the basic principles developed in
practice over a long period, particularly the principle of
the consent of the countries concerned. Missions should
maintain communication with the Governments of the
countries concerned and keep a relationship of mutual
trust and cooperation, which is a prerequisite for smooth
peacekeeping operations. We hope that the Security
Council will always strive to strengthen cooperation
between peacekeeping operations and the countries
concerned as a top priority and work tirelessly to that end.

S/PV.9365

At present, many African countries, including those
in the Sahel region, are facing multiple threats, such as
terrorism, humanitarian crises, challenges to poverty
reduction and development, as well as climate change.
Maintaining regional peace and stability is in the
common interest of the international community, which
China expects to pay attention to the practical difficulties
and needs faced by Mali and other countries in the region
and to continue to provide assistance and support on the
basis of respect for the sovereignty and leadership of the
countries concerned.
Since 2013, when China began its involvement
in the United Nations peacekeeping operations in
Mali, Chinese peacekeepers have faithfully fulfilled
the peacekeeping Mission, despite all difficulties
and dangers, and contributed Chinese efforts to the
maintenance of peace and stability in the country. China
has sent multiple batches of guards, defence, infantry,
engineering and medical contingents to Mali. They have
conducted successful missions, such as armed patrols,
guard and defence, engineering support, emergency
construction, casualty care and medical support. They
have won the recognition of the Malian Government
and people. In June, all 398 peacekeepers of the tenth
Chinese peacekeeping contingent to MINUSMA were
awarded the United Nations Peace Medal of Honour.
China will continue to support Mali in safeguarding
its sovereignty, territorial integrity and national security
and stability and make further contributions to its peaceful
development via multilateral and bilateral channels.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United Arab
Emirates.
I would like to thank France, in its capacity as
penholder, for steering resolution 2690 (2023) to its
conclusion and unanimous adoption that we, the United
Arab Emirates, voted in favour of, with some concern.
I wish to express my deep gratitude, on behalf of
the United Arab Emirates, to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Wane and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) personnel for their efforts and
contribution to peace and stability for the people of
Mali. We pay tribute to the men and women who have
served as peacekeepers, troops and police officers and
especially to the Blue Helmets killed while performing
their duty in Mali. Their sacrifice is recognized here
today by all of us.

23-188347/9

S/PV.9365

The situation in Mali

The United Arab Emirates voted in favour of
the resolution today because it directly responds to
the request from the host authorities of Mali for the
withdrawal of MINUSMA, without delay. The prospect
of the United Nations maintaining a political office
and peacekeepers in a country, without consent, would
be untenable. It would not only run counter to the
fundamental principles of peacekeeping, but it would
also be unworkable both politically and practically.
However, the Council remains responsible
for ensuring the proper implementation of today’s
resolution, which provides clear timelines and reporting
for the drawdown to be completed in an orderly and
safe manner. Importantly, it ensures consultations
with the transition Government of Mali and those
countries contributing troop and police personnel. All
efforts should now be focused on successful and safe
implementation. The smooth and safe departure of
MINUSMA will be no small task given the large number
of United Nations personnel and extensive equipment
present in the country. We look forward to receiving the
Secretary-General’s regular updates in that regard and
to continue consultations with regional stakeholders.
Strong communication must be at the heart of efforts
to move forward — first, between MINUSMA and the
transition Government of Mali, in order to ensure strong
coordination; and secondly, between MINUSMA and
the United Nations country team, particularly with
regard to the departure of armed personnel, whose
presence helped facilitate their work and life-saving
humanitarian assistance. Finally, those citizens for
whom the presence of MINUSMA is a protective shield
should benefit from clear communication related to
drawdown plans. That will also serve in safeguarding
Mission personnel against the threat of disinformation
or misinformation.
Today’s resolution reaffirms the centrality of
the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
to achieving a sustainable peace in the country. We
reaffirm the support of the United Arab Emirates
for the international mediation, its efforts for the
implementation of the peace agreement, and its
engagement with regional actors. Ensuring conclusion
of the political transition will also be important. We
also underline that regional stability must be preserved.
The role of regional actors, including the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States,
together with the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel, is vital.
8/9

30/06/2023

MINUSMA is withdrawing from Mali, but Mali
and its people will not be left behind. We will count on
the Malian transitional authorities’ commitment during
this critical phase to respecting the status-of-forces
agreement until the departure of MINUSMA and allow
for a smooth withdrawal and beyond for peace and
security in Mali and the protection of its people.
I now resume my function as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): The
Government of the Republic of Mali takes note of
resolution 2690 (2023), just adopted by the Security
Council, which terminates the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), effective as of today,
30 June 2023.
We also note the Council’s favourable response to
our request for MINUSMA’s immediate withdrawal.
The underlying reasons for this request for MINUSMA’s
withdrawal were given in this Chamber on 16 June 2023
by His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Republic of Mali (see S/PV.9350).
While recognizing that MINUSMA has certainly
not achieved its fundamental objective of supporting
the Government’s efforts to secure the country, the
people and the Government of Mali nonetheless
welcome its contributions in other areas, in particular
in terms of humanitarian and social assistance and the
good offices missions of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General.
The Government of Mali notes that, under the
terms of the resolution adopted today, the MINUSMA
withdrawal process will begin on 1 July and end on
31 December 2023. The Government of the Republic of
Mali will make sure that the commitments undertaken
in this respect are fulfilled.
As a responsible Government, the Malian
authorities undertake to cooperate closely with the
United Nations Secretariat and MINUSMA in the
timely implementation of resolution 2690 (2023). With
this in mind, in line with its responsibilities as host
country, Mali will uphold the measures taken to ensure
the safety and security of MINUSMA personnel,
premises, installations and property, until the Mission’s
departure on the agreed date.
23-18834

30/06/2023

The situation in Mali

I would also like to reassure Council members
of the Government of Mali’s total commitment to
relentlessly pursuing its sovereign mission of protecting
civilians and property throughout the national territory.
In this respect, the Government regrets that the Council
continues to consider the situation in Mali as a threat
to international peace and security, despite the tangible
results achieved on the ground by the Malian Armed
Forces, in particular thanks to the strengthening and
equipping of the defence apparatus, on the one hand,
and with regard to the return to the peaceful and secure
constitutional order so dear to His Excellency Colonel
Assimi Goïta, President of the Transition, Head of State.
And, as you know, Madam President, the successful
holding of the constitutional referendum on 18 June
2023 is part of this dynamic.
The Government of Mali is also committed to
pursuing the efficient and diligent implementation of the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which
emerged from the Algiers process, in collaboration with
the signatory movements that are willing, with a view
to lasting peace, national reconciliation and stability in
our country and for the benefit of the Malian people.
Before concluding, on behalf of the people and
the Government of Mali, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his commitment to peace in
Mali. I would also like to thank all the countries that
have contributed troops, police and civilian personnel
to MINUSMA over the past 10 years for their efforts
and at times the ultimate sacrifice that they have made
alongside their fellow soldiers from Mali in the quest

S/PV.9365

for peace in our country. I would like to express the
gratitude of the people and the Government of Mali
to all States Members of the United Nations for their
multifaceted contributions to MINUSMA.
The Republic of Mali is ready to cooperate with
all willing partners that respect the key principles of
Mali’s public action. I pay tribute to the memory of all
the civilian victims of the crisis and all the foreign and
Malian soldiers who died in battle in Mali.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of June,
I would like to express the sincere appreciation of the
delegation of the United Arab Emirates to the members
of the Council and the Secretariat of the Council for all
the support they have given us.
It has indeed been a busy month, and one in
which we rallied to consensus on several important
issues within our purview. We could not have done it
alone or without the hard work, support and positive
contributions of every delegation and the representatives
of the Secretariat, including the technical-support team,
conference-service officers, interpreters, translators,
verbatim reporters and security staff.
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the entire Council in wishing the delegation of the
United Kingdom good luck for the month of July.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

23-188349/9
