S/2002/759

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 July 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 15 July 2002 from the Permanent Representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
The wrap-up session of the Security Council under the presidency of the
Syrian Arab Republic was held on 28 June 2002. With reference to my note verbale
dated 25 June 2002 (S/2002/701), it was agreed that after the wrap-up session, and if
appropriate, the presidency might prepare a summary paper on the main points
raised at the wrap-up session.
The summary paper is attached (see annex). The purpose of the paper is to
indicate the areas and suggestions for follow-up action. It is not meant to be
exhaustive on the issues raised, but for use as a resource to improve the work of the
Security Council, both procedural and substantive.
I would be grateful if the contents of the present letter and its annex could be
brought to the attention of members of the Council and issued as a document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Mikhail Wehbe
Ambassador

02-48232 (E) 170702 170702

*0248232*

S/2002/759

Annex to the letter dated 15 July 2002 from the Permanent
Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
[Original: Arabic]
Wrap-up meeting on the work of the Security Council for the month of June
2002, held on 28 June 2002
Points concerning the wrap-up meeting of the Council
Some members said that the holding of wrap-up meetings to assess the work of
the Council was a matter of importance and that it would be useful to continue the
practice.
A number of speakers said that they saw no need to hold such wrap-up
meetings every month.
Some speakers stressed that it was important to translate delegations’
observations on the working methods of the Council into rules for the future work of
the Council, because this practice would have no point unless the numerous
observations were taken into account.
In general, a number of speakers emphasized the importance of holding an
increased number of open meetings of the Council at which Member States could
present their views on the issues on the Council’s agenda.
The situation in Afghanistan
Speakers expressed their satisfaction at the discussions that had taken place in
the Council during the month of June on the situation in Afghanistan. They
mentioned, in particular, the Council’s sustained monitoring of the meetings of the
Loya Jirga, inasmuch as they constituted a fundamental advance towards the
achievement of peace and stability in the country. In the context of the security
situation in Afghanistan, a number of representatives spoke of how to deal with the
security issue outside Kabul. A number of speakers also welcomed the efforts being
made by the International Security Assistance Force to enable the Loya Jirga to hold
its meetings in a peaceful atmosphere. They also emphasized that the security
situation in Afghanistan must remain a priority on the agenda of the Security
Council. The speakers stressed that Security Council resolution 1401 (2002) was
clear evidence of support for the peace process in Afghanistan and for the
implementation of the Bonn Agreement generally.
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Many speakers said that the Security Council mission to the Great Lakes
region had been timely, since it had preceded the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) and had enabled members to become acquainted at close hand with the
actual situation.

2

S/2002/759

Speakers expressed their concern that the situation remained tense, particularly
in Kisangani; the Council must exert every effort to impose respect for its
resolutions on the parties concerned.
Speakers agreed that the Council, through its handling of the various
developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, had sent a clear message to
the parties to the conflict to ensure the holding of a comprehensive dialogue and
also to guarantee the safety of the members of MONUC.
Speakers emphasized the need for the withdrawal of foreign forces from the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Middle East
A number of speakers said that the Council had difficulty in dealing with the
topic of the Middle East and that the Council had held many meetings for the
purpose of discussing the situation in the region.
A number of speakers welcomed the opportunity afforded by Farouk
Al-Shara’, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Syrian
Arab Republic, presiding over the Council and being able to hear from him directly
about the Syrian position on political developments in the region, and they
commended the useful and constructive discussion held during the meeting.
A number of Council members spoke of the need to mobilize all efforts to
achieve a comprehensive and just peace in the region. Representatives referred to
the Arab peace initiative endorsed by the Beirut Summit and the work being done by
the quadripartite committee, as well as to the statement by the President of the
United States of America, George W. Bush.
Speakers stressed the need for the Security Council to assume its full
responsibilities with regard to the Middle East. Some speakers spoke of the urgent
need for the convening of meetings at which Council members could exchange
views on opportunities and prospects for activating the Middle East peace process
on the basis of the resolutions of international legitimacy, particularly Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Somalia
There was general agreement that it had been a long time since the Council had
discussed the situation in Somalia. The suffering of the Somali people was still
continuing, because the problem remained unresolved.
The view was generally expressed that the Council must deal with the situation
in Somalia more effectively.
A number of Council members spoke of the importance of implementing
Security Council resolutions relating to the implementation of the arms embargo
imposed on Somalia.

3
