s

UNITED
NAT10NS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/24346
24 July 1992
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

.

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the
Council, at its 3100th meeting, on 24 July 1992, in connection with the
Council's consideration of the item entitled "Report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/24333)":
"The Security Council recalls the statement of its President of
17 July 1992 (S/243O7) concerning the Agreement signed in London on
17 July by the parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/243O5).
"The Security Council takes note with appreciation of the
Secretary-General's report (S/24333) submitted to it, in response to its
request of 17 July 1992, together with a Concept of Operations.
"The Council concurs with the Secretary-General's view that the
conditions do not yet exist for the United Nations to supervise the heavy
weapons in Bosnia and Herzegovina as envisaged in the London Agreement.
"The Council invites the Secretary-General to contact all Member
States, particularly the Member States of the relevant regional
organizations in Europe, to ask them to make urgently available to the
Seoretary-General information about the personnel, equipment and logistic
support which they would be prepared to contribute, individually or
collectively, to the supervision of heavy weapons in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as described in the Secretary-General's report.
"In the. light of the outcome of these contacts, the
Secretary-General will undertake the further preparatory work needed on
the supervision of the heavy weapons in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"Recalling the provisions of Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter, the Council invites the European regional arrangements and
agencies concerned, and particularly the European Community, to enhance
their cooperation with the Secretary-General in their efforts to help to

92-33873

3462d (E)

240792

/

240792

...

S/24346
English
Page 2
resolve the conflicts that continua to rage in the former Yugoslavia. In
particular, it would welcome the participation of the Secretary-General
in any negotiations under European Community auspices.
"The Council further invites the European Community in cooperation
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations to examine the
possibility of broadening and intensifying the present Conference with a
view to providing a new momentum in the search far negotiated settlements
of the various conflicts and disputes in the former Yugoslavia.
"The Council underlines the importance of the parties to the
Agreement signed at London on 17 July 1992 (S/24305) honouring fully the
terms of that Agreement and calls on others concerned also to respect the
Agreement. It emphasizes in particular the need far the parties to
respect and maintain a cease-fire throughout the entire territory of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and for them to declare imm~diately to the Force
Commander of UNPROFOR the locations and guantities of the heavy weapons
to be placed under supervision. It further demands that the parties and
others concerned cooperate fully with UNPROFOR and the humanitarian
agencies and take all necessary steps to ensure the safety of their
personnel.
"The Council stresses the need far full compliance with all the
requirements of its relevant resolutions and stands ready to consider
immediately, vhenever necessary, further steps to achieve a peaceful
solution in conformity vith its relevant resolutions.
"The Council requests the Secretary-General to report back to it on
the further vork being undertaken and remains actively seized of the
matter."
