S/PV.7803

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7803rd meeting

Tuesday, 8 November 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Seck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Senegal)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Coleman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 28 October 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2016/911)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-36731 (E)
*1636731*

S/PV.7803

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

an opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s application
for EU membership, which is a truly momentous
development. Bosnia and Herzegovina is not a member
of the EU, and not even a candidate yet, but it has taken
a decision about its future. It has taken a decision about
its direction. This is wholeheartedly supported by a
large majority of the population.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 28 October 2016 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/911)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/911, which contains a letter dated
28 October 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting
the fiftieth report of the High Representative for
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko.
Mr. Inzko: In my remarks today, I want to talk about
two trends that are developing in parallel in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, one positive and one quite negative.
To begin with, the open and helping hand extended
to Bosnia and Herzegovina by the European Union
(EU) has led to further progress, with the adaptation
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement and a
domestic EU Coordination Mechanism finally agreed.
State and entity-level authorities have also continued to
make certain progress on economic reforms. Following
these steps, on 20 September the EU General Affairs
Council invited the European Commission to submit
2/25

08/11/2016

Another positive development took place in June with
the publishing of the first post-war census, an essential
tool for socioeconomic planning. While arguments over
the census soured the political environment, tensions
increased significantly, first with the decision by the
Republika Srpska National Assembly in July to hold
an entity referendum, in defiance of an earlier decision
of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court,
and then with the actual holding of the referendum in
September, in direct contravention of a second decision
suspending the referendum until the Court could decide
on disputes concerning its constitutionality.
The Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which is also annex 4 of the Peace Agreement, states
explicitly that decisions of the Constitutional Court, as
in our own countries, are final and binding, and that
the entities are bound to comply with the decisions of
the State authorities. For this reason, I consider the
referendum of 25 September to be a grave violation of
the Peace Agreement and the rule of law. It was held
in contravention of decisions of the Court, including a
direct order suspending the referendum.
The positive diplomatic role played by neighbouring
Serbia and Croatia during the crisis is worth noting.
Serbian Prime Minister Aleksandar Vučić declined
to support the referendum — he did so twice, in
public — while Prime Minister designate of Croatia
Andrej Plenković condemned it outright.
With this unprecedented step, the authorities of
Republika Srpska established that they do not consider
themselves bound by Constitutional Court decisions
with which they do not agree, effectively opting out of
the country’s judicial system. For example, the President
told media that he would also order Republika Srpska
institutions not to follow a final decision of another
institution, the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
a case related to the ownership of military property.
Similarly, the President publicly rejected a summons
to give a statement to the State Prosecutor regarding
the referendum.
16-36731

08/11/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

In addition to being a fundamental challenge to the
State’s sovereignty, the constitutional order and the rule
of law, the September referendum should be seen in the
context of the long-standing policy of the ruling party
in the Republika Srpska, and its President in particular,
to deny the authority of the common State institutions
and to advocate openly for the dissolution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In their public statements during
the reporting period, the Republika Srpska President
and other officials of his party clearly linked the
referendum with possible future secession, describing it
as the first in a series, to possibly include referendums
against the State institutions or NATO, on the status
of the Republika Srpska, and on independence. Would
we tolerate similar moves for secession in our own
countries?
However, in recent weeks we have witnessed
another staggering development in the Republika
Srpska. This was the move by the Republika Srpska
National Assembly and its speaker Nedeljko Čubrilović
to decorate a number of convicted war criminals,
including Radovan Karadžić, who was sentenced by
a United Nations tribunal in the first instance to 40
years’ imprisonment for genocide, crimes against
humanity and violations of the laws or customs of war.
This deeply offended the survivors of ethnic cleansing
and many others. This act of officially decorating and
glorifying war criminals who have been sentenced by
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
is unprecedented in modern and civilized history. For
me, those who have initiated the decoration of those
internationally convicted war criminals, and who are
thereby glorifying genocide, are barbarians and outside
the orbit of civilized society. They do not belong to it
any longer. They are on the wrong side of history.
On 2 October, citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
voted in the country’s sixth local elections since the
war. Unfortunately, parties that focused on polarizing
rhetoric and ethnic division generally saw the greatest
gains at the ballot box. While the conduct of elections
was largely peaceful, electoral irregularities and unrest
in the southern town of Stolac resulted in a suspension
of the vote, which will need to be repeated as soon
as possible.
In Srebrenica, a place of genocide in 1995, as
confirmed by two United Nations tribunals, legal
challenges still dominate the media. It is therefore of
the utmost importance that the mayor of Srebrenica
be a mayor working in the interests of all citizens of

S/PV.7803

the town. In Mostar, citizens were again unable to
participate in elections due to the failure of political
parties to agree on needed changes to the election law.
The fact that the citizens of Mostar have not elected
local representatives since 2008 is a stain on democracy
and another demonstration of how the rule of law
continues to deteriorate. Compounding these political
difficulties, some prominent Croat leaders more
persistently advocated for internal territorial changes
during the reporting period, calling for federalization
or the creation of a third entity, which did little to help
the overall political environment.
As I mentioned earlier, we as the international
community need to take an honest look at two trends
developing in parallel in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
first is one of positive steps taken by the Government
in Bosnia and Herzegovina towards reforms aimed
at EU integration — which I wholeheartedly
support — culminating in the truly significant fact that
Bosnia and Herzegovina has now taken a decisive step
towards candidacy status with the European Union.
This is a truly historic act that is seen only once in a
lifetime. This positive trend cannot be denied, and I
believe that it is the duty of all of us gathered here today
to fully embrace it.
The second trend, however, is the tendency of
some political actors to return to the divisive and
destructive agendas of the past and, in the case of the
Republika Srpska referendum, to assert that neither
the Dayton Peace Agreement nor the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina can limit their actions. With
this referendum, I believe that we as the international
community, need to ask ourselves how long these
two dynamics can be sustained before the second
overwhelms the first. Or to put it another way, can
we accept that some of the country’s leaders work
for European Union integration and the internal
disintegration of the country at the same time? Can we
accept that some speak about European values but at
the same time glorify war criminals and thus genocide?
Moving forward, I believe that the answer for
us as an international community is to send a strong
message to those authorities and leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina who openly reject the rule of law and
seek to reopen the wounds of the past that they will
not lead their constituencies to prosperity or integration
with Euro-Atlantic structures. Instead, they will lead
themselves into isolation. The leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina — with the help and guidance of the

16-367313/25

S/PV.7803

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

international community — must recommit to making
Bosnia and Herzegovina a peaceful, stable, functional
and multi-ethnic country that is fully and irreversibly
integrated into European structures.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Inzko
for his briefing.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/935, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2315 (2016).
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to begin
by welcoming Mr. Inzko back to the Security Council
and by thanking him for his report (S/2016/911, annex)
and for his briefing just now. As High Representative, he
has the United Kingdom’s full and continuous support
in his efforts to help Bosnian authorities overcome the
challenges that they face.
As penholder for the Western Balkans this
month, the United Kingdom warmly welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2315 (2016) today.
The deterrence and security provided by the European
Union-led stabilization force (EUFOR ALTHEA) are
fundamental during this period of reform in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The united show of support for the continuation
of the Mission is a clear message to the people and
the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina relaying the
Council’s commitment to the country’s stability,
security and territorial integrity. Such a message comes
4/25

08/11/2016

at an important time. The past 12 months have been
eventful, both for reform and the country’s future in
the European Union and for political upheaval, the
persistence of divisive rhetoric and, sadly, challenges to
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
That was most clearly seen in the decision by the
Republika Srpska authorities to hold a referendum
in September, in clear violation of the ruling of the
Constitutional Court. At heart, that decision was not
about a national day. It was instead a direct challenge
to an integral part of the Framework Agreement. As
set out in annex 4, the Constitutional Court is vital to
the Agreement’s implementation, and, as also set out
in annex 4, the Court’s decisions are final and binding.
Therefore, when a decision is ignored, the legitimacy of
the Dayton institutions is threatened. Such attacks are
unacceptable and destabilizing, and I strongly condemn
them in this Chamber today.
However, it is important to note that the challenge
posed by the referendum went far beyond what is set
out in the Framework Agreement. It evoked dark and
divisive sentiments that have not been seen or heard
for many years, but that are clearly still lingering just
below the surface. It evoked words of war, hatred and
division that have no place in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I therefore call on political leaders of all sides and on
all parties to refrain from such divisive nationalist
rhetoric. It only distracts from the real issues, where
progress is so desperately needed.
Take Mostar, for example: for over eight years the
people of that town have been unable to elect their own
representatives. Instead, they have existed in a frozen
stalemate where progress has been held hostage by
division. Let us call on all the relevant parties to reach an
agreement to allow elections to be held. I also hope that
the authorities can quickly resolve the issues in Stolac,
so as to allow the failed elections there to take place as
soon as possible. Elsewhere, we hope that, following
the election in Srebrenica, the new mayor will work
for the benefit of all communities. It is crucial to see a
renewed focus on reconciliation and the local economy,
so that all citizens see a future in that municipality. For
all the challenges of the past 12 months, the leaders of
the country have also made reforms aimed at moving
away from the rhetoric and the division. In February,
Bosnia and Herzegovina applied formally to join the
European Union, and in September we saw all 28
European Union Foreign Ministers agreeing to task the
16-36731

08/11/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Commission to review that membership application.
Those are significant steps forward.
We should all welcome the progress made on the
reform agenda. It shows what Bosnian leaders can do
when they work together. Let us all encourage Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s leadership to continue making
progress on that agenda, so that all of their citizens can
benefit from the prosperity and security afforded by
Euro-Atlantic integration. In that effort, they will have
no stronger supporter than the United Kingdom.
However, in order to make progress, further
efforts are required with regard to registering defence
property, which is needed for the activation of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization Membership Action Plan
and for progress on the 5+2 agenda. Nevertheless,
until those efforts bear fruit, we remain committed
to the continuing role of the High Representative and
his Office.
Mr. Inzko continues to have our full support as
the final authority in-theatre regarding the civilian
implementation of the General Framework Agreement,
which includes supporting the use of his Bonn powers,
if the situation requires. That is because as High
Representative, together with EUFOR ALTHEA, he
has a vital role to play in Bosnia and Herzegovina until
stability and security are firmly entrenched.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to extend our thanks and
appreciation to Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Hercegovina, for his thorough briefing
before the Council on the latest developments in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Egypt expresses its full support to him in
carrying out his mandate.
Egypt welcomes the positive political developments
in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the past period,
particularly the European Union’s approval of the
official application presented by Bosnian authorities
to join the European Union. That shows the Bosnian
Government’s persistence in pressing ahead with
carrying out the requisite reforms with a view to
achieving integration with Euro-Atlantic institutions in
a manner that fosters the stability of the country and
contributes to the efforts to achieve the comprehensive
development aspired to by the Bosnian people.
At the same time, Egypt expresses its grave concern
about the deterioration in the overall political climate

S/PV.7803

in Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly in the wake
of the decision by the Republika Srpska to organize a
plebiscite to commemorate “Republika Srpska Day”,
in contravention of two decisions by the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
That was described by the High Representative
today in his report (S/2016/911, annex) as constituting a
grave violation by the Republika Srpska of its obligations
under the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Constitution of the
country. That came in addition to further intimations
by Republika Srpska officials about the possibility of
organizing further referendums, including one on the
status of the region.
The insistence by Bosnian Serb officials not to
respect the decisions of courts in general demonstrates
a failure to apply the rule of law and negatively affects
the independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That
was accompanied by a launch of nationalistic calls
from certain political parties in Republika Srpska for
the secession of the Serbian entity from Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in addition to other calls to redemarcate
the internal borders of the federal Republic. That
constitutes a serious threat to the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Bosnia. That fallout will affect not
only Bosnia and Herzegovina but also the entire Balkan
region. Hence, we call upon all of the political leaders to
place the joint interests of the Bosnian people over the
narrow ethnic political interests of any particular ethnic
group, which would only thwart progress and stability.
We wish to state that if those challenges are not
addressed in a serious, comprehensive and consensual
framework, with the participation of all Bosnian
political parties, the political achievements made
since the signing of the Dayton Agreement will be
undermined. That Agreement remains the prevailing
reference point for the region and the main guarantee
of its stability. In that connection, Egypt would like
to highlight the need for all parties to respect the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, national Constitution
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the decisions
issued by the country’s judiciary.
Once again, we emphasize our full backing for the
efforts of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in confronting the dangers of terrorism. We are ready
to extend all forms of support to efforts to confront
extremists and aberrant ideologies, particularly efforts

16-367315/25

S/PV.7803

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

aimed at fighting violent religious speech and at
rectifying flawed religious concepts.
In conclusion, Egypt reasserts the need to intensify
efforts aimed at implementing the 5+2 agenda in full,
as well as the need for the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to earnestly emphasize the concepts of
sociopolitical coexistence, and, concomitantly, to press
ahead with the cause of peace and action, which also
requires sincere international and regional backing for
those efforts.
Ms. Coleman (United States of America): I
thank High Representative Inzko for his service in
representing the international community in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and for his stewardship of the Office
of the High Representative.
The United States welcomes the unanimous
adoption today of resolution 2315 (2016). Among its
provisions, the resolution authorizes the extension of a
Chapter VII mandate for the EUFOR ALTHEA mission
and the NATO presence for an additional year. It
reaffirms the final authority of the High Representative
in the interpretation of civilian aspects of the Dayton
Agreement and reaffirms that any amendments to
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Constitution must be made
in accordance with the amendment procedures set out
therein. The resolution demonstrates the unity of the
Security Council in its support for the agreements
reached in Dayton, and the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as support
for those who seek to protect those fundamental rights,
including High Representative Inzko.
The High Representative’s role, while always
pivotal, has been particularly important this year, as
certain elements have worked against the unity that
Bosnia and Herzegovina has striven for over the past
20 years. His briefing today underscores why the
Council must remain vigilant against those who seek
to undermine the constitutional order in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Republika Srpska’s decision to hold
its referendum in September, in contravention of a
Constitutional Court order, made it clear that Republika
Srpska President Dodik and other politicians are
systematically attempting to erode the competencies
of State-level institutions. As the High Representative
highlighted in his report (S/2016/911, annex), the direct
rejection of the Constitutional Court by the Republika
Srpska means that it has effectively opted out of the
judicial system, out of the State, and has thereby
6/25

08/11/2016

fundamentally rejected the sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. As the High Representative goes on to say
in the report, the referendum is viewed by observers on
both sides as a possible prelude to further referendums
on status questions regarding the Republika Srpska.
Such purposeful destabilization is unacceptable and
threatens to send the country down a fractious path.
The United States looks forward to the day when
Bosnia and Herzegovina meets the objectives and
conditions established by the Peace Implementation
Council for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative, and to the day when we can say with
absolute confidence that Bosnia and Herzegovina has
reached full compliance with the Dayton Agreement
and has become a peaceful, viable State, irreversibly
on course for European integration. But that day has
still not arrived — delayed, in part, because divisive
rhetoric and destabilizing actions on the part of certain
elements within Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to
erode and degrade the vital institutions necessary
for progress.
Further progress for Bosnia and Herzegovina on
political and socioeconomic reforms, on European
Union and NATO membership and on ensuring basic
rights for its people, such as the right to vote in Mostar,
requires commitment from all sides. The United States
commends the continued work of EUFOR ALTHEA
and of NATO, through its headquarters in Sarajevo, and
wholeheartedly supports the renewal of their mandates.
We are pleased that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s defence
review is advancing, and we look forward to that
document, which will further reforms in the defence
sector. However, that progress cannot overshadow the
fact that the registration of defence properties in the
Republika Srpska continues to be blocked. We call on
Republika Srpska President Dodik to ease his unhelpful
rhetoric and inaction on that issue.
Finally, we welcome Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
progress in the European Union membership process
this year, as well as the Government’s dedication to
its reform agenda. Continuing down that path will
require vision, political will and real follow through
on commitments and, most important, compromise
and unity.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank High
Representative Valentin Inzko for his briefing and for
his comprehensive report (S/2016/911, annex) to the
16-36731

08/11/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Security Council, including the special report on the
referendum in the Republika Srpska.
Based on the briefing and the reports, my delegation
is deeply concerned about the developments in Bosnia
and Herzegovina during the reporting period and
about the direction in which the country is heading.
Of particular concern to us is the viability of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as the Agreement is being increasingly
challenged and violated. We can trace the various
political contentions in the country to its ethnic fault
lines, from the dispute over the 2013 census results,
the referendum on the Republika Srpska National Day,
the continuing failure to implement the ruling of the
Constitutional Court on the electoral system for Mostar,
to the secessionist agenda of some quarters in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
In that context, we recognize the crucial need for
the Council to send a united message via resolution 2315
(2016) to urge the parties to abide by the commitment
to cooperate fully with all institutions involved in
the implementation of the Peace Agreement and to
reaffirm the existence of two entities under the Peace
Agreement, as upheld by the Constitution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The holding of the referendum by the Republika
Srpska on 25 September was carried out in complete
disregard of final and binding decisions of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
represents the latest act of defiance by the Republika
Srpska on the judicial institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in violation of the Framework Agreement.
We have seen persistent challenges by the Republika
Srpska to the State’s judicial system in the past, including
its disregard of the Bosnian Constitutional Court’s
decisions on the registration of defence property. More
recently, the President of the Republika Srpska chose
to ignore the summons by the State Prosecutor’s Office
relating to the referendum of 25 September. It is simply
unacceptable for the Republika Srpska to pick and
choose which decisions of the State’s judicial system it
is willing to obey. Such actions are in violation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement and the State’s Constitution.
They also constitute a dangerous precedent, especially
in the context of divisive secessionist rhetoric and
increasing attacks on the authority of the High
Representative. Self-serving and divisive politics is a
dangerous game that gets played at the expense of the
future of the country, especially given its traumatic

S/PV.7803

history. We therefore urge all parties to renounce their
divisive politics and secessionist agendas and to abide
by the State’s Constitution, the various relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Dayton Peace Agreement
for the sake of peace and stability in the region.
Malaysia is encouraged by some positive
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina during
the reporting period. We particularly welcome the
progress made by the country towards integration into
the European Union (EU), which remains central to
the aspirations of its people. Malaysia also welcomes
the increase in foreign direct investments in the first
quarter of 2016. The Government must remain steadfast
in implementing its reform agenda, particularly in
addressing youth unemployment, fighting corruption,
instilling good governance and strengthening the rule
of law. It needs to remain focused on economic growth
and development and the creation of a promising future
for all. We also commend the ongoing commitment
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to countering violent
extremism, as can be seen in the recent sentencing
of seven individuals for joining or attempting to join
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant as foreign
terrorist fighters.
On the issue of the return of refugees and
displaced persons, we wish to see further progress by
the authorities in order to create conducive political,
economic and social conditions for their voluntary
return and harmonious reintegration and reconciliation.
Malaysia reiterates the need to intensify efforts
to fully implement the 5+2 agenda as a condition for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative.
That agenda seeks to promote collaboration among the
political actors and stakeholders, and not adversarial
politics. Until then, Malaysia reaffirms its strong
support for the Office of the High Representative, as
laid out in the Dayton Peace Agreement and as upheld
in various Council resolutions. We condemn the
intimidation and death threats levelled against the High
Representative and call for their prompt and thorough
investigation in conformity with the rule of law.
We also recognize the important stabilizing role
played by the EU-led multinational stabilization force
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We therefore welcome
the renewal of its mandate and the Council’s unity in
adopting resolution 2315 (2016).
In conclusion, Malaysia reaffirms its commitment
to the independence, sovereignty, national unity and

16-367317/25

S/PV.7803

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have
long supported the country in its reconstruction efforts
after the war and will continue to do so with a view to
strengthening the country’s nation-building, inclusive
democracy, reconciliation and economic progress.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Many thanks to Ambassador Valentin Inzko for his
presentation of his biannual report (S/2016/911, annex)
and, more important, many thanks for the special
report on the referendum held on 25 September in the
Republika Srpska.
I also wish to express our appreciation for the
adoption of resolution 2315 (2016), which once again
points to the multinational commitment to stabilization
on the part of the European Union. which has played
a positive and commendable role in supporting the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
By way of a preliminary remark, I wish to endorse
the contents of the statement to be delivered by the
observer of the EU.
The year 2016 has been a major year for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, marked by a series of landmark events.
I wish to point to one of those events — 15 February,
which is when Bosnia and Herzegovina’s candidacy
for integration into the European Union was
presented — which points to the beginning of a path
that will not be easy, a path that Spain knows well. I can
affirm that, in the end, it is a path towards progress and
stability. Bosnia and Herzegovina has already taken the
first important steps on that path towards the European
Union. I will highlight three steps.
The first step is the implementation of the
reform agenda. The second step is the adaption of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement. The third
step is the adoption, on 23 Augus,t of the coordination
mechanism for European Union matters. We welcome
those steps, but in order to continue along the positive
path, it is absolutely necessary that all actors and
relevant political forces address and come up with a
solution to those issues that are of the greatest concern
to the population. I think that one of the greatest
concerns has to do with respect for the rule of law,
which is an irreplaceable and essential pillar of any
State and which is the foundation of the European
Union. It is for that reason that I most lament those
cases where we have seen actions against the rule of law,
against established legislation, against the authority of
institutions and in particular against the authority of
8/25

08/11/2016

the Bosnian Constitutional Court with respect to its
decision of 17 September on the convening and holding
of a referendum in the Republika Srpska.
Spain calls on all institutional and political actors
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to be guided in all their
conduct by the need to fulfil legal requirements. We
also want to see, once and for all, an end to divisive
rhetoric, and we unequivocally condemn any incitement
to hatred. The political leaders of the three communities
are especially responsible for seeking reconciliation
and ensuring that everyone can live peacefully together.
I cannot conclude without reiterating Spain’s support
for the work carried out by the High Representative. It
is our desire to see necessary progress made as soon as
possible in order to ensure that the five objectives are
met and the two conditions for the conclusion of his
mandate. I also wish to recall my previous statement
(see S/PV.7688) on this issue here in the Security
Council in which I expressed the unequivocal support
of Spain for the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and unity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as our
conviction that the stability of the region as a whole is
inseparable from the political stability and progress of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I wish to express my gratitude
to Ambassador Valentin Inzko, High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzogovina, for his informative briefing.
Japan appreciates the High Representative’s ongoing
contribution to peace and stability in the country. We
also welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2315 (2016), which supports the implementation of the
Dayton Agreement.
The Dayton Agreement was the best and wisest
choice available to the international community in
1995. I remember being struck by what I saw when I
visited Sarajevo as the Chief Political Officer for United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo in
1999. In addition to the ravages of war, I saw a total lack
of communication, five years following the Agreement.
The town of Pale in the Republika Srpska — just 13
kilometres away from Sarajevo, on the other side of the
mountain — had no interaction at all with Sarajevo. I
recall hoping that the ethnic tensions would be resolved
over time through efforts by all sides to overcome the
very difficult matter of ethnic tension.
As a member of the Peace Implementation Council,
Japan has contributed to the implementation of the
Peace Agreement by emphasizing mutuality among
16-36731

08/11/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV.7803

different ethnic groups. Since the collapse of the former
Yugoslavia, ethnic tensions have continued to affect
the Balkans. When I was in Kosovo, the prevailing
perspective was that the Dayton Agreement had sowed
interim stability, and it was our belief that in the long
term, Kosovo’s borders would become unnecessary and
meaningless in tandem with its regional integration
within the European Union (EU). Japan therefore
welcomes the decision by the EU General Affairs
Council to accept the application of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for membership in the EU. We also
welcome the approval of the Extended Fund Facility
to Bosnia and Herzegovina by the Executive Board of
the International Monetary Fund, which will enhance
economic stability.

Herzegovina and pay attention to and heed the views
and concerns of all parties concerned.

It is nonetheless disappointing to see actions that
foment ethnically based divisions and run contrary
to the vision of the Dayton Agreement. Japan is
particularly concerned about the impact on the stability
of the country of the referendum in the Republika
Srpska. The referendum was held against the orders of
the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

China respects the independence, sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We respect the choice made by the Bosnian
people with regard to the future of their country, and
we support Bosnian people of all ethnicities in living
harmoniously and seeking development together.
We welcome the efforts by High Representative
Inzko to promote the political process of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We hope that, according to his mandate,
he will continue to play a positive role in promoting the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement.

As it has done for the past quarter century, the
international community must continue to provide
the vision to resolve the ethnic tensions that have
plagued the region. The future is in reconciliation,
not in confrontation. The future is in integration,
including market integration, not in secession. Member
States should bolster reconciliation and avoid fanning
ethnic tensions. The Security Council must speak
with one voice in urging dialogue among the various
ethnic groups.
The Office of the High Representative continues
to be vital for the peace and stability of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Japan will continue to fully support
Ambassador Inzko and his Office to that end.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Inzko, for his briefing.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country
in the Balkans. It is in the interests of the international
community in general, and of regional States in
particular, that it maintain peace and stability, advance
coordinated socioeconomic development and achieve
harmonious coexistence among all ethnic groups.
The international community should take a balanced
and prudent approach on the question of Bosnia and

China welcomes the achievement by Bosnia and
Herzegovina in advancing national reconciliation,
promoting economic development and strengthening
the rule of law. We have noted that the country is
still faced by difficulties and challenges in its pursuit
of national stability and development. We hope that
Bosnian people of all ethnicities will work actively to
consolidate the results of the political process, engage
in dialogue to settle their differences, comprehensively
implement the Dayton Peace Agreement and continue
to strive for greater progress in all areas so that Bosnian
people of all ethnicities can share in the peace dividend.

China welcomes the adoption of resolution
2315 (2016), which extends the mandate of EUFOR
ALTHEA, the EU-led peacekeeping force. We hope
that EUFOR ALTHEA will continue to maintain
close cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina and
play a constructive role in maintaining the peace and
stability of the country. China is willing to work with
the international community and continue to contribute
to the realization of the lasting peace, stability and
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for the Implementation of
the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
thank him for the fiftieth report (S/2016/911, annex) of
the High Representative to the Security Council. We
commend his work in support of the implementation
of the General Framework Agreement and for the
consolidation of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2315
(2016), which extends the mandate of the multinational
stabilization force EUFOR ALTHEA for an additional
12-month period, focused on capacity-building and

16-367319/25

S/PV.7803

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

training and to contribute to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
authorities’ deterrence capacity.
Angola is fully committed to respecting and
supporting the unity, independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to
the General Framework Agreement for Peace. In our
statement, we will basically focus on three issues: the
general political environment, challenges to the General
Framework Agreement and the lack of cooperation with
the High Representative.
We are concerned about the political environment
prevailing in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The holding of
a referendum in September by the Republika Srpska
authorities is in violation of ruling of the Constitutional
Court that stipulates that any referendum must be
consistent with the country’s Constitution and the
General Framework Agreement. The Republika Srpska
authorities must abide by the Constitutional Court’s
decisions and avoid, by all means, unilateral elections
that might undermine peace and stability in the country.
We welcome the holding of peaceful local elections
in October as an important step for the consolidation
of peace and democratic institutions in the country.
Although they were peaceful in general, the elections
were marked by inter-ethnic incidents, irregularities
and unrest in some polling stations. The electoral
process should be completed and voting held where it
has not taken place. We urge the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to create political and socioeconomic
conditions conducive to the voluntary repatriation
and reintegration of refugees and displaced persons
in their territories and communities of origin, while
strengthening reconciliation and social cohesion so as
to consolidate peace, healing and forgiveness.
Regarding the challenges to the implementation of
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, we are very worried by the statements
made by high officials that challenge the country’s
territorial integrity. The provocations by the Republika
Srpska authorities, such as offering congratulations to
war criminals, should be universally condemned. Such
statements and actions threaten the General Framework
Agreement and Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence. They
help to undermine a multi-ethnic society’s cohesion
and the country’s unity and national reconciliation.
In line with resolution 2315 (2016), we reaffirm that
Bosnia and Herzegovina consists of two entities by
10/25

08/11/2016

virtue of its Constitution, and that any change to the
Constitution must be made in accordance with the
procedure it prescribes.
Regarding the lack of cooperation with the High
Representative, we reject the decision of the Republika
Srpska authorities to deny him access to information and
documents, as required under annex 10 of the General
Framework Agreement, and we call on them to allow
him access, as requested by his Office, that will enable
him to carry out his mandated duties accordingly.
In conclusion, we commend the European Union for
its support to Bosnia and Herzegovina in the security
and defence sectors and in the implementation of
socioeconomic, rule-of-law and public administration
reforms. We call on the European Union to continue
helping the country to overcome its remaining
challenges and to implement the reforms. Today’s
adoption of resolution 2315 (2016) gives expression to
that commitment. Lastly, we call on the international
community, and the United Nations in particular, to
continue supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina in fully
implementing the Peace Agreement, which is key to
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s attainment of
stability, peace and security and well-being, as well as
in the Balkans as a whole.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, we are grateful to our United
Kingdom colleagues for their constructive approach
during the consultations and willingness to take our
chief concerns into consideration, enabling us to support
today’s Security Council resolution 2015 (2016) on
extending Operation Althea of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
After thoroughly studying the reports of
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we are compelled to conclude that, like
similar previous reports, they do not attempt to assess
what is happening in the country objectively. We regret
the fact that despite our frequent appeals and warnings,
the High Representative, in his actions and public
comments, is clearly not giving enough attention to
the basic tasks of encouraging intra-Bosnian dialogue
and strengthening inter-ethnic trust. We are getting the
distinct impression that Mr. Inzko’s guiding principle
has become an anti-Serbian credo, thereby creating
artificial ruptures between the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, when his main objective should be to
unite them.
16-36731

08/11/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Instead of pursuing these seemingly obvious
priorities, the High Representative is increasingly
sliding into politicized polemic, with the focus on
personal sympathies and antipathies. From now on, we
repeat that what we want to see in his reports is not a
flood of emotion dictated by the current environment,
but at least an attempt at impartial analysis of the
situation, something that we are firmly believe would
be very useful to every member of the Security Council.
With regard to the documents Mr. Inzko presented
to the Council, we cannot agree with the tendentious
interpretations, taken out of context, of the Republika
Srpska referendum held on 25 September on the entity’s
main holiday, Republika Srpska Day. We believe that
a plebiscite held on an issue within the Republika
Srpska’s constitutional remit in no way threatens the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. There is no need to create artificial
problems. Moreover, the steps taken on 25 October by
the Republika Srpska authorities, following up on the
expression of the electorate’s opinion by enacting a new
law on Republika Srpska Day, testify unambiguously to
Banja Luka’s readiness to affirm the holiday’s secular
and non-discriminatory nature.
Security Council members can acquaint themselves
with those and other useful facts in the substantive
report of the Republika Srpska Government, which, by
tradition, we recommend that our colleagues read and
note as a helpful guide to a more objective understanding
of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly
since for some reason the High Representative’s
reports purposely do not touch on those Republika
Srpska actions. And the abuses of the independent
Government’s central judicial organs are simply way
out of line.
The credibility of the Bosnian State-level justice
authorities should be built solely on improving their
professionalism, impartiality and effectiveness and
ending the process of withdrawing foreign specialists
from the staff of the higher judicial authorities, which
by definition should be national and independent.
The key to that is carrying out thorough reform of the
judicial and prosecutorial system on the best possible
foundations, which should be developed collectively by
Bosnians themselves without any pressure, imposition
of ready-made schemes or interference from outside.
We believe that the principle of transferring
responsibility for all the country’s processes to the

S/PV.7803

Bosnian authorities should define the international
community’s approach to the other issues that Bosnia
and Herzegovina is currently dealing with, whether
they concern the publication of the census results, the
implementation of the decisions of the European Court
of Human Rights on the well-known Sejdić and Finci
case or the holding of municipal elections in Mostar.
That is why we have consistently advocated for shutting
down as soon as possible the remaining elements of the
international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
represented by the High Representative and the Bonn
powers, which have outlived their usefulness.
We should recall that in his recent reports the High
Representative pays lip service to caring about the
importance of respecting the decisions of the Bosnian
State structures, but he was not always so scrupulous. In
2011, for the sake of short-term ambitions, he suspended
the implementation of the decision of the Central
Election Commission of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in a
significant blow to its positions as a crucial body for the
functioning of democracy in the country. And we are
all familiar with the lamentable consequences of that
step. That voluntarism vis-à-vis the law proved to be
ineffective five years ago and would be all the more
inappropriate in the future.
We would once again like to draw attention to the
fact that both in his reports and in practice, Mr. Inzko
gives too little space to the implementation of the 5+2
plan, adopted almost 10 years ago as one of the conditions
for closing the Office of the High Representative.
We believe that he should turn his attention back to
implementing that programme. And the subject of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s relations with the European
Union and NATO, which has nothing to do with the
High Representative’s Dayton mandate and diverts his
Office’s limited resources, should on the contrary be
immediately dispensed with. We are fundamentally
opposed to any attempts to use external channels to
influence the sovereign choice of the independent State
that Bosnia and Herzegovina unquestionably is.
We note that after a series of persistent reminders,
the High Representative’s reports have begun to touch
on the counter-terrorism situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. However, we hope that future reports
will reflect the subject appropriately because Islamic
terrorism poses a real threat to the security of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and neighbouring countries, unlike
something that is occupying much of Mr. Inzko’s
attention — the anti-Serbian demagoguery. Mr. Inzko

16-3673111/25

S/PV.7803

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

has said that this demagoguery has reached its apogee.
Furthermore, in an interview on 1 November with a
correspondent of the Wall Street Journal he suggested
that the Western community needed to rethink the
current President. He said:
(spoke in English)
“He was the hope of the West... Dodik is building
his own empire... The Western community should
think about removing him.”
(spoke in Russian)
But can an international official of such rank,
whose gold standard should be objectivity, neutrality
and impartiality, make such a comment? We do not
believe the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina to be
as bleak as it is being depicted. In that vein, we would
note the municipal elections held on 2 October, which
were by and large held normally, as an example; and we
wish every success to those representatives who will be
taking office at the local level.
The Russian Federation, as a guarantor of the 1995
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, will continue to help its steadfast
implementation, including by guaranteeing genuine
equality for all three constituent peoples and the
defence of broad authorities of the entities, as outlined
in the Dayton Peace Agreement. We will continue to
consolidate a beneficial partnership with Bosnia and
Herzegovina at all levels of authority.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I begin
by thanking the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina for his briefing and aligning myself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union shortly.
France welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2315 (2016), which shows that all members
of the Council share the same guiding principles with
regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina: support for the
presence of the European Union-led peacekeeping force
(EUFOR Althea) while awaiting the strategic review
that will be carried out next autumn by the European
External Action Service; respect for the aspirationa
of all factions in the country that favour a European
outlook; and the absolute necessity that all must respect
the principles and institutions set forth in the Paris
Dayton accords.
12/25

08/11/2016

The unity of the Council around such a common
base sends a message of peace to the region. It recalls
that the international community is in agreement in
supporting the independence and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which should not be
challenged by any of its entities, and in respecting the
country’s choices, provided that they are in line with
international law and the framework established by the
peace agreements.
More than 20 years after its signature, the Dayton
accords remain the cornerstone of institutional stability
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that regard, and as many
have done before me, we can only deplore the decision
made by the authorities of the Republika Srpska to hold
a referendum in September on the issue of Republika
Srpska Day, in contravention of its suspension by the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
hence of the Constitution, which is an integral part of
the peace agreements that stipulates that the Court’s
rulings are final and binding. That decision has led to
an unnecessary spiral of tensions between communities
and has revived memories of past divisions. We also
regret the fact that the local elections on 2 October were
not held in Mostar because of a lack of agreement on
its status. The inhabitants of Mostar cannot continue
to be deprived of their right to choose their own
representatives, as they have been for eight years now.
France does not rule out the possibility of a debate
being held among the entities on the definition of
national holidays or the aspirations of some to improve
the functioning of the central State. It nonetheless
recalls that any viable solution must come by way of
dialogue in good faith among the different stakeholders
of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina — the central
State and the entities — while respecting constitutional
rules. We also call on all the parties to cooperate with
the institutions mentioned in the peace agreement,
in particular the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the High Representative. The
latter has a crucial role to play in promoting peaceful
dialogue among the different communities and the
entities. Political decision-makers must also fulfil
their responsibilities, and we call on them to abandon
divisive rhetoric.
Having said that, despite such fragilities we remain
convinced that the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is today heading in the right direction, towards
normalization. Our objective for years to come remains,
16-36731

08/11/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

without challenging the principles of the Paris Dayton
accords, to fully adapt the international presence to
current realities.
France welcomes the fact that a European outlook
is the main driver of development and consolidation in
the country. Last February, Bosnia and Herzegovina
submitted its candidacy for accession to the European
Union, reflecting the broad support for such an
outlook within the country. In that new context, the
European Union shall continue more than ever to
assist the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
implementing reforms that respond to the economic
and social aspirations of the population. The Reform
Agenda adopted last year is, in that regard, critical.
We welcome the fact that it is already bearing concrete
results, such as the adoption of new labour legislation at
the entity level. We encourage Bosnian authorities at all
levels to intensify their reform efforts to the benefit of
the people of the country and in the context of moving
Bosnia and Herzegovina closer to Europe.
The European Union mission EUFOR Althea will
also pursue its efforts to enable the security forces of
Bosnia to operate in an independent fashion and to
thereby participate in building a peaceful society looking
towards the future. Next autumn, this will be subject
of a strategic review within the European Union, as I
have already said, that will allow for the drawing up of
options for its development in the years to come, taking
into account the progress Bosnia and Herzegovina has
made towards European rapprochement.
Twenty years after the horror of war, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is today advancing in the right direction,
with the support of the European Union and its other
partners. The responsibility of the international
community, and especially the Council, is to encourage
it in that direction. The unanimity with which we
have adopted resolution 2315 (2016) this morning will
undoubtedly contribute to that.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine joins the
other Council members in welcoming the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2315 (2016). We are grateful to
the United Kingdom delegation for preparing the text
and are ready for further active engagement on the issue,
including as a member of the relevant Coordination and
Drafting Group.
Ukraine also aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

S/PV.7803

I wish to express my delegation’s appreciation to
High Representative Valentin Inzko for his leadership
of the Office of the High Representative and for
his contribution to the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. I wish to stress that, despite the attempts
of one Council member to question the authorities,
under the provisions of the Peace Agreement as was
already mentioned, the High Representative is the final
authority in theatre regarding interpretation of the
said Agreement on the Civilian Implementation of the
Peace Settlement.
We are alarmed at the fact that the political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has deteriorated.
Serious disagreements between the parties persist
on many important issues. As a result, Bosnia and
Herzegovina was unable to meet the requirements of
the 5+2 agenda necessary for the closure of the Office
of the High Representative.
At the previous Security Council meeting on the
subject, in May (see S/PV. 7688), the majority of the
Council members, including my delegation, expressed
concerns over the statements made by Republika Srpska
authorities on possible referendums. My delegation
then underscored that any referendum that contradicts
the provisions of the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Dayton Agreement is illegitimate.
Unfortunately, appeals by Council members fell on
deaf ears. Ukraine strongly condemns the holding of
a referendum by the authorities of Republika Srpska in
clear contravention of two final and binding decisions
of the Constitutional Court.
I fully agree with the High Representative that that
move causes unnecessary tensions and poses a grave
challenge to the rule of law. It has serious implications
for peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We also fully share the High Representative’s concern
regarding the decoration of a number of war criminals
sentenced by the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. The referendum is the continuation of
the policy of Republika Srpska aimed at challenging
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including by threats of separation.
In that light, it is unfortunate that despite the
obvious fact that the referendum is an exceptionally
dangerous development for the region, one Council
member defends this decision and supports the Bosnian
Serb leaders in their defiance of the authority of the
central bodies of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In fact,

16-3673113/25

S/PV.7803

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

the authorities of Republika Srpska abuse the special
status granted to their entity by the Dayton Agreement.
Instead of full compliance with the Peace Agreement
to everybody’s benefit, they actually undermine the
common State, thus blocking Bosnia’s political and
economic development.
That is a very irresponsible policy — irresponsible
towards the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
people of Republika Srpska, who have found themselves
living in self-imposed isolation. Just imagine — a new
generation has grown up in the country since 1995,
and many of them have never been outside Republika
Srpska. There are several famous bridges in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, including the old Mostar bridge and
the bridge on the Drina in Višegrad, the very one to
which Ivo Andrić referred in his book The Bridge on
the Drina:
“Of everything that man erects and builds in his
urge for living, nothing is in my eyes better or more
valuable than bridges. They are more important
than houses, more sacred than shrines. Belonging
to everyone and being equal to everyone, useful,
always built with a sense, on the spot where most
human needs are crossing, they are more durable
than other buildings and they do not serve anything
secret or bad”.
With this message from Ivo Andrić in mind, I believe
it is more important to build new bridges in Bosnia and
Herzegovina than to burn existing ones.
I would like to remind the Republika Srpska
authorities that any referendum must be conducted
in a way that is consistent with the Constitution
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and cannot violate the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Ukraine would also like to reaffirm its strong
commitment to the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and urges the parties to
avoid further statements and actions that could make
the situation even more difficult.
Now, on a positive note, Ukraine welcomes
the progress achieved in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
European Union (EU) integration process, which
is reflected in the European Council conclusions of
20 September 2016. We consider the EU decision
to submit an opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
application for new membership as an important
14/25

08/11/2016

step towards Bosnia and Herzegovina’s European
integration. It is vital to continue efforts to implement
the Reform Agenda, which includes socioeconomic
issues, the rule of law and public administration
reforms. It is also important to demonstrate progress in
the functioning of the judiciary and in the fight against
corruption and organized crime, and the fight against
radicalization and terrorism.
Ukraine welcomes the EU’s readiness, as confirmed
in the conclusions of the EU Foreign Ministers on
17 October, to continue to play an executive military
role in supporting the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities in the maintenance of a safe and secure
environment under a new Security Council mandate.
In that respect, we also positively note the EU’s request
that the High Representative present a strategic review
in autumn 2017 as the basis for a discussion on options
for the future of the operation. It is extremely important
to intensify efforts and fully implement the 5+2 agenda.
In the meantime, it is vital to support the actions and
reforms needed to reach that milestone and to provide
all necessary support to the High Representative as he
fulfils his mandate.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his
briefing this morning.
I would like to begin by highlighting Uruguay’s
adherence to the principle of the territorial integrity
of States, enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. Uruguay reaffirms its support for Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the consolidation of its unity and in the
exercise of its sovereignty.
Respect for institutions and legality is the path
towards a stable Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which the
communities that compose it live together in harmony.
In that context, Uruguay attaches the highest value to
the rule of law and to the authority of the institutions
established by the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and therefore deems
it essential to maintain the commitment to fully comply
with the 1995 Dayton Agreement. We urge all parties,
including the international community, to support any
and all efforts to promote peace and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which will also have an impact on
stability in the entire region.
16-36731

08/11/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Here I would make a special plea to the political
players in Bosnia and Herzegovina to conduct themselves
responsibly and to engage in a constructive dialogue
that will enable them to overcome their differences
and focus on national reconciliation and on achieving
common objectives, so as to ensure that Bosnia and
Herzegovina becomes a solid and prosperous nation.
The report of the High Representative (S/2016/911,
annex) indicates scant progress in achieving the
remaining five objectives and two conditions
established by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council for the closure of the Office of
the High Representative. For that reason, I would point
once again to the importance of continuing efforts and
maintaining progress in taking forward the 5+2 agenda.
Despite the lack of progress in some areas, Bosnia
and Herzegovina has progressed in others, which must
be highlighted. I wish in particular to note the climate
of security and stability that prevailed during the
period despite the inflammatory rhetoric and enabled
the peaceful holding of local elections of October.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made progress in
implementing its Reform Agenda, adopted in July
2015, which focuses on the socioeconomic issues that
directly affect its citizens, and has taken a number
of steps towards European Union (EU) integration
through its signing of the Protocol on the adaptation
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement and the
adoption of the EU coordination mechanism.
The international community must continue
to support the process of consolidating the peace
agreements. We are especially grateful for the work of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force Operation
Althea, which represents a guarantee of the political
and social stability of the country. It is vital that the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to
cooperate with the Office of the High Representative
until the end of his mandate, once the 5+2 programme
has been completed.
I reiterate Uruguay’s commitment and our desire
to see a stable and sovereign Bosnia and Herzegovina
that embraces all of its citizens and focuses on their
common welfare.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First and foremost,
we would like to thank the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his

S/PV.7803

briefing and to reiterate our full support for his work
on the matter.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela once
again reaffirms its full support and respect for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Given that
that is one of the fundamental elements of the Charter
of the United Nations, we believe that it is a principle
that cannot be violated under any circumstances. We
believe that the international community must continue
to support the implementation of the 1995 General
Framework Agreement for Peace as a way to contribute
to a peaceful solution of the differences among the
stakeholders concerned.
Today more than ever, at a moment when tensions
in the region have increased, we wish to highlight the
importance of unequivocal and clear compliance with
the Dayton Agreement. Moreover, we must bear in
mind that it is incumbent upon the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to lead the efforts related to the future of
their country. As part of that process, the ethnic groups
must continue to work together in the framework of
dialogue that fosters peace, human rights, cooperation
and social and economic development, setting aside,
once and for all, the tensions and confrontations that
tormented the region during the 1990s.
In that context, and on the basis of the principles of
impartiality, transparency and constructive work, the
High Representative must continue to play a supporting
role to promote such efforts and find common ground
among the parties through dialogue based on balanced
and prudent approaches and with a constructive
vision, leaving behind the criticisms that exacerbate
animosities, and in which the opinions and views of all
stakeholders are reflected.
The European Union’s multinational stabilization
force in Bosnia and Herzegovina has carried out its
work within the framework of the mandate assigned
to it, in collaboration with the authorities, to ensure a
safe environment for all the ethnic communities. Our
country therefore welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2315 (2016), which renews its mandate for a
further 12 months.
With regard to the fight against terrorism, it is worth
mentioning that the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/501)refers to the issue of foreign terrorist
fighters and the sentences given to several citizens
accused of joining or attempting to join the Islamic

16-3673115/25

S/PV.7803

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

08/11/2016

State in Iraq and the Levant. Our country supports
the efforts aimed at preventing and fighting terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, which must be
accompanied by effective strategies against social
exclusion, poverty, violence and intolerant ideologies,
with a view to curbing radicalization, with particular
emphasis on young people. Furthermore, we must work
to effectively implement Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions that prohibit the financing,
training and transfer of weapons to such groups.

the country well as it pursues this path of integration in
the months and years to come.

With regard to fighting impunity, we support
the work of the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, which was set up to try those responsible
for the violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law that were committed during the armed
conflict in the territories of the former Yugoslavia.
Moreover, we reiterate our solidarity with, and support
for, Bosnia and Herzegovina for its firm commitment
to foster peace and stability in the country for the
benefit of its citizens.We are convinced that respect
for sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence is essential to achieving those objectives.

As Bosnia and Herzegovina pursues EU
membership, we look forward to regional and
international partners supporting the implementation
of the reform agenda for the benefit of all of its citizens.
We also hope to see accelerated progress on the five
objectives and two conditions that are necessary for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative.

Finally, we call on all parties to redouble their
efforts to build confidence and work together in the
framework of international law, which is necessary for
a just and lasting solution that redounds to the benefit
of the parties and the entire region.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I too welcome
High Representative Inzko and the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are pleased that the Council has today
reauthorized the European Union (EU) military presence
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The EU-led mission
continues to play an important role in supporting Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s efforts to maintain a safe and secure
environment. The mission also offers capacity-building
that helps to ensure that Bosnia and Herzegovina has
the tools it needs to respond to security threats.
As we heard this morning, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has continued to make significant progress toward
its goal of EU membership since the Council last
discussed the situation in the country (see S/PV.7688).
In September, another milestone was reached when
the European Commission was asked to conduct an
assessment of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s membership
application. While there is a long road ahead, it is another
sign of what Bosnia and Herzegovina can achieve when
its leaders unite around a common purpose. We wish
16/25

We welcome the progress Bosnia and Herzegovina
has made on its reform agenda. That agenda provides
a road map for strengthening public administration
and improving socioeconomic conditions. However,
maintaining momentum in the implementation of the
agenda will require persistence and determination in
the face of difficult decisions.

As we have heard today, the High Representative
has reported actions in Bosnia and Herzegovina that
directly challenge the authority of the State judicial
institutions and the General Framework Agreement
for Peace, including the holding of a referendum in
contravention of a ruling of the Constitutional Court.
Those activities are destabilizing and undermine the
rule of law. We urge all political actors to respect State
institutions and constitutional order. Disagreements
should be dealt with through dialogue. We hope that
divisive and inflammatory actions will be left behind
and that leaders will choose to focus on what can be
achieved by working together constructively. Divisive
rhetoric also serves to undermine reconciliation
efforts. More than two decades after the Dayton Peace
Accords brought an end to a devastating conflict, true
reconciliation remains an unfinished project.
We hope that all political leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina can move beyond their points of difference
and focus on fulfilling the aspiration of all of its citizens
for stability and prosperity. An inclusive and united
society will ultimately make the country stronger and
more stable and will improve the welfare of all of its
peoples. That is the future we wish to see for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Senegal.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for the detailed briefing he has just given. The Senegalese
16-36731

08/11/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

delegation welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2315 (2016). More than 20 years have passed
since the signing of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace, the Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement. Bosnia
and Herzegovina, despite the persistence of some
pitfalls, is continuing its inexorable march towards
reunification and nation-building. The Senegalese
delegation’s statement will concentrate — as it did six
months ago here in the Chamber (see S/PV.7688) — on
all the political, economic, institutional and security
dimensions of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
On the political level, progress has certainly been
made. On the one hand, we have seen the publication,
on 30 June, of the results of the population census that
had been under way since 2013. On the other hand,
on 2 October, local elections were held across the
territory, except, unfortunately, in the city of Mostar.
We must recognize that the past six months have also
been marked by a resurgence in some tension among
Bosnian, Croat and Serb communities.
The Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement, which ended
one of the most terrible wars in the very heart of
Europe, today seem fragile, not to say jeopardized,
by the referendum organized on 25 September by the
Republika Srpska. We warned against that referendum.
The holding of the referendum constitutes an additional
challenge with regard to carrying out the threats of
secession proclaimed by the Republika Srpska — which,
we remind the Council, had already called into question
the competence of the Constitutional Court and the
Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as the competence and the decisions of the
High Representative.
My delegation is of the view that such a step
undermines the work on the national construction
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which instead requires
renewed commitments to strengthen the institutional
architecture outlined in the Dayton-Paris accords,
a calm atmosphere and frank dialogue among all
the components of the State, all while respecting the
Constitution and laws.
During the period under review, Bosnia and
Herzegovina saw encouraging economic progress. In
July, there was the adoption of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement, followed on 23 August by
the adoption of the Coordination Mechanism of the
European Union. The country has also benefitted from
support and assistance from the International Monetary

S/PV.7803

Fund, which decided to earmark €553 million for a
period of three years. There was also a notable increase
in economic activity in Bosnia and Herzegovina during
the first seven months of 2016, when compared with the
same period in 2015. The unemployment rate fell by
4.2 per cent, compared with the same months of 2015.
At the same time, the trade deficit saw a downturn of
4.1 per cent, and industrial production increased by
4 per cent, compared with 2015. That progress has
been consolidated with the ongoing assistance of the
international community, prioritizing harmonious
development, stability and the welfare of the population
in order to contribute to mitigating the fragility of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the region.
At the institutional level, the Senegalese delegation
reaffirms its support for the High Representative and
encourages all parties to cooperate with him. This
has to do with the preservation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity as well as the political independence
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as guaranteed by the
General Framework Agreement for Peace, by the
country’s Constitution and by international law. It is
in that spirit that the Senegalese delegation call on all
three ethnic groups to collaborate more closely and to
further cultivate a common will to guarantee a stable,
strong and prosperous State that can take its rightful
place among the world’s nations.
It is in that spirit that my delegation commends the
Council’s decision to extend by 12 months the mandate
of the European Union-led multinational stabilization
force in Bosnia and Herzegovina, EUFOR ALTHEA.
As underscored by the report (S/2016/911, annex) of
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the presence in the country of European Union
military mission, which has an executive mandate, is
still important in that it allows his Office and other
participants from the international community to
discharge their respective mandates and to reassure
citizens from all ethnic groups regarding the safety and
security of their environment.
The fight against terrorism is a challenge that Bosnia
and Herzegovina must handle with discernment, in a
context of the return of foreign fighters and complex
migratory flows that constitute an additional risk for
the security of the country and the whole region. It goes
without saying that tangible results cannot be achieved
and maintained in the struggle without the indispensible
reinforcement, at all levels, of cooperation and dialogue

16-3673117/25

S/PV.7803

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

among the authorities of the different components of
the State.
Senegal calls on the international community to
continue supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina’s efforts
for greater resilience in the face of socioeconomic
difficulties, support which should also involve
capacity-building of the police force and the defence
of the country so that they may overcome the strategic
and operational shortcomings in a context where the
terrorist threat remains pressing.
Finally, I would like to encourage the international
community, and first and foremost the Council, to
maintain its commitment and its current level of
cooperation in its approach to the situation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in order to assist the country in the
positive trend it has demonstrated during the past
two decades.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Mr. Vukašinović (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of November and to wish you and your delegation
every success. We welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and have
taken note of his report (S/2016/911, annex) on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, covering the
period from 16 April to 21 October 2016.
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2315 (2016), which extends the mandate of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, EUFOR ALTHEA, for an additional
12 months. It is important to emphasize that Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as a host country, has had respectable
and fruitful cooperation with EUFOR ALTHEA,
particularly in capacity-building and training of its
armed forces, which has contributed to strengthening
national ownership.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
peaceful and calm for a long period of time. That has
been regularly reflected in the reports of the EUFOR
ALTHEA mission, as well as in the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The EUFOR ALTHEA mission
is mandated to support the implementation of military
aspects of the General Framework Agreement for Peace
18/25

08/11/2016

in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to ensure compliance
with annexes 1-A and 2 of the Agreement. Over the
past few years the EUFOR ALTHEA mission has been
reconfigured so as to correspond to the situation on
the ground, while the primary focus of the mission
has shifted from deterrence and activities providing
a safe and secure environment to capacity-building
and training.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has come a long way
from a security consumer to a troop-contributing
country to United Nations peacekeeping missions and,
accordingly, a security provider to international peace
and security. Today, military and police personnel from
Bosnia and Herzegovina participate in United Nations
peacekeeping missions worldwide.
On 2 October, democratic and credible local
elections were held in a peaceful atmosphere in the
country. Citizens throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina
exercised their democratic rights and elected members
of municipal councils and city assemblies, as well as
mayors. Voter turnout was relatively high. Around
54 per cent of eligible citizens exercised their right to
cast a vote.
With regard to the economic situation, it is
important to underscore that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
economy, like other economies in the region, has been
affected by the global economic slowdown. However,
macroeconomic data also show steady growth in Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s economy in the first half of 2016.
Compared with the first half of 2015, the economy grew
by more than 2 per cent. At the same time, exports
increased by 3 per cent.
During the reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina
made notable progress in the implementation of the
Reform Agenda and continued its robust efforts aimed
at achieving socioeconomic reforms, in particular,
those necessary for integration into the European
Union (EU). Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities at
all levels have coordinated their efforts to ensure that
the legal and fiscal framework is conducive to foreign
investment, which is crucial for economic growth and
new job creation.
With the backing of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the European Commission and Bosnia
and Herzegovina signed the Protocol on the adoption of
the Stabilization and Association Agreement. Following
the accession of the Republic of Croatia to the European
Union, the adoption of the Agreement became an
16-36731

08/11/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

outstanding issue for Bosnia and Herzegovina in terms
of its path towards European integration. Furthermore,
Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted a European integration
coordination mechanism. More precisely, the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted the
Decision on the System of Coordination of the European
Integration Process in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
sets up an institutional and operational system of
coordination, as well as modalities for coordination
among Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions at various
levels in relation to the process of European integration.
We would like to express our appreciation to the
EU General Affairs Council decision of 20 September,
which asked the European Commission to submit its
opinion on the application of Bosnia and Herzegovina
for EU membership. This decision represents a major
milestone for European integration. Also during the
reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
European Commission signed the agreement associating
Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Competitiveness of
Enterprises and Small and Medium-sized Enterprises
(COSME) programme. This agreement will enable
Bosnia and Herzegovina to participate in the COSME
programme and support national efforts aimed at
improving the economy and the overall business
environment.
Advancing friendly and constructive cooperation
among countries of the region in areas of mutual
interest is one of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s main
priorities. The prospect of European integration
remains one of the most important factors for regional
stability in the Western Balkans, whose States continue,
within the framework of the Berlin process, to deepen
collaboration in the field of transportation and energy
as the most significant areas for economic growth.
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to prosecute
war crimes in its domestic courts. We reiterate that
fighting impunity at the local level is vital for Bosnia
and Herzegovina as a complex and multinational State.
In that regard, implementing the national strategy for
prosecuting war crimes, regardless of the national
or religious origin of the perpetrators or victims, is
essential for reconciliation and long-term stability.
Terrorism, radicalization and violent extremism
together constitute one of the main security challenges
at the global, regional and national levels. Bosnia
and Herzegovina continues to fulfil its international
obligations with regard to countering terrorism and

S/PV.7803

violent extremism. In accordance with provisions
of its amended penal code, Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to prosecute individuals involved in fighting
on behalf of terrorist and paramilitary organizations as
well as those facilitating terrorist-fighter recruitment.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s judicial and security
institutions have been implementing its strategy for
preventing and combating terrorism. It is important
to emphasize that the strategy, together with
security measures, includes preventive activities for
deradicalization undertaken by national stakeholders,
such as religious communities, educational institutions,
civil-society organizations and the media. During the
reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina also made
progress in combating organized crime, corruption and
money-laundering.
Refugee and migrant flows in the Balkans remain
to be a challenge to the States of the region and their
institutions. We consider that only extensive and
coordinated actions to address underlying causes
of migration in the countries of origin at the global
level can bring a satisfactory solution to the migrant
crisis. Although Bosnia and Herzegovina has not been
under direct pressure brought about by a significant
migrant movement throughout its territory, I would
like to stress that its institutions have undertaken a
set of comprehensive measures to respond in case of
massive influx of refugees, including measures in
the humanitarian and security spheres. Bosnia and
Herzegovina has adopted a strategy in the field of
migration and asylum as well as a plan of action for the
period 2016-2020. These instruments specify Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s policy in the field of migration and
asylum in accordance with the highest European and
international standards.
Finally, we would like to express the readiness of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities to continue their
work to secure a better and prosperous future for its
citizens. At same time, we would also like to express
our gratitude to international partners for supporting
Bosnia and Herzegovina on that path.’
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28
member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro

16-3673119/25

S/PV.7803

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

08/11/2016

and Albania, as well as Ukraine, align themselves with
this statement.

the Copenhagen European Council of 1993 and the
conditions of the Stabilization and Association process.

We thank the Security Council for unanimously
adopting resolution 2315 (2016) renewing the mandate
of the European Union-led peacekeeping force’s
Operation Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina for
one year. I join other speakers in welcoming High
Representative Valentin Inzko back to the Council and
assure him of the European Union’s continued support.
I also welcome the Permanent Representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and thank him for his statement.

This is also an election year for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Although the local elections of 2 October
were generally conducted in an orderly manner, they
unfortunately brought to the surface persisting political
divisions and challenges that have the potential to
undermine stability in the country. The irregularities
and isolated violent incidents that occurred should
be investigated by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities without any delay. Once more, elections in
Mostar did not take place due to disagreements on the
electoral requirements.

The year 2016 is a very important year for Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s European Union prospects. On
15 February, the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
submitted the country’s application for EU membership.
On 20 September, the EU Council decided to ask for the
Commission’s opinion on that membership application.
This decision marks an important milestone for the
European integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
follows the joint efforts of the country’s leadership
at all levels, demonstrating their commitment to the
reforms, answering to citizens’ demand for change and
moving closer to the European Union.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has demonstrated a
serious commitment and readiness to take difficult
political decisions in order to meaningfully implement
the Reform Agenda, an ambitious set of socioeconomic,
rule of law and public administration reforms.
Together with our international partners, including
the international financial institutions, we provided
clear incentives to move forward with reforms of labour
laws, the pension system and banking regulations, as
well as long-term improvements of the business climate
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Currently, Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s economy is showing potential for growth
in the next three to four years.
It is essential to keep the momentum going
regarding both effective reforms and the EU integration
process. The next stages will be equally demanding.
The Reform Agenda will pass into its second stage,
where much remains to be done to improve the political
atmosphere in the country, rule of law issues and public
administration. The reply of Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities to the comprehensive list of questions
prepared by the European Commission will provide the
basis for the assessment of the country’s membership
application and its capacity to meet the criteria set by
20/25

The European Union regrets the unlawful holding of
an entity-level referendum on Republika Srpska Day, in
violation of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court decision of 17 September. The referendum
caused unnecessary tensions and challenged the rule of
law. Such action also distracts attention from the social
and economic problems that people throughout Bosnia
and Herzegovina face on a daily basis. The European
Union encourages all political actors and institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to resolve this issue through
the established legal processes and constructive
dialogue and within the existing constitutional
framework. It urges the parties, in accordance with
the Peace Agreement, to abide by their commitment to
cooperating fully with all institutions involved in the
implementation of the peace settlement, as described
in the Peace Agreement, including the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It also more generally
recalls that under the Peace Agreement, Bosnia and
Herzegovina consists of the two entities that exist legally
by virtue of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution,
which does not allow either entity to secede.
Next year will be an election-free year in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and I would like to take this
opportunity to encourage all parties to resolve pending
issues that present a challenge to the respect of human
rights and democratic institutions, and to embark on
further and deeper socioeconomic reforms. Beyond the
general need to ensure the further implementation of
the adopted reforms and to build a solid track record,
one area in need of a strong focus in the coming
period is the rule of law, including the fight against
corruption and organized crime, addressing any
outstanding shortcomings of the judiciary and the need
for its depoliticization, impartiality and independence,
including in the prosecution of war crimes. In that
16-36731

08/11/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV.7803

respect, the European Union is concerned over recent
cases of the glorification of persons convicted for the
gravest crimes against humanity. All political leaders
and institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina have a
responsibility to assess wartime events honestly, in the
interests of truth, reconciliation and a peaceful future.

continuing, in the appropriate forum, the discussion with
the international community on the reconfiguration of
the international presence. In this regard, the European
Union calls on the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to meet the outstanding objectives and conditions for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative.

I would also like to encourage the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to work towards the
implementation of the rulings of court institutions,
especially of the European Court of Human Rights
case of Sejdić and Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina
and related rulings, as well as of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which will be an
important factor in moving forward its European
agenda and contribute to establishing a democratic
and well-functioning society in which the equality
of all constituent peoples and citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is warranted.

In conclusion, over the two decades that the
Council has been discussing the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we have witnessed substantial progress
in the country in all fields: stability, democracy,
security, economic development and EU integration.
Still, much more needs to be accomplished in terms
of improving the daily lives of citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and of reconciliation among citizens, as
well as the responsible behaviour of all members of the
political leadership in the country. But we believe that
the progress the country achieves on its EU integration
process will catalyse reconciliation and the resolution
of chronic issues, addressing in parallel urgent demands
for comprehensive reforms.

The European Union reiterates its unequivocal
commitment to the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a sovereign and united country. The
European Union will continue to use all available
instruments to support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
stability and progress. While the overall security
situation has remained relatively calm and stable,
stability has not been fully entrenched. The European
Union welcomes the continued presence of Operation
Althea, which retains the capability to contribute to
the deterrence capacity of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities if the situation so requires, while focusing
on capacity-building and training. In this regard, as part
of the overall EU strategy for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the European Union confirms its readiness at this stage
to maintain the executive military role of Operation
Althea to support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities
in maintaining a safe and secure environment, under a
renewed United Nations mandate.
The European Union invited its High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to present a
strategic review in autumn next year, as a basis for
internal discussion within the EU on options for the
future of the Operation, also bearing in mind Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s progress in its EU integration
process and taking into account the security situation
on the ground.
As the country’s stability continues to strengthen
and further progress is achieved in reforms and on
the EU path, the European Union looks forward to

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Vujic (Serbia): Regional stability and
the development of all-round cooperation with its
neighbours continue to be foreign policy priorities of the
Republic of Serbia. In this regard, my country perceives
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a key bilateral partner in
the pursuit of the policy of reconciliation and regional
cooperation in the Balkans. The Republic of Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina are parts of the same process
of enlargement of and accession to the European Union
(EU), and we welcome and applaud each and every step
forward made by our neighbour in that direction, for we
consider that the strengthening of regional cooperation
in the Western Balkans and South-East Europe in all its
aspects is a beeline to membership of the Union. The
potentials for such cooperation are multiple and many,
all the more so as the policy agendas and visions of
the future of the two countries are interchangeable, and
sometimes even identical.
The Dayton Peace Agreement, which ended the
tragic conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina some 20 years
ago, has been the cornerstone of regional peace and
stability. The Republic of Serbia signed the Agreement
and is one of its guarantors. Abidance by the letter and
spirit of the Agreement is as important today as it has
been all these years. After all, it is only by honouring
the Agreement and scrupulously implementing its

16-3673121/25

S/PV.7803

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

provisions that we can achieve genuine reconciliation,
peace and stability, and, by extension, a better life for
the people in both Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the
Republic of Serbia.
Respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States is among the most important principles
of international law and is a standard feature of
international relations. In a region that had the illfortune of being riven by war, ethnic strife and political
upheaval in its not-so-distant past, such principles and
the future are of particular importance. A next-door
neighbour and partner of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the Republic of Serbia has therefore been staunchly
committed to respecting the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, scrupulously
strengthened and promoted close cooperation and
worked consistently on establishing the bonds of
friendship and building mutual confidence, which
will not only benefit the relations between the two
countries, but will also bring us closer to the family of
European nations: integration and membership of the
European Union.
But not every voyage is always unobstructed plain
sailing. In recent months, political winds lifted the ship
of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina and messages
that we believe belong in the past were sent. Relations
among Bosnia and Herzegovina constituent peoples
and its entities were unnecessarily disrupted and the
constructive approach that we had all come to expect
was not visible. Yet, just as it always has in the past,
the Republic of Serbia made every effort to stabilize
the situation, calm political passions and overcome
differences by agreement, with one all-important
goal in mind — that of maintaining peace, bringing
progress and ensuring a better future for the people of
the Republic of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
did so by scrupulously respecting the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of its neighbour and, lest it should
slip the Council’s attention, the effort was recognized
far and wide.
Ever since the signing of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, it has been proved time and again that the
best way to address and resolve outstanding internal
issues and the subjects of disagreements among the
constituent peoples and the entities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is though dialogue and agreement. In
my country’s opinion, one such issue is the marking
of the Republic of Srpska Day. We therefore support
active dialogue as the best way to find acceptable
22/25

08/11/2016

and applicable solutions — a dialogue that implies
the readiness of all sides to mutually respect and
understand one another. That is in the best interests of
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the only way
for the country’s integration into larger organizations,
including the European Union.
As an EU candidate country, the Republic of
Serbia has begun the EU membership negotiation
process and undertaken relevant reforms. It considers
them as policy priorities, yet, all the same, it supports
its neighbours in their own activities, in the belief that
they will bring about integration in those countries,
as well as in the entire region of the Western Balkans,
in the European Union. To that end, the Republic of
Serbia welcomes the decision of the European Union
of 20 September to accept the application of Bosnia
and Herzegovina for membership of the European
Union, as well as the agreements reached inside the
country providing for coordination mechanisms within
the process of European integration. We are ready to
intensify our cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina
in a field in which formal conditions exist, including a
relevant memorandum of understanding and an action
plan. Let me point out that ongoing cooperation has
evolved within the framework of regional programmes
financed by the Instrument of Pre-Accession funds.
The Western Balkans has embarked irreversibly
on the road to reconciliation, stability and integration,
and European integration in particular. Yet what
we need now, perhaps more than ever before, is to
build mutual confidence among the three constituent
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its two entities.
The country is home to a large number of Serbs, and
it is our earnest expectation and hope that they will
cooperate with their compatriot Bosniacs and Croats
ever more closely and intensely. Proceeding from
the Dayton Agreement, Serbia maintains, develops
and deepens transparent relations with the Republic
of Srpska, while all along striving to establish and
expand cooperation with the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina as well. In that context, building
confidence and promoting understanding among the
peoples and entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
of paramount importance for their work together and
the taking of joint decisions aimed at bringing about a
better life for all of the citizens of that country.
The Republic of Serbia has always worked avidly
on establishing better communications and promoting
political dialogue with Bosnia and Herzegovina,
16-36731

08/11/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

considering them the basic instruments for the creation
of positive relations between the two countries. To
that end, many State or Government officials from the
Republic of Serbia visited Bosnia and Herzegovina or
played host to their respective counterparts.
On 29 May, the President of the Republic of Serbia
attended the summit of the Brdo-Brijuni process in
Sarajevo and the Summit100 Business Leaders in
Southeast Europe the day before. During the visit,
the President of the Republic of Serbia reiterated the
importance that the Republic of Serbia attaches to
the promotion of regional cooperation and relations,
particularly with Bosnia and Herzegovina, while the
two sides expressed readiness to prepare an official
visit of the Serbian President to Sarajevo.
On 20 September, speaking in New York alongside
the Mayor of Srebrenica to the panel on reconciliation
in the Western Balkans 20 years after the Dayton
Agreement, organized by the Clinton Foundation, the
Serbian Prime Minister said that we needed each other
and that we had to live together, not beside each other.
The Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia added
that he would otherwise be concerned about the future
of the Western Balkans.
On 25 July, the Speaker of the Parliament of the
Republic of Serbia visited Bosnia and Herzegovina,
while the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica
Dačić, led a Serbian delegation to a ministerial meeting
of the Central European Initiative in Banja Luka on
16 June. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia
and Herzegovina also visited Belgrade on 26 July.
Traditionally, Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
one of the Republic of Serbia’s most important foreign
trade partners. Both countries are very interested in
building and rebuilding infrastructure and a bridge
over the Drina River between Ljubovija in Serbia, and
Bratunac in Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the process
of construction, while the work on energy-generating
projects on that river is ongoing. Cooperation between
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina in the field of
joint ventures is also being intensified. A meeting
of the Trilateral Trade Committee of the Republic of
Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Turkey and an
accompanying business forum were held in Ankara on
25 October, and a joint trade and tourist office of the
Republic of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina was
opened in Istanbul on 26 October.

S/PV.7803

Bringing people together and linking regions
and their economies is the most important task that
the Republic of Serbia has undertaken to promote
in the Western Balkans. I trust and believe that
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the Republic of
Serbia’s other neighbours, are agreed that we need
to continue to work on delivering results. We made a
commitment to improve regional cooperation and to
take measures to realize numerous projects, especially
in the fields of infrastructure, transport and energy.
Alongside the commitment of my country to peace,
reconciliation, stability and cooperation, they will
help us strengthen the bonds of friendship and goodneighbourliness and facilitate our journey to regional
and transregional integration.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
f loor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Let be start by
congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council this month. I also thank the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Inzko, for his important report (S/2016/911, annx)
and his valuable work.
Croatia aligns itself with statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union (EU) and I would
like to make some remarks in its national capacity.
As a signatory to the Dayton Peace Agreement,
Croatia bears a special responsibility towards Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
first EU neighbour, also bears a special responsibility
towards Croats as one of the constituent peoples,
whose genuine institutional equality with the other
two peoples and all citizens will enable a more
functional, viable and efficient, and thus stable,
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina are
therefore a foreign policy priority and its integration
into the European Union and NATO a strategic goal of
the Republic of Croatia. This was clearly demonstrated
by the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina was the first
country that the new Prime Minister of Croatia visited
after taking office. A stable, peaceful and prosperous
Bosnia and Herzegovina contributes to the stability of
South-East Europe as well as to that of the European
Union as a whole.
The European and Euro-Atlantic perspective of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a goal that Croatia will

16-3673123/25

S/PV.7803

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

continue to staunchly support. We see the future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the EU and NATO as
the best catalyst for addressing internal outstanding
issues as well as a safeguard for ensuring further
democratization, the strengthening of institutions,
freedom of the media and an independent judiciary.
We welcome the September conclusions of the
Council of the EU, which tasked the Commission with
preparing an opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
application for membership in the EU. This is an
important milestone for Bosnia and Herzegovina
because it reaffirms its commitment to the process of
European integration, including European values and
standards. This important development is the result
of the hard work and commitment of the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we commend them
for that.
Steps forward have been taken on the Reform
Agenda-related laws that have been adopted at both the
State and entity level. The credibility and sustainability
of reforms must be sustained in the interest of all
citizens, the State itself and regional stability.
The agreement on the coordination mechanism
achieved in July is of great importance for the credible
implementation of the Stabilization Association
Agreement and, later, the negotiations with the EU.
Croatia is looking forward to the finalization of the
process of the adaptation of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with a swift signing and the
provisional application of the Protocol.
We can say that the new EU approach has proved
effective and is yielding its initial results. Additionally,
it has helped Bosnia and Herzegovina step out of the
stalemate and bring the country to the next stage of its
relations with the European Union.
We have invested a great deal in Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s stability and in fostering the EU agenda
through all of the EU’s instruments, including through
the Special Representative and Operation Althea of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (EUFOR). It is important for the
EU to remain actively engaged in preserving safety
and security in Bosnia and Herzegovina; that is why
we support the extension of the executive mandate of
EUFOR Althea and its substantial contribution.
In order for Bosnia and Herzegovina successfully
to address all of the challenges that it will face at the
24/25

08/11/2016

next stage of the European integration process, all
available European tools and policies should be put at
its disposal. Croatia will, for its part, make available its
expertise and know-how from our accession process.
The progress made on the European path has
not been mirrored by internal developments. On the
contrary, some of the internal political dynamics are
cause for concern. We have said it before and we will
say it again: the referendum held in Republika Srpska
runs counter to the decision of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and undermines the
stability of the country. Such activities challenge the
founding principles of the Dayton Peace Agreement
and are unconstitutional and dangerous.
Local elections, while on the whole conducted in
a peaceful and orderly way, revealed divisions and
mistrust in an environment in which it is crucial to
promote tolerance and coexistence. Moreover, the
incident that took place in Stolac involved a violent
physical assault against a representative of the Central
Election Commission. Any violence or election
irregularities should be condemned in the clearest
possible terms. We trust the local institutions to
find institutional solutions to problems as well as to
investigate and prosecute unlawful activities.
We also regret the fact that the elections in Mostar
were not held together with the local elections in the
rest of the country, on 2 October. We encourage the
finding of a solution for the implementation of the
Constitutional Court ruling on Mostar, so that its
citizens are not deprived of their right to vote.
Croatia encourages the authorities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to implement the Sejdić and Finci
ruling in order to move forward its European agenda
and contribute to establishing a democratic and
well-functioning society in which the equality of
all constituent peoples and citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is guaranteed and safeguarded.
Finally, the rule of law must be promoted and
protected, including the fight against corruption and
organized crime, while all outstanding deficiencies
of the judiciary must be addressed. In this regard, the
need for the depoliticization of the judiciary and for
its impartiality and independence, especially in the
prosecution of war crimes, should receive strong focus.
Bosnia and Herzegovina, a State with a
1,000-kilometre-long land border with Croatia and the
16-36731

08/11/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

EU, remains our priority, and we shall spare no effort
to help our neighbour on its path towards enhanced
stability and long-term prosperity.

S/PV.7803

The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

16-3673125/25
