S/2005/694

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 November 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 2 November 2005 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
authorized Ambassador Kenzo Oshima (Japan), in his capacity as Chairman of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations of the Security Council, to visit the
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea from 6 to 9 November, 2005. The
members of the Council have agreed on the terms of reference of his mission (see
annex).
I should be grateful if you could have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Andrey I. Denisov
President of the Security Council

05-58453 (E) 021105

*0558453*

S/2005/694

Annex
Terms of reference
1.
Concerned by the difficulties that the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea (UNMEE) has been facing as a result of the recent developments regarding
the Mission’s freedom of movement, the Security Council has authorized
Ambassador Kenzo Oshima, Chairman of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations of the Security Council, to visit UNMEE separately from the Council’s
mission to Central Africa. He will visit UNMEE offices and, if feasible, UNMEE
positions in the Temporary Security Zone.
2.
Acting on behalf of the Security Council, Ambassador Oshima will meet with
UNMEE officials and those representing troop contributors, and exchange views
with them on the situation on the ground and the activities of UNMEE. He will
convey to UNMEE officials and those representing troop contributors the Council’s
unequivocal support for their work and appeal to them to persevere in maintaining
their presence, despite the immense difficulties UNMEE is facing, to avoid a
possible deterioration of the situation, while all the necessary steps are being taken
to alleviate operational problems.
3.
Ambassador Oshima will thereafter report back to the Security Council on his
findings.

2
