RP-11olutione adopted on the reporte of the Fourth Committee

37

2. Requests the Administering Members to do their
utmost to mobilize the effective participation of the
inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories by
transferring to them effective power in order to accelerate their social, economic and educational advancement;
3. Considers that the transmission of information on
developments in the political field will enable the
General Assembly better to assess the information
transmitted by the· Administering Members concerning
educational, social and economic development in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories;
4. Reiterates the view that the voluntary transmission of information on political developments in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories is fully in accord with
the spirit of Article 73 of the Charter of the United
Nations;
5. Urges the Administering Members concerned to
extend their full co-operation in this matter by voluntarily transmitting information of a political and constitutional character with regard to developments in the
Territories under their respective administrations, including the establishment of intermediate time-tables
leading to the attainment of self-government by these
Territories.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

longer appropriate or necessary for it to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations in respect of Alaska and Hawaii;
2. Expresses the opinion, based on its examination
of the documentation and the explanations provided,
that the people of Alaska and Hawaii have effectively
exercised their right to self-determination and have
freely chosen their present status;
3. Congratulates the United States of America and
the people of Alaska and Hawaii upon the attainment
of a full measure of self-government by the people of
Alaska and Hawaii ;
4. Considers that, owing to the circumstances mentioned above, the declaration regarding Non-Se!tGoverning Territories and the provisions established
under it in Chapter XI of the Charter can no longer he
applied to Alaska and Hawaii;
5. Considers it appropriate that the transmission of
information in respect of Alaska and Hawaii under
Article 73 e of the Charter should cease.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

1469 (XIV). Cessation of the transmission of
information under Article 73 e of the Charter in respect of Alaska and Hawaii

The General Assembly,
Referring to its resolution 1330 (XIII) of 12 December 1958,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the association of Non-Self-Governing Territories
with the European Economic Community,8 ~
Noting with concern that the Administering Members have not yet submitted sufficient information on
the possible effects of the association of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories under their administration with
the European Economic Community,
Considering that the association of Non-Self-Governing Territories with the European Economic Community may have significant effects on the development
of these Territories towards the objectives of Article 73
of the Charter of the United Nations,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the association oi Non-Self-Governing Territories
with the European Economic Community;
2. Again invites the Administering Members concerned to transmit to the Secretary-General information
on the possible effects of the association of the NonSelf-Governing Territories under their administration
with the European Economic Community;
3. Requests the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories to devote special attention at its 1960 session, at which it is to deal particularly with the economic development of the NonSelf-Governing Territories, to the question of the
association of certain Non-Self-Governing Territories
with the European Economic Community and to the
possible effects of tltls association on the development of
these Territories towards the objectives of Article 73
of the Charter of the United Nations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, for the
fifteenth session of the General Assembly, a report on
new developments connected with the association of

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by resolution 222 (III) of 3 November 1948, the General Assembly, while welcoming any
development of self-government in Non-Self-Governing
Territories, considered it essential that the United
Nations be informed of any change in the constitutional
status of any such Territory as a result of which the
responsible Government concerned thinks it unnecessary
to transmit information in respect of that Territory
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations,
Having received from the Government of the United
States of America communications dated 2 June 195938
and 17 September 19593 4 informing the SecretaryGeneral that Alaska and Hawaii, respectively, have, as
a result of their admission into the United States as
the forty-ninth and fiftieth States, attained a full measure of self-government and that, as a consequence of
this change in their constitutional status, the United
States Government would cease to transmit information
under Article 73 e of the Charter in respect of Alaska
and Hawaii,
H wing examined the communications of the Government of the United States of America in the light
of the basic principles and objectives embodied in
Chapter XI of the Charter and of all the other elements
of judgement pertinent to the issue,
Bearing in mind the competence of the General
Assembly to decide whether a Non-Self-Governing Territory has or has not attained a full measure of selfgovernment as referred to in Chapter XI of the Charter,
1. Takes note of the opinion of the Government of
the United States of America that, owing to the new
constitutional status of Alaska and Hawaii, it is no
33 Jbid., Fourteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 36, document A/4115.
34 Jbid., document A/4226.

1470 (XIV). Effects of the European Economic
Community on the development of certain
Non-Self-Governing Territories

a~ !hid., document A/4197.

~~-leeatLSwlaa

Non-Sdf-Goveming Territories with the European
Economic Community, taking into account the information to be submitted by the Administering Members
and the studies that may be undertaken in this connexion
by the Economic and Social Council, the Economic
Commission for Africa, the Economic Commission for
Europe, the Economic Commission for Asia and the
Far East, the Economic Commission for Latin America
and other international organs, in so far as these studies
may be relevant to the development. of Non-SelfGoverning Territories;
5. Resolves to resume consideration of this question
at its fifteenth session.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

informatio!1 about the scholarships offered, and, whenever possible, the need to provide travel funds to
prospective students;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to give such assistance as is possible, and as may be sought by the
Member States concerned and by the applicants ;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare for
the fift~enth session of the General Assembly a report
concernmg the actual use of scholarships and training
facilities offered by Member States to students from
the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

1471 (XIV). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Sell-Governing Territories

1473 (XIV). The future of the Trust Territory of
the Cameroons under United Kingdom administration: organization of a further
plebiscite in the northern part of the Territory

The General Assembly,
Be_ari~g in mind that most of the Non-Self-Governing
Ternt?nes d? not have sufficient facilities for higher
education which would ensure the education of highly
qualified indigenous cadres,
Considering the urgent need in the Non-Self-Governing Territories for indigenous personnel who could take
over the functions held by those 'lon-indigenc-•1s persons
wh? . up ~o now h~v~ oc<;upied the most important
positions m the admm1strat10n of those Territories
N oti?7-g with satisfaction the further response t; its
resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954 inviting
Membe~ ~tates to e~tend_ offers of facilities for study
and trammg to the mhab1tants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories,
[I.xpressing regret that a great number of the scholarships offered by Member States remain unutilized,
Further expressing regret that some Administering
Members do not provide all students who have been
accorded scholarships with facilities to leave the NonSelf-Governing Territories in order to take advantage
of such scholarships,
Recalling its resolution 845 (IX) inviting the Member
States to make scholarships available to qualified students from the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on offers of study and training facilities under General
Assembly resolution 845 (IX) ;3 6
2. Reaffirms its resolution 1331 (XIII) of 12 December 1958, and invites the Administering Members
to take all necessary measures consistent with the interests ~nd needs of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
an~ ~~eir peoples to ensure that scholarships and training
fac1hhes offered by Member States may be utilized by
the_ inhabitants of those Territories, and to render every
assistance to those persons who have applied for, or
have been granted, scholarships or fellowships, particularly with regard to facilitating their travel formalities;
3. Requests all Administering Members which have
not done so to give the fullest publicity in the Non-SelfGoverning Territories under their administration to all
offers of study and training facilities made by Member
States;
4. R~quests the Member States offering scholarships
to take mto account the necessity of furnishing complete

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1350 (XIII) of 13 March
1959, concerning the future of the Trust Territory of
the_ Cameroons under United Kingdom administration,
~h1ch recommended that a plebiscite should take place
m the Northern Cameroons in November 1959 and
req nested the United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner
to submit to the Trusteeship Council in time for consideration by the General Assembly at its fourteenth
sess10n a report on the organization, conduct and results
of this plebiscite,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Plebiscite Commissioner 87 and the report of the Trusteeship Council thereon, 38
Noting from the report of the United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner that the people of the Northern
Cameroo?s have decided by a substantial majority that
they are m favour of deciding their future at a later date,
Noting further that the United Nations Plebiscite
Commissioner is satisfied that the plebiscite was conducted in a fair and impartial manner,
Noting_ t?e s~atement made by the representative of
the Adm1mstermg Authority at the 988th meeting of
the Fourth Committee on 5 December 1959 to the effect
that urgent action is being taken to introduce reforms
m the system of local administration in the Northern
Cameroons,
Having heard the petitioner,
. Considering that the extremely close date of the elecnons to the Legislative Assembly of the Federation of
Nigeria make:' _it im~ossible for the General Assembly
to take a dec1s10n with regard to the participation or
non-participation of the people of the Northern
Cameroons in these elections,
1. Expresses its high appreciation of the work of the
United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner and the United
Nations staff under his direction;
. 2. Recommends t~at the Administering Authority,
m pursuance of Article 76 b of the Charter of the
United Nations and in consultation with the United
Nat(ons Plebiscite Commissioner, organize under United
Nations supervision a further plebiscite in the Northern
Cameroons, the arrangements for which shall begin
87 Ibid.,

86 [bid., documents A/4196 and Add.I.

agenda item 41, documents A/4314 and Add.I.
A/4313.

38 [bid., document
