which the Council would authorize the establishment of
the Mission.

Security Council as soon as possible a further detailed
report on his implementation plan, containing, in particular, an estimate of the cost of the United Nations Mission
for the referendum in Western Sahara, on the understanding that this further report should be the basis on

Adopted unanimously at the
2929th meeting.

THE SITUATION BETWEEN IRAQ AND KUWAIT
Resolution 661 (1990)

Decision

of 6 August 1990

At its 2932nd meeting, on 2 August 1990, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Iraq and Kuwait to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
entitled:
"The situation between Iraq and Kuwait:
"Letter dated 2 August 1990 from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/21423); 104
"Letter dated 2 August 1990 from the Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/21424)". 104

The Security Council,
Reaffirming its resolution 660 (1990) of2 August 1990,
Deeply concerned that that resolution has not been implemented and that the invasion by Iraq of Kuwait continues, with further loss of human life and material destruction,
Determined to bring the invasion and occupation of
Kuwait by Iraq to an end and to restore the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Kuwait,
Noting that the legitimate Government of Kuwait has
expressed its readiness to comply with resolution 660
(1990),
Mindful of its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international peace
and security,
Affirming the inherent right of individual or collective
self-defence, in response to the armed attack by Iraq
against Kuwait, in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter,
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter,
l. Determines that Iraq so far has failed to comply with
paragraph 2 of resolution 660 (1990) and has usurped the
authority of the legitimate Government of Kuwait;
2. Decides, as a consequence, to take the following
measures to secure compliance of Iraq with paragraph 2 of
resolution 660 (1990) and to restore the authority of the
legitimate Government of Kuwait;
3. Decides that all States shall prevent:
(a) The import into their territories of all commodities
and products originating in Iraq or Kuwait exported therefrom after the date of the present resolution;
(b) Any activities by their nationals or in their territories which would promote or are calculated to promote the
export or trans-shipment of any commodities or products
from Iraq or Kuwait; and any dealings by their nationals
or their flag vessels or in their territories in any commodities or products originating in Iraq or Kuwait and exported
therefrom after the date of the present resolution, including
in particular any transfer of funds to Iraq or Kuwait for the
purposes of such activities or dealings;
(c) The sale or supply by their nationals or from their
territories or using their flag vessels of any commodities
or products, including weapons or any other military
equipment, whether or not originating in their territories
but not including supplies intended strictly for medical
purposes, and, in humanitarian circumstances, foodstuffs,
to any person or body in Iraq or Kuwait or to any person
or body for the purposes of any business carried on in or
operated from Iraq or Kuwait, and any activities by their

Resolution 660 (1990)
of 2 August 1990

The Security Council,
Alarmed by the invasion of Kuwait on 2 August 1990 by
the military forces of Iraq,
Determining that there exists a breach of international
peace and security as regards the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait,
Acting under Articles 39 and 40 of the Charter of the
United Nations,
1. Condemns the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait;
2. Demands that Iraq withdraw immediately and unconditionally all its forces to the positions in which they
were located on 1 August 1990;
3. Calls upon Iraq and Kuwait to begin immediately
intensive negotiations for the resolution of their differences and supports all efforts in this regard, and especially
those of the League of Arab States;
4. Decides to meet again as necessary to consider
further steps to ensure compliance with the present resolution.
Adopted at the 2932nd meeting
by 14 votes to none. One member
(Yemen) did not participate in the
vote.

Decision
At its 2933rd meeting, on 6 August 1990, the Council
proceeded with the discussion of the item.
104
See Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-fifth Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1990.

19
