UNITED

iVATIONS

THIRTY-SECOND

YEAI?

rd
MEETING:

NEW

28 SEPTEMBER

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

.. . ,. . . . . . . ,,.. .. .. .. . , .. ... ,.

1

.., , , .. . ,. . . .. . ,.,. ., .. . . . . .. ,.. .. .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 23 September 1977 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12402) . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2033)

Adoption

of the agenda

.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Cauncil. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

I

,’

2033RD
Held in New York

on Wednesday,

&&dent: Mr. Riidiger von WECHMAR
(Federal Republic of Germany).
Prcserzl: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada,
China,
France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
I’anama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2033)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 23 September 1977 from the Permanent
Reprcscntative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2402)

Adoption of the agenda

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 23 September 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Irelaud to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/ 12402)
1. The PRESIDENT: l sl~hi
like to inform the Council
that I have rcccivcd a lcttcr From the rcprescntalives of
Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Mauritius
(S/12405/. It reads as follows:
“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council,
have the honour to request that during its current
meeting devoted to consideration or the ‘Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia’, tl,t: Council
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure to Mr. Joshua Nkomo, co-leader of the
Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe.”
If I hear no objection, 1 shall take it that Lhc Council agrees
to this rcqucst.
It ws so deci&cI.

MEETING
28 September

1977, al 3 p.m.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to draw the attention
of members of the Council to the following documents:
letter dated 1 September 1977 from the representative of
the United Kingdom to the President of the Security
Council /S/12393/; letter dated 8 September 1977 from
the representativeof the United Kingdom to the President
of the Council [S/1239.5/; text of a draft resolution
sponsoredby the United Kingdom /S/12404).
3. The first speakeris the Secretary of State for Foreign
and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, I-lis
Excellency the Right Honourable Mr. David Owen, whom I
welcometo the Council.
4. Mr. OWEN (United Kingdom): Mr. President,first may
I welcomeyou to your office and say what a pleasureit is
to speakin the Council under your presidency, particularly
as you are the representative of the Federal Republic of
Germany, with which my country has had for many years
and will always have very close relations. It is a pleasure
for us.
5. The United Nations has beeninvolved in Rhodesiafor
many years and so, in bringing this draft resolution .O the
Council, I do not believe that we are raising a new issueof
principle. Involvement of the United Nations and indeed
involvement of the Council is not a new issue.I wish that it
were otherwise, I wish that this issueof Rhodesiahad not
been before the Councjl for the many years that it has
been.
6. Britain has striven within the international
community
to bring about an end to the
illegal r&gime
and to transfer
power to the majority in Rhodesia. I hol>e there is no
misunderstandingabout the depth of the commitment
of
my Government to achieving, al the earliest possibledate, a
transfer to majority rule and an independent, rrcc
Zimbabwe.
7. In the negotiations that havebeen undertaken, we have
had to face the fact that lhcre are many different views
about the form of a settlement which will bring about an
independentZimbabwe. It is, in my judgement, impossible
to reach total agreementamong all the parties. What we
have striven to do is to produce proposalswhich the world,
the United Nations and the Security Council will judge to
be fair.
8. At this stage, the crucial issue is to try to end the
fighting, to bring about a cease-fire. Until arrangements
satisfactory to the parties have been worked out, it isvery
difficult to seeus making an over-all packagewhich will be
accepteblcto everybody in the Council.

Council’s earlier decision, invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to tnake his statement.

9. The fundamental principles on which we have tried to
work are these: that Mr. Smith and the present illegal
rggime must stand down before the start of the transition
period and that there should be fair and fret elections on
the basis of one person, one vote. We have advocated a role
for the United Nations because we believe it offers an
assurance to the nationalist leadership by guaranteeing the
impartiality of elections and by guarding against any fears
they may have of recolonization because of the presence of
a Resident Commissioner under the British Government.

16. Mr. NKOMO: Mr. President, members of the Security
Council, allow me to extend to you the greetings of the
struggling people of Zimbabwe and their liberation movement, the Patriotic Front. We appreciate the constructive
role of the United Nations in promoting peace and security,
co-operation and understanding among the nations of the
world. We Zimbabweans particularly appreciate the role of
the United Nations in the efforts to eradicate the racist and
colonial situation in our country.

10. But I am not asking for a judgement on the United
Nations role at this stage. What we propose in our draft
resolution is a limited step which has the aim of bringing
together the parties who have been doing the fighting so
that they can agree to a cease-fire which will lead into the
transitional period. We recognize that the parties cannot
agree to a cease-fire first and only then discuss transitional
arrangements.

17. The Security Council is meeting today to consider the
rapidly changing situation in Zimbabwe. It is important,
first of all, to understand precisely why the situation has
changed to such an extent that this august body finds itself
debating mechanisms for the transfer of power from the
Rhodesian minority to the Zimbabwean majority. This
change has been brought about by, and only by, armed
struggle, by the sweat and blood of our people, some of
whom have forsaken normal lives in order to free their
country. Our people have chosen to make this supreme
sacrifice because the British and their Rhodesian agents
would not heed our peaceful demands for self-determination. Naturally, we should have preferred to regain our
independence without having to lose some of our finest
sons
and daughters in the process, but we were left with no
choice. Since the liberation movement began to respond to
the Rhodesian violence with commensurate force, our
liberation ranks have swelled by leaps and bounds. We have
reached this point because the people are fighting a war and
are winning it. If we are challenged to press on to total
victory on the battlefield we shall rise to the occasion,
because we know that final victory is certain and will be
ours. Our people have suffered too much to allow any
obstacle to stand in the way of complete victory over
Rhodesian fa.scism. We do not seek further bloodshed for
the sake of it, but we shall not shrink from it if the
alternative is to accept something less than real and
authentic independence.

11. The draft resolution before the Council speaks for
itself. Operative paragraph 1 requests and refers to the
appointment of a representative to enter into discussions
“concerning the military and associated arrangements that
are considered necessary to effect the transition to majority
rule in Southern Rhodesia”. Since the publication of our
proposals, a number of comments have been made by the
parties, some in writing and some orally, and we shall be
pursuing consultations with them on all the points raised
with the hope of widening the measure of agreement.
Certainly, if there can be a further agreement, I shall do
everything in my power to try and achieve it.
12. Therefore, in taking this step that is proposed to the
Council today, nobody is required to pronounce himself on
the package as a whole, That will be done when we come
back to the Council at a later stage after discussions with all
the parties, and none of the arrangements in the paper that
have been put before the Council can be put into effect
until the parties and the Council are satisfied, until there
has been agreement on a cease-fire, and unless the British
Government and Parliament believe that the over-all
package is such as will give them authority for the
appointment of a Resident Commissioner under the legal
powers which Britain still possesses.

18. This, then, is the reality against which any formula to
resolve the crisis in Zimbabwe must be measured. The
reality today in Zimbabwe is the war being waged by forces
of the Patriotic Front, the sole liberation force in that
country. Anjl moves to find a formula to end the crisis in
Zimbabwe must take that fact into account. The next thing
is to identify the parties to the armed conflict. Who, then,
are these parties? They are the forces of the Patriotic Front
on the one hand and the British settler forces on the other.
Unless this reality is clearly recognized there will never be a
solution to the crisis in Zimbabwe.

13. I hope, therefore, that the Council can agree to take
this limited step on the basis of the draft resolution that has
been put forward by my Government. It has been put
forward in the genuine belief that it offers the quickest and
the speediest way of resolving the conflict in Rhodesia and
bringing about what has been the objective of the United
Nations now for many years, that is, a transfer of power to
the majority in Rhodesia and the creation of an independent Zimbabwe that will bring satisfaction and peace to the
people of Zimbabwe and also stability to the whole of that
region of southern Africa.

19. 1 should now like to turn to the specific issue on
which this meeting of the Council has been convened. It has
been called at the request of Britain to authorize the
Secretary-General to appoint a representative who would
work with the British Resident. Commissioner designate and
with us, that is, the Patriotic Front.

14. It is with these objectives in mind that the British
Government has put forward these proposals and this draft
resolution. I hope that the Council will feel able today to
take a decision along the lines of this draft resolution.

20. The Zimbabwe liberation movement recognizes the
role of the United Nations and the specialized agencies in
the process of decolonization. We have availed ourselves of

15. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Joshua
Nkomo. I welcome him and, in accordance with the
2

every opportunity offered us to petition the United Nations
against British colonialism and Rhodesian racism in Zimbabwe. In this regard, we have always viewed this role of
the United Nations as a positive contribution towards the
liberation of our people.

26. The PRESIDENT: I wish to welcome the presencein
the Security Council of the Secretary for Foreign Affairs of
Ihe Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mr. Treiki, and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Romania,Mr. Macovescu.
27. Mr. BOYA (Benin) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President,my delegationvery much appreciatesthe tact
and diplomatic skill with which you have been so effectively conducting the proceedingsof the Council during this
month of September, Today the Council has before it a
question of great importance for Africa. We have no doubt
that this debate will be conducted with objectivity and a
high degree of responsibility. My delegation would like to
take this opportunity to extend to you our appreciation for
the very friendly relations existing between your country,
the Federal Republic of Germany, and my own, the
People’s Republic of Benin. The fruitful co-operation
between our two countries has produced resultsbeneficial
to Benin; the people of Benin are happy about this
co-operation.

21. But today the context in which we discuss the
proposed United Nations role in Zimbabwe is different
from what it has been in that this time it is the colonizer
who is requesting the Security Council to come to his aid.
It is important for people who have held the work of the
United Nations in high esteem to understand what it is that
the Organization is being asked to do. If Britain’s motive is
to make the United Nations play the role of partner in the
furtherance of colonial interests, we vehemently
oppose the
move. On the other hand, if the United Nations presence is
sought to facilitate the complete decolonization of Zimbabwe, the Patriotic Front will have nothing against it. In
other words, unless the role of the United Nations
representative is specifically defined, there is a danger that
he may be seduced into playing a role inimical to the
interests of the United Nations and of the people of
Zimbabwe.

28. My delegation welcomes the presence here of an
authentic son of and fighter for Zimbabwe, our brother
JoshuaNkomo,co-president of the Patriotic Front, the only
representative of all the people of Zimbabwe, My delegation salutes the courage and spirit of sacrifice of the
freedom fighters of Zimbabwe. We pay a respectful tribute
to the memory of all the sons of Zimbabwe who have fallen
on the battlefield in the fight for liberty, sovereignty and
national independence. The People’s Republic of Benin
vigorously supportsthe positionsof the Patriotic Front.

22. This meeting of the Council has been called to
examine just one aspect of the latest British proposals. At
this stage of the negotiations, especially as the Council is
not considering the substantive elements of the proposals,
we do not intend to make a detailed and comprehensive
response to the proposals. Such a response will be made at
the appropriate time. Nevertheless, in order to assist the
Council in its deliberations, it behoves us to afford the
Council some insight into the thoughts of the Patriotic
Front on the British White Paper [see S/12393/. For that:
reason I shall now make available to the members of the
Council a document, the Maputo document,] conveying
those thoughts. As we seeit, to enablethe United Nations
to fulfil the objective of decolonization in Southern
Rhodesia,its representative’srole must be defined in terms
which clearly enhance and advance the objective of
decolonization in a concrete and practical way. TO that
end, the instrument by which he is appointed must
incorporate in clear and unequivocallanguagethe following
elements:first, that his appointment shouldbe madeby the
Secretary-General acting in close consultation with the
membersof the Security Council and the parties to the
armed conflict and, secondly, similarly, that his duties,
powers and functions should be determined in close
consultation with the membersof the Council and the
partiesto the armedconflict.

29. The debate in which we are participating today is a
sign of the profound and irreversible changesthat have
occurred in Zimbabwe sincethe arrogant rebel clique of Ian
Smith unilaterally and illegally proclaimed the independence of the British colony of Southern Rhodesia.It is a
sign that, faced with the determination of the freedom
fighters of the Patriotic Front to intensify the armed
struggle of national liberation until complete victory-and,
therefore, faced with the constant deterioration of Smith’s
positions-the United Kingdom, the colonial Power, cannot
remain passiveany lotiger. Hence, my delegation believes
that the processleading to these initiatives is positive in
itself becauseGreat Britain has at last understood the scope
of its heavy responsibility in this misfortune that hasbeen
inflicted on the people of Zimbabwe for more than 12
years.
30. My delegationappreciatesall the efforts towardspeace
designed to spare the people of Zimbabwe so much
suffering and sacrifice, But it must be fully understood that
these efforts must lead exclusively to the true and total
independence of Zimbabwe. That is why my delegation
would like, at this stage,to restate its position with regard
to what it expects from this debate.

23. Allow me now, on behalf of the Patriotic Front and
the struggling people of Zimbabwe, to expressour gratitude for the opportunity afforded us to present to the
Council the position of the Patriotic Frc .lt.
24. I now conclude by formally presentingto the Council
the Patriotic Front’s document.

31. We do not wish to seethe usual confusion surround
this debate. Everything must be made crystal clear, because
the Africans in the Council, including Benin, do not wish to
bear any responsibility for confusion carefully orchestrated
by the enemies of Africa with their shady and sordid
designs.

25. We believe that Zimbabwe must be free, the struggle
must continue. Victory, of course,is certain.
1 Sub&ucntly

circulated as document

S/124OG.

3

Securitv Council during these past months since tnv L
appointment as representativeof the United States. 1
extend to you the greatappreciationof my Governmentfor
your leadershipin resolvingthe previous question before
the Council-Cyprus -and for the leadershipyou are now
giving the Council as we take up the present important
issue.

, 32. It is not a matter of discussing the Anglo-American
proposals as such. What is at issue for us here is the
consideration of the Anglo-American arrangements as a
reflexion of the desire of the United Kingdotn and the
United States to embark, particularly with the Patriotic
Front, on serious negotiations aimed at achieving a peaceful
settlement of the Rhodesian question. And we think that
the Anglo-American arrangements contain elements that
could serve as a basis for such negotiations. This debate
should not be interpreted as an attempt or a wish on the
part of the Council to endorse the Anglo-American arrangements. We regard these arrangements as a parallel initiative
towards a peaceful settlement. That is all.

I

,

40. Of course, the United Slates supports the present
proposals.And yet I must say that these are not really
Anglo-American proposals-asour presshas termed them.
Rather, I refer to them 21s Anglo-African-American proposalswhich, essentially,have come about becauseof initiotives on the part of nations and peoples of Africa
themselves.

33. For us there can be no question of using these
arrangements as a substitute for the armed struggle in the
fjeld,. Jhat struggle must be pursued with even greater
determination until the last of the Smith dique’s torturers
give up.
For us, there can be no question of leaving the field
free for anyone to replace Smith by neo-colonialistpuppets
devoted heart and soul to the protection of the shady
imperialistinterests.
34.

35. I turn now more specifically to the object of this
meeting,which is to give the Secretary-Generala mandate
to appoint a representative to negotiate the details of
certain questions very important for the successof the
whole process. We must be absolutely clear about this
subjecttoo.
36. As we see it, it is not a matter of appointing a
representative of the Secretary-General to dismantlethe
national liberation forces of Zimbabwe or to help to
underminethe basesof a struggleby the peopIeto savethe
embattled massesof Zimbabwe. The representativeof the
Secretary-General will not be going there to help the
ResidentCommissionerof the colonial Power to do some
careful nco-colonialist plastering-overof cracks designedt+
safeguardthe imperialist interestson the scene.As we see
it, the idea is to help Smith to fall without breakingany
bones, as it were. In other words, the mandate of the
raprese.ntativeto be appointed by the Secretary-General
should be defined in such a way as to enable the
negotiationswith the Patriotic,Front to continue on cleat
bases.As Mr. Nkomo quite rightly said just now, the
Secretary-General’srepresentative should be appointed in
close consultation with the members of the Security
Council.
37. It is in the light of that analysis,the purposeof which
is to preservethe purity of future actions, that the People’s
Republic of Benin agreesto grant the mandatesoughtby
Great Britain for the appointment of a representativeof the
Secretary-General.
38. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representativeof Benin
for the kind words he addressedto me and for his
comments about the good relations between our two
countries.
39. Mr. YOUNG (United States of America): Mr. President, it has been a pleasure to work with you in the
4

41. It is true that my Government would not be involved
at all had it not beenfor the insistenceof African States
that we had a role to play in the transformation of the
entire southern African continent and the achievementof
rria,jority rule on that continent. It was as a result of our
commitment to majority rule throughout southernAfrica
that we becameinvolved in the processof listeningto the
front-line I’residcnts,the liberation movementsand all the
partiesthat have beeninvolved in this struggle.
42. There ~is sonic trepidation whenever the United
Nations getsinvolved in this kind of exercisebecauseover
the past years, especiallyin Africa, our history has been
somewhat spotty. There have been difficulties when we
have attempted this kind of exercise on the African
continent, but I would contend that there is a tremendous
difference in that continent in 1977 from the time in 1963
when the Security Council was last involved there. That
difference is manifested in the presence of a strong
Organization of African Unity, which itself dclcrminesthe
al’fairs of Africa and which, rather than listening to the
so-calledsuper-Powers,
iscertainly much morein a position
to have lhe super-t’owers
servethe interestsof Africa than
wasthe casein 1963.
43. The organizationof the frontSlinePresidentsand their
ability lo work together as a unit have already been
evidencedin the achievementof liberation TarMozambique
and Angola through their united support of the liberation
struggle,and the lessons
which they have learnedfrom their
experiencein leadingthat part of Africa to freedom. They
arc comingto this cxerciscwith a body of cxpcriencewhich
could not have existedin 1963 when their countrieswere
fledglingsstrugglingfor their own freedom.
1 must agreewith Mr. Nkomo that we would not be
here were it not for the strengthof the liberation struggle.
That liberation strugglehas been both an armedstruggle
and a diplomatic struggle.That WCarc here is testimony IO
the fact that it hasbeenassuccessful
in its diplomatic asin
its military efforts.
44.

45. We arc here today looking for an intcrnationnlly
acceptablesolution. There are many solutionswhich arc
possiblebut only from this body can comea solution which
is both permanentand internationally acceptable,The way
this body, and especially the Secretary-General, have
operated, is an indication that, perhaps, given all these

circumstances that have come about in the past, we can
approach at least this phase of the exercise with some
mcasure of confidence. Under some circumstances a Secretary-General might be able, without calling a meeting of the
Council, to appoint a representative to observe talks about
military arrangements leading up to a cease-fire, and yet
Secretary-General Waldheim has sought to consult the
Council and to take his mandate from it. In everything we
have done in Zimbabwe, there has been an effort on the
part of the Secretary-General to work in consultation with
the members of the Council. That is not something that is
necessarily mandated by the Council; it is something which
the Secretary-General accepts as his obligation and one of
the responsibilities of his office.

with very little risk and with tremendous potential,
because, as a result of this step, we might continue that
slow process that we have been engaged in of learning to
work together to solve the world’s problems. I hope that
the Council will support this proposal and, more than just
rrupporting this limited first step, will support the entire
process and see to it that, as reports come back to us, we
seek to find some way of bringing about freedom,
independence and justice in Zimbabwe and minimizing the
shedding of blood and the destruction of the resources of
that country.
50. Mr. .!AlPAL (India): Mr, President, my delegation
extends to you its warm felicitations on your assumption of
the office of President of the Council for this month. We
are greatly impressed by your efficient and tneaningful
conduct of the business of the Council and we feel sure that
your guidance of our work will contribute to its success. ,

46. As we are approaching an internationally acceptable
solution and as we accept the responsibilities of the Council
for that solution, we are in fact giving Zimbabwe an
opportunity
for a permanent solution. WC are giving
Zimbabwe an opportunity to move towards independence
and majority rule without a lot of the in-fighting, conflict
and internal dissension that has inevitably gone with the
struggle for freedom when it has not been accompanied by
the support of the entire international community.

51. We are glad to welcome the presence of Mr. Joshua
Nkomo in the Council and we were most interested in what
he had to say since his words have direct relevance to OUI
present debate.
52. As to the question before us, my delegation listened
with great attention to the statement of the Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwcrilth Affairs of the United
Kingdom. His presence here among us is a mark of the
importance the United Kingdom attaches to the resolution
of the state of rebellion in Southern Rhodesia, if possible
by peaceful methods and with the association of the United
Nations.

47. There is no doubt, so far as I am concerned, about
preserving the security of the white society or about its
sanctity and survival in Africa. In no place in Africa has
white society been destroyed; even where there has been a
‘complete military takeover of the government, whites have
either survived in the country, if they chose to stay, or they
have somehow miraculously been able to get out, like the
roughly 300,000 who were airlifted out of Angola. Yet
what we are talking about is the possibility, if we are not
together and united in helping this nation to achieve its
independence through some orderly, democratic means, of
continued civil strife, which is essentially a black-on-black
struggle and which has very little to do with the struggle
against racism, colonialism or imperialism.

53. My delegation will support the draft resolution sponsored by the United Kingdom in document S/12404 for the
following reasons: we see the appointment of a representative of the Sccrctary-General as a desirable and indeed
necessary form of association of the United Nations in the
process of bringing about the true independence of
Southern Rhodesia on the basis of majority rule. We regard
it as the very first step in this process and as being in
conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter.

48. I should think the so-called super-Powers have learned
that there is no advantage to be gained in Africa; that
essentially all that we as the United States could do for the
African continent, all the money that we have to spare, all
the power that we have to utilize, c3uld be poured into
Africa and it would be hardly a drop in the bucket in
dealing with the problems that Africa faces. We would gain
hardly any advantage at all through a massive expenditure
of time, talent, money or military resources. The problems
of Africa arc so enormous that they can be approached
only with the kind of international unity that can come
from this body.

54. There has been an illegal situation in Southern
Rhodesia since 1965, and the former colonial authority has
been trying, unsuccessfully, with or without the help of the
United Nations, to quell the rebellion of Ian Smith. The
Security Council, in its first resolution on this question,
resolution 202 (1965), requested the United Kingdom to
promote majority rule and to enter into consultations with
all concerned for the attainment of the independence of
Southern Rhodesia on the basis of majority rule.

49. It is with that in mind that my G&ernment supports
these proposals, hoping that in doing so we are beginning a
period of international co-operation towards putting an end
to colonialism, racism and imperialist domination, and
towards enabling people to determine by their own choice
how their governments are to be run and who shall run
them. It is because I think that this first step offers the
Security Council and the representative of the SecrelaryGeneral an opportunity to explore the possibilities of
taking this kind of action with a representative designated
by the United Kingdom that we can take this step at least

55. That involves the rectification of the illegal situation
caused by the Smith rebellion, With that objective in view,
the United Kingdom and the United States have taken
certain exploratory initiatives. It is not our present intention to comment on those initiatives except to say that the
restoration of legality in Southern Rhodesia does not imply
the return of the colonial authority per se; but it does mean
co-operative efforts by the United Kingdom and the United
Nations for the purpose of achieving the objectives of the
Charter,
5

56. In other words, the restoration of legality in Southern
Rhodesia is subject to two conditions: first, it should be on
the basis of the principle of the paramountcy of the
interests of the people of Zimbabwe; secondly, it should be
on the principle of rule by the elected majority leading to
the independence of Zimbabwe.
57. The peaceful return of legality naturally must involve
the restoration of peace in the first instance, SO that
thereafter there could be further steps towards decolonizing
Southern Rhodesia. My delegation is in favour of exploring
the opportunity offered by the proposal of the United
Kingdom in appointing a representative of the SecretaryGeneral. This appointment would involve simply the
association of the United Nations with the efforts of the
United Kingdom to create, first of all, peaceful conditions
and the appropriate atmosphere necessary to bring about
the transition to majority rule and independence in
Zimbabwe. This limited purpose has our full support and
we wish it the success it deserves because it is a peaceful
attempt to solve a very difficult problem in accordance
with the Charter and in association with the Secretary
General.

\

58. Now, as regards the actual appointment of a representative of the Secretary-General, it has always been our
view that the competence of the Secretary-General should
not be limited in any way or in any formal sense. But
knowing the Secretary-General as we do, we have no doubt
whatsoever that he will naturally ensure that the appointment has the tacit or the explicit approval of the parties
concerned.
59. The PRESIDENT: 1 thank the representative of India
for the kind words he addressed to me. I should like to add
that the task of the President during the debate on Cyprus
was made much easier thanks to his help and mediation.

.

60. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): Mr, President, I am happy
to see you in the Chair of the Council at a time when we
are discussing Zimbabwe.
61. Having heard the important statement of my socialist
comrade, the Right Honourable Mr. David Owen, Secretary
of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the
United Kingdom, and having heard also the equally
important statement of my glorious and beloved African
brother, Mr. Joshua Nkomo, I wish to state that my
delegation fully supports the initial and limited step
regarding a mandate to our esteemed Secretary-General to
appoint a representative for the purposes of paving the way
for a peaceful and negotiated settlement in Zimbabwe. 1 do
not believe we would have reached this stage in our efforts
towards achieving majority rule in Zimbabwe were it not
for the armed struggle of the African liberation movements,
the awakening of the United Kingdom under the wise
leadership of Prime Minister James Callaghan and of the
distinguished Mr. David Owen, and the indispensable role
played by the United States, especially by our good friend
Andy Young, under the wise leadership of President Carter.
62. I shall not-1 repeat not-at this stage offer any
comment 011 the British White Paper as circulated. I wish
the eventual representative of the Secretary-General every
success.

63.

Mr.

BARTON

(Canada):

Mr.

presi~ellt,

Once

Q!aiII

it is

a pleasurefor my delegation to be serving under your
guidance.We havewitnessedits quality lIef0rc an11*‘e lljok
forward to your continuing ministrations (luring the
remainderof this month.
64. The United Nations has for many years given its

support to efforts designedto bring ab(jut inllel~endeIIce
andmajority rule in SouthernRhodesia.WChavewitnessed
a number
of initiatives
taken
by the aih’linistcriIlg
I’()Wer,
the United Kingdom, and supported 1~~the iIIternati~~na1
’
community,designedto bring about that clllsive end.
65. The resultsof the latest and most intensive initiative
which the United Kingdom, with the full a&rcemcIIt and
supportof tile United States,hasevolved, al’tcr coIlslIlting
all the partiesconcerned,are embodied in the hcuIWH
that is beforeustoday. At this point in our ilclihcrati~ms,it
has been agreedgenerally that we will not enter into a
substantivediscussionof the situation in Southern 12hodesia, nor of the proposalsfor the settlcmeIlt cmbndicd in
that document. But 1 do wish to draw attentioil to the
comment made by our Secretary of State for I~sLernul
Affairs during his statementto the 6mx’a~
helllhly
hst
Monday2to the effect that Canadafully SupportStllis plan,
not only becauseit provides the basis for a f:lir and
equitablesolution, but also bcciluseWC rcjcct
totally
the
alternative of rurther bloodshed. To this cnt1, we are
pleasedto support the draft resolution now I~cl’tIrc the
Council which requestsit to ilf>flUiIlt
a rcprescntutive
to
enter into discussions
with the British Resident Commissionerdesignateandwith all the partiesconcerningmilitary
and associatedarrangementsin Southern Rhodesiaduring
the transition to majority rule.
66. Weare hopeful that this first step will bc I’oliowcd by
measures
which will bring early and pc:tcef’ulindcpcnduncc
to Zimbabwe.
67. Mr. MACOVESCU (Romania) (itlterprctrrticvt
fhtt
French): Mr. President,I shouldlike to congratulate you on
your assumptionof the presidencyof the Securily C’truncil
for this month and to wish you every successirk y0u1
important tasksin that capacity.
68. 1 shouldalso like to welcomethe presenceamong us
of Mr. JoshuaNkomo, co-presidentof the Patriotic Icront
of Zimbabwe, and to assurehim of our support in the
struggle which his people are waging to achieve the
independence
of their country.
with the ideascontained in the
by the United KjngdoIn SecretarY of State for Foreign and Com~~w~nve~dtl~
Affairs,
Mr. David Owen. In this it is guided by the p()sitil)n (If
principle of the Romanian Government concerniI)g the
effective role which the United Nations must play within
the
context
of the actions
taken by th i1~tcn~otjom.d
community in support of the struggle of pel)l~les fi)r
freedom and independenceand to ensure interllutional
peaceandsecurity.
69.

My

draft

resolution

delegation

agrees

submitted

2 Official Records of the General Assernhly,
Session,Plenary Meetings, 6th meeting.

TltirtpSacot~d

70. The United Nations has special responsibilities in
general, and the Security Council in particular, with regard
to the elimination of the illegal minority regime in Rhodesia
through the establishment of the conditions necessary for
the people of Zimbabwe to exercise their right to selfdetermination and independence.

for the Organization and the Security Council to play a
more active role in the settlement of the Rhodesian
problem and to follow closely and control the way in which
political power is transferred to the Zimbabwe majority
government.

71. It is regrettable that for almost 12 years now the
actions taken within the United Nations, including th.e
sanctions adopted by the Security Council, have not
yielded the expected results, In fact, the illegal r6gime of
Salisbury remains in power thanks to the assistance
provided by some States, in particular South Africa, in
disregard of resolutions adopted by the United Nations and
the mandatory sanctions decreed by the Council.

77. Although it is only a limited step, the appointment by
the Secretary-General of a representative in Rhodesia can
contribute to a more decisive United Nations commitment
in the settlement of the Rliodesian problem. Like other
members of the Council who have spoken, we wish to
emphasize that the decision which we shall take must in no
way be used as justification to evade previous Council and
General Assembly resolutions concerning Southern Rhodesia or as a pretext to put off a settlement of the serious
situation in Rhodesia.

72. In the circumstances, the people of Zimbabwe and
their national liberation movement, are quite justified in
resorting to all means of struggle, including armed struggle,
in order to realize their aspirations to freedom and
independence.

78. For its part, Romania, faithful to its policy of
solidarity with the peoples of Africa and the entire world,
will continue to give full support to the people of
Zimbabwe in their just struggle to achieve freedom and
national independence.

73. At the same time, the successes of the liberation
struggle of the peoples of southern Africa have brought
about conditions permitting the use, in addition, of
political methods and negotiations in an endeavour to settle
by peaceful means the grave situation prevailing in Rhodesia .

f

79. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (interpreta thn jbm
French): Mr. President, 1 should like to welcome you to the
presidency of the Council once again and assure you of our
co-operation and of our confidence in you.
80. There is no need to recall that the primary task of the
Council is to ensure the establishment and maintenance of
peace. At the present time, we are facing a situation in
Rhodesia which is fraught with menace to the stability of
an important part of the world. It is therefore our duty to
seek ways of meeting the situation. Today the United
Kingdom is proposing that we should explore a method
which may avoid greater difficulties. It seems natural that
WC should give our support to this proposal.

74. In that context, international public opinion has
welcomed with interest the various initiatives and attempts
to set in motion a process leading to the peaceful
settlement of the Rhodesian crisis. It is also within the
framework of these concerns that we, find the initiatives of
the United Kingdom Government, which has special responsibilities as the administering Power of Rhodesia. The
Romanian delegation has taken note of the considerations
presented here by the United Kingdom Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs and those of the
co-president
of the Patriotic
Front of Zimbabwe,
Mr. Joshua Nkomo.

81. My delegation has listened with attention to our
African colleagues, who are primarily interested in a happy
ending to the situation and who have signified their
agreement with the proposal to appoint a special representative of the Secretary-General. Mr. Nkorno in person has
just addressed us on this subject. In the circumstances, my
delegation thinks that it would be a good idea, at this stage,
to send out someone whose task would be to get in touch
with all the interested parties and to report to us on the
results of these talks. After having considered that report,
the Council will be in a position to draw the necessary
conclusions and, in particular, to decide whether or not we
should go ahead with the application of the plan referred to.

7.5, The Romanian delegation reserves the right to participate again in the debate when the Council begins the
discussion of all the substantive questions involved in the
settlement by political means of the question of Rhodesia.
For the moment, we wish to emphasize that any initiative
aimed at a solution of the Rhodesian problem can have the
support of this forum as long as it meets with the
fundamental objective of the people of Zimbabwe: the
obtainment of the freedom and total independence of their
country, Accordingly, it is only natural that the representative of the liberation movement of Zimbabwe, the Patriotic
Front, should participate in the discussion at the United
Nations on the future of Rhodesia in order to present his
views.

82. WC would be failing in our duty if today we were not
to try out a proposal likely to bring sovereignty and
independence to the people of Zimbabwe in a peaceful
way, in keeping with the wishes of the international
community.

76. We believe that consideration by the Security Council
of the means by which the United Nations could effectively
and specifically support the attainment by the people of
Zimbabwe of their legitimate rights is a positive step in
fulfilling the role which the United Nations is called upon
to play in the final elimination of colonialism and racism.
The Romanian delegation would like to emphasize the need

83. Mr.
ILLUECA
(Panama) (interpretation
from
Sl.‘anish): Mr. President, the Security Council, under your
wise leadership, seems once again to be coming close to a
hirmonious
solution of one of the most difficult and
thorny questions which has been on the agenda of this
body for many years.
7

,

we have adopted and applied continue to be insufficient to
put an end to the Smith regime and its consequences. The
capacity for survival of this rCgime is clearly explained by
the unconditional support it receives from its South African
friends and by the free movement of capital from Western
operate freely
companies. Transnational corporations
through their South African branches, quite legally and with
ease. There is no doubt that that is the greatest support of
the Smith rkgime. It is with this weapon that 270,000
whites subjugate more than 7 million blacks in Southern
Rhodesia, The situation is steadily worsening. The people
of Zimbabwe are suffering spiritually and physically and it
is more and more urgent to find a solution of the problem.
When the majority of the population is recognized as
representing the people of Zimbabwe, the transnational
companies will have to recognize that fact and accept their
will.

84. The delegation of Panama wishes to announce that it
will support the draft resolution contained in document
S/12404 introduced by the delegation of the United
Kingdom because it considers it to be a sound, judicious
and wise decision to place the solution of the Zimbabwe
problem before the logical forum, that is, the United
Nations system.
85. My country wishes to pay a special tribute to the
liberation movements of southern Africa and especially the
Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe, which has been SO ably
represented here today by Mr. Joshua Nkomo. His words
were imbued with sincerity and wisdom, as might be
expected from a man who fights in the field and who also
knows how to fight at the negotiating table. As several
representatives have stated, it is a triumph for liberation
movements, for those who struggle for the freedom of
Africa.

92. The recent c!eath of Mr. Biko, a distinguished fighter
for the freedom of the South African people, is one further
manifestation of ihe cruelty of racist regimes. His death is
one more proof o? the urgency of eliminating apartheid and
those guilty of perpetuating it.

86. Naturally, we wish to express our appreciation of the
efforts exerted by the Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, Mr. David
Owen, to enable his country to respond to the wishes of the
international community, to the aspirations of the common
man, so that a just and swift solution of the problem of
Zimbabwe can be reached.

93. The delegation of the United Kingdom, which is
headed at this moment by Mr. Owen, has submitted a
proposal to the Council which results from Anglo-American
consultations and which we find appropriate, on the
understanding that it is a good point of departure towards
the adoption of a series of subsequent measures.

87. We also wish to recognize the efforts which have been
undertaken in this connexion by our colleague, Ambassador
Andrew Young of the United States.
88. We believe that they have made a presentation which
deserves public support. The major Western Powers are
engaged in a process of restoring the faith of the public, and
we feel that this should also rind an echo among the
Eastern Powers because we all wish for a peaceful end to
the suffering of the African pcoplcs.

94. We wished to hear Mr. Nkomo to ascertain his position
on this proposal. We are now convinced that it is necessary
to make a beginning and take a first step which would
permit the transfer of power to the majority in Zimbabwe.
We strongly believe that, on this occasion, the role of the
United Nations is to lend assistance and co-operation to the
Member State which bears the main responsibility for the
solution of this problem.

89. Accordingly, my delegation endorses the ideas expressed by other representatives this afternoon and addresses a very sincere and heartfelt appeal to all members of
the Council to support this effort to resolve the problem of
Zimbabwe within the United Nations system by giving the
Secretary-General yet another proof of our confidence. We
know that, in his official capacity, he must needs be fully
responsive to the spirit of the General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions which seek a solution of this
problem and try to bring about the decolonization of
Zimbabwe, the recognition and proclamation of its independence and majority rule by an effective formula which
will guarantee the definitive, specific and unlimited exercise
of the right of political and economic sell-determination for
the people of Zimbabwe.

95. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): Mr. President, allow me
first, instead of congratulating you on these closing days of
your presidency, to pay a tribute to the efficient, skilful
and patient manner in which you have conducted our
deliberations during the course of this month.
96. I wish also to apologizc particularly to the Foreign
Secretary of the United Kingdom for my inability to lx
present at the early part of this meeting. I was occupied in
another meeting of a different nature, but of some
importance.
97. We have had occasion to state our position on the
question of Southern Rhodesia in the Council, in the
General Assembly and in various other forums on previous
occasions. Therefore, there is little need for me to reiterate
the views of Pakistan.

90. Miss LOPEZ (Venezuela)
(interpretation
fkm
Spanish): Today’s debate is of extreme importance for
Venezuela. That is why we wished to be present, since it
deals with one of the most dramatic problems affecting the
African continent, a problem which concerns not only
Africans but all members of the world community.

98. The Council is concerned today with taking action 011
the specific request of the rcprcsentative of the United
Kingdom in document S/12402. A draft resolution has
been submitted in document S/12404 in which the Council
would request the Secretary-General to appoint a representativc to enter into discussions with the British Resident

91. The problem of Rhodesia has been the object of
constant concern in this forum, and the resolutions adopted
on that question are many. However, the sanctions which
8

Commissioner designate and with all the parties concerning
military and associated arrangements. We are in sympathy
with the objectives of that draft resolution and will be able
to Support it.
99. We have also heard the statement made here by
Mr, Joshua Nkomo, representativeof the Patriotic Front, a
principal party in the conflict. The considerationsthat he
put forward in giving his endorsement to the clraft
resolution merit the most SCrious considerationandwill, we
hope and we are sure, be given proper weight.
100. We sincerely hope that the prcscnt initiative marks a
turning point in the situation, which is both tragic and
dangerous,and that it will lead to the rapid emergenceof
Zimbabwe to true independence.
101. The PRESIDENT: AS 1 have no more nameson the
list of speakersand with the concurrence of the Council, 1
wish to suspendthis meeting in order to enablemembersto
meet with me immediately in Confcrcncc Room 5 for
consultations to decide on how the deliberations of the
Coulxil should be continued.

i

102. Mr. OWEN (United Kingdom): 1 am very conscious
that the decisionsthat 1 am askingthe Council to make are
of great importnncc and I do not wish any memberto feel
that it is being put under undue pressure.But we have only
three more members around this table that have yet to
speakand 1 wonder whether it would be possibleto reacha
decision today. This will, of course, bc discussedin the
consultations, but by having consultations do we, as 1
understand it, leave open the possibility of taking a decision
today, were we to obtain agrccmcnt? 1 would certainly
hope so, but 1 would understand it if there were strong
pressingreasons for our being unable to cl0 so, I have a
slight pCrS0nill reason for my hope: I might Findit difficult
to be here and I wanted very much to be presentto listen

to all the contributions. I greatly
appreciate
the overwhelming measureof support that the draft resolutionhasalready
received.
103. The PRESIDENT: I recall for the benefit of members
of the Council that it was my intention to suspendthe
meetingand not to adjourn it.
104. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): 1 support the requestof
the representative of the United Kingdom that we arrive at
a decision on the draft resolution today. But I should also
like to point out that the three African membersof the
Council have an appointment to meet with the SecretaryGeneral immediately after this meetingand we alsohave an
appointment to meet with Mr. Nkomo. Therefore,
Mr. President, if we are to meet with you for consultations
we should appreciateit very much if you could allow US at
least 15 to 20 minutes.
105. Mr. KIKHIA (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): I think it is
the custom in the Council to discussthis kind of procedural
problem in informal meetings. Since you, Mr. President,
invited us to meet in aninformal meeting,we should prefer
to hold that meetingand decide in it whether to resumeour
meetingtoday or to havea meetinganother day.
106. The PRESIDENT: 1 have just beeninformed by the
Secretary-Generalthat he would be willing to postponehis
meeting with the three African membersof the Council
which was originally scheduledafter the adjournment of
this meeting. 1 shall now suspendthe meeting for the
purposeof holding what I hope will be brief consultations
in Conference Room 5 in orcler to decide how we should
continue,
7%~meeting wassuspendedat 4.55 p.m. It resumedat
5.45 p.m. and wasadjourned.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

IJnitcd
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section. New York or Gcncva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PWBLJCATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: LJnited Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

1~s publications
des Nations
Unies sent cn vente dans Ies librairies
et les agences
dCpositaires
du mondo enticr. Informez-vous
sup&s de volre libraire
ou adressez-vow
R : Nations Units. Swtion
des ventos, New York ou GenAve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLJCACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
TJnidas e&n en venta en librerias
y cssas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas. Seccicin de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-October

1978-2,200
