U

General A11embly-Twenty-fifth SeHion

1. Recommends that the World Meteorological
Or~ation take, if necessary, further appropriate
action for mobilizing capable scientists, technologists
and other pertinent resources from any or all nations
with a view to obtaining basic meteorological data
and discovering ways and means of mitigating the
harmful effects of these storms and removing or
minimizing their destructive potentials;
2. Calls upon Member States to exert efforts within
their means to implement fully the World Weather
Watch plan of the World Meteorological Organization;
3. Requests the World Meteorological Organization
to submit a report through the Secretary-General to
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
at its next session, and to such other United Nations
bodies as may be appropriate, on the steps taken
punuant to the present and other resolutions.
1932nd plenary meeting,
16 December 1970.

2734 (XXV). Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security
Tlw General Assembly,

RecalUng the determination of the peoples of the
United Nations, as proclaimed by the Charter, to save
succeeding generations from the scour~e of war, and
to this end to live together in peace with one another
as good neighbours and to unite their strength to maintain international peace and security,
Considering that in order to fulfil the purposes and

principles of the United Nations Member States must
strictly abide by all provisions of the Charter,
Recalling its resolution 2606 (XXIV) of 16 December 1969 in which the General Assembly, inter alia,
expressed the desire that the twenty-fifth year of the
Or~tion's existence should be marked by new
initiatives to promote peace, security, disarmament and
economic and social progress for all mankind and the
conviction of the urgent need to make the United Nations more effective as an instrument for maintaining
international peace and security,
Mindful of the observations, proposals and suggestions advanced during the debate at the twentyfourth session of the General Assembly or presented
subsequently by Governments of Member States concerning the attainment of this objective, and of the
report submitted by the Secretary-General in
conformity with paragraph 5 of resolution 2606
(XXIV),81
Having in mind the Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Co-operation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, adopted unanimously
at the current session,88
Conscious of its duty to examine in depth the present
international situation and to study the means and
recourses provided by the relevant provisions of the
Charter in order to build peace, security and co-operation in the world,
1. Solemnly reaffirms the universal and unconditional validity of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations as the basis of relations
among States irrespective of their size, geographical
location, level of development or political, economic
111 A/7922 and Add.1-6.

H Resolution 2625 (XXV).

and social systems and declares that the breach of these
principles cannot be justified in any circumstances
whatsoever;
2. Calls upon all States to adhere strictly in their
international relations to the purposes and principles
of the Charter, includin$ the principle that States shall
refrain in their international relations from the threat
or us~ of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State or in any other
manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United
Nations; the principle that States shall settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a
manner that international peace and security and justice
are not endangered; the dutr not to intervene in matters
within the domestic jurisdiction of any State, in accordance with the Charter; the duty of States to cooperate with one another in accordance with the
Charter; the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples; the principle of sovereign equality
of States; and the principle that States shall fulfil in
good faith the obligations assumed by them in accordance with the Charter;
3. Solemnly reaffirms that, in the event of a conflict
between the obligations of the Members of the United
Nations under the Charter and their obligations under
any other international agreement, their obligations
under the Charter shall prevail;
4. Solemnly reaffirms that States must fully respect
the sovereignty of other States and the right of peoples to determine their own destinies, free of external
intervention, coercion or constraint, especially involving the threat or use of force, overt or covert, and refrain from any attempt aimed at the partial or total
disruption of the national unity and territorial integrity
of any other State or country;
5. Solemnly reaffirms that every State has the duty
to refrain from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity and political independence of any
other State, and that the territory of a State shall not
be the object of military occupat10n resulting from the
use of force in contravention of the provisions of the
Charter, that the territory of a State shall not be the
object of acquisition by another State resulting from
the threat or use of force, that no territorial acquisition resulting from the threat or use of force shall be
recognized as legal and that every State has the duty
to refrain from organizing, instigating, assisting or
participating in acts of civil strife or terrorist acts in
another State;
6. Urges Member States to make full use and seek
improved implementation of the means and methods
provided for in the Charter for the exclusively peaceful settlement of any dispute or any situation, the continuance of which is likely to endanger the maintenance
of international peace and security, including negotiation, inquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration,
judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or arrangements, good offices including those of the Secretary-General, or other peaceful means of their own
choice, it being understood that the Security Council
in dealing with such disputes or situations should also
take into consideration that legal disputes should as a
general rule be referred by the parties to the International Court of Justice in accordance with the provisions of the Statute of the Court;
7. Urges all Member States to respond to the immediate need to agree on guidelines for more effective
peace-keeping operations in accordance with the
Charter, which could increase the effectiveness of the

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Comn11ttcc

United Nations in dealing with situations endangering
international peace and security, and consequently to
support the efforts of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations to reach agreement on all questions
relating to such operations, as well as on provisions
for their appropriate and equitable financing;
8. Recognizes the need for effective, dynamic and
ftexible measures, in accordance with the Charter, to
prevent and remove threats to the peace, suppress
acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace, and
in particular for measures to build, maintam and restore international peace and security;
9. Recommends that the Security Council take steps
to facilitate the conclusion of the agreements envisaged
in Article 43 of the Charter in order fully to develop
its capacity for enforcement action as provided for
under Chapter VII of the Charter;
10. Recommends that the Security Council consider, in conformity with Article 29 of the Charter,
whenever appropriate and necessary, the desirability
of establishing subsidiary organs, on an ad hoe basis,
and with the participation of the parties concerned,
when conditions so warrant, to ass1s.t the Council in
the performance of its functions as defined in the
Charter;
11. Recommends that all States contribute to the
efforts to ensure peace and security for all nations and
to establish, in accordance with the Charter, an
effective system of universal collective security without
military alliances;
12. Invites Member States to do their utmost to
enhance by all possible means the authority and effectiveness of the Security Coundl and of its decisions;
13. Calls upon the Security Council, including the
permanent members, to intensify efforts to discharge,
m conformity with the Charter, its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security;
14. Recommends that Member States support the
efforts of the Special Committee on the Question of
Defining Aggression to bring its work to a successful
conclusion, thus achieving the definition of aggression
as soon as possible;
15. Reaffirms its competence under the Charter to
discuss and recommend measures for the peaceful adjustment of any situation which it deems likely to
1Dlpair the general welfare or friendly relations among
States, including situations resulting from a violation
of the provisions of the Charter setting forth the purposes and principles of the United Nations;
16. Urges all Member States to implement the decisions of the Security Council in accordance with their
obligations under Article 25 of the Charter and to
respect, as provided for in the Charter, the resolutions
of United Nations organs responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security and the
peaceful settlement of disputes;
17. Urges Member States to reaffirm their will to
respect fully their obligations under international law
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and to continue and intensify the efforts towards the progressive development and codification of
international law;
18. Calls upon all States to desist from any
forcible or other action which deprives peoples, in
particular those still under colonial or any other form
of external domination, of their inalienable right to
self-determination, freedom and independence and to

25

refrain from military and repressive measures aimed
at preventing the attainment of independence by all
dependent peoples in accordance with the Charter and
in furtherance of the objectives of General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and
render assistance to the United Nations and, in accordance with the Charter, to the oppressed peoples
in their legitimate struggle in order to bring about the
speedy elimination of colonialism or any other form
of external domination;
19. Affirms its belief that there is a close connexion
between the strengthening of international security, disarmament and the economic development of countries,
so that any progress made towards any of these objectives will constitute progress towards all of them;
20. Urges all States, particularly the nuclearweapon States, to make urgent and concerted efforts
within the framework of the Disarmament Decade and
through other means for the cessation and reversal of
the nuclear and conventional arms race at an early date,
the elimination of nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction and the conclusion of a treaty on
general and complete disarmament under effective intemational control, as well as to ensure that the benefits
of the technology of the peaceful use of nuclear energy
shall be availaole to all States, to the maximum extent
possible, without discrimination;
21. Emphatically reiterates the need to undertake,
within the framework of the Second United Nations
Development Decade, urgent and concerted intemational action based on a global strategy aimed at re-ducing and eliminating as soon as possible the economic gap between developed and developing countries, which is closely and essentially correlated to the
strengthening of the security of all nations and the
establishment of lasting international peace;
22. Solemnly reaffirms that universal respect for
and full exercise of human rights and fundamental
freedoms and the elimination of the violation of those
rights are urgent and essential to the strengthening of
international security, and hence resolutely condemns
all forms of oppression, tyranny and discrimination,
particularly racism and racial discrimination, whereever they occur;
23. Resolutely condemns the criminal policy of
apartheid of the Government of South Africa and
reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of the oppressed
peoples to attain their human rights and fundamental
freedoms and self-determination;
24. Expresses its cc,nviction that the achievement of
universality of the United Nations, in accordance with
the Charter, would increase its effectiveness in
strengthening international peace and security;
25. Considers that the promotion of international
co-operation, including regional, subregional and
bilateral co-operation among States, in keeping with
the provisions of the Charter and based on the principle of equal rights and on strict respect for the
sovereignty and independence of States, can contribute
to the strengthening of international security;
26. Welcomes the decision of the Security Council8T
to hold periodic meetings in accordance with Article
28, paragraph 2, of the Charter and expresses the hope
that these meetings will make an important contribution
to the strengthening of international security;
3 7 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-fifth
Year, 1544th meeting.

24

General A11embly-Twenty-fi.fth Se11ion

21. Emphasizes the need for the United Nations to

exert continuous efforts for the strengthening of international peace aud security and requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on steps taken in
pursuance of the present Declaration.
1932nd plenary meeting,
16 December 1970.

2749 (XXV). Declaration of Principles Govern•
ing the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor, and the
Subsoil Thereof, beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2340 (XXII) of 18 December 1967, 2467 (XXIII) of 21 December 1968
and 2574 (XXIV) of 15 December 1969, concerning
the area to which the title of the item refers,
Affirming that there is an area of the sea-bed and
the ocean floor, and the subsoil thereof, beyond the
limits of national jurisdiction, the precise limits of which
are yet to be determined,
Recognizing that the existing le$al r6gime of the
bi~ seas does not _provide substantive rules for regulatmg the exploration of the aforesaid area and the
exploitation of its resources,
Convinced that the area shall be reserved exclusively
for peaceful purposes and that the exploration of the
area and the exploitation of its resources shall be
carried out for the benefit of mankind as a whole,
Believing it essential that an international r6gime
applyin• to the area and its resourc.es and including
appropnate international machinery should be established as soon as possible,
Bearing in mind that the development and use of
the area and its resources shall be undertaken in such
a manner as to foster the healthy development of the
world economy and balanced growth of international
trade, and to minimize any adverse economic effects
caused by the fluctuation of prices of raw materials
resulting from such activities,
Solemnly declares that:
1. The sea-bed and ocean floor, and the subsoil
thereof, beyond the limits of national jurisdiction
(hereinafter referred to as the area), as well as the
resources of the area, are the common heritage of
mankind.
2. The area shall not be subject to appropriation
by any means by States or persons, natural or juridical, an~ no ~tate shall claim or exercise sovereignty
or sovereign rights over any part thereof.
3. No State or person, natural or juridical, shall
claim, exercise or acquire rights with respect to the
area or its resources incompatible with the international regime to be established and the principles
of this Declaration.
4. All activities regarding the exploration and
exploitation of the resources of the area and other
related activities shall be governed by the international regime to be established.
5. The area shall be open to use exclusively for
peaceful purposes by all States, whether coastal or
land-locked, without discrimination, in accordance
with the international regime to be established.
6. States shall act in the area in accordance with
the applicable principles and rules of international

law, including the Charter of the United Nations
and the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, adofited by the General Assembly
on 24 October 1970, 8 in the interests of maintaining
international peace and security and promoting international co-operation and mutual understanding.
7. The exploration of the area and the exploitation of its resources shall be carried out for the
benefit of mankind as a whole, irrespective of the
geographical location of States, whether land-locked
or coastal, and taking into particular consideration
the interests and needs of the developing countries.
8. The area shall be reserved exclusively for
peaceful purposes, without prejudice to any measures which have been or may be agreed upon in
the context of international negotiations undertaken
in the field of disarmament and which may be applicable to a broader area. One or more international agreements shall be concluded as soon as
possible in order to implement effectively this principle and to constitute a step towards the exclusion
of the sea-bed, the ocean floor and the subsoil thereof
from the arms race.
9. On the basis of the _Principles of this Declaration, an international r6gime applying to the area
and its resources and including a~propriate international machinery to give effect to its provisions shall
be established by an international treatv of a universal character, generally agreed upon. "The r6gime
shall, inter alia, provide for the orderly and safe
development and rational management of the area
and its resources and for expanding opportunities in
the use thereof, and ensure the equitable sharin• by
States in the benefits derived therefrom, taking mto
particular consideration the interests and needs of
the developing countries, whether land-locked or
coastal.
10. States shall promote international co-operation in scientific research exclusively for peaceful
purposes:
(a) By participation in international programmes
and by encouraging co-operation in scientific research
by personnel of different countries;
(b) Through effective J?Ublication of research
programmes and dissemination of the results of research through international channels;
( c) By co-orc::ration in measures to strengthen
research capabilities of developing countries, including the participation of their nationals in research
programmes.
No_ such _activity shall form the legal basis for any
clauns with respect to any part of the area or its
resources.
11. With respect to activities in the area and
acting in conformity with the international regime to
be established, States shall take appropriate measures
for and shall co-operate in the adoption and implementation of international rules, standards and
procedures for, inter alia:
. (a) The prevention of pollution and contamina!Jon, ~nd other haz:3rds to the ~arine environment,
mcluding the coastline, and of mterference with the
ecological balance of the marine environment;
as Resolution 2625 (XXV).
