S/PV.7457

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7457th meeting

Friday, 5 June 2015, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ibrahim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Omaish
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-16933 (E)
*1516933*

S/PV.7457

Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 9.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedures, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
and Mr. Alexander Hug, Deputy Chief Monitor of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. On behalf of
the Council, I welcome Mr. Hug, who is joining today’s
meeting via video teleconference from Kyiv.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: Since the Council last met on Ukraine
on 6 March (see S/PV.7400), while the situation in eastern
Ukraine has remained tenuous, we have had some
grounds for hope. The ceasefire continues to largely hold
in most parts of the conflict zone, and the number and
pace of casualties have generally slowed. Importantly,
the political process aimed at full implementation of
the package of measures for the implementation of the
Minsk agreements, adopted on 12 February, is finally
under way. I also wish to reiterate that, had it not been
for the continued diplomatic efforts of Ukraine, France,
Germany and the Russian Federation in the Normandy
format and the support of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), we would likely
be faced with a more challenging situation. The full
implementation of Minsk is sine qua non for leading
eastern Ukraine and the country out of conflict. The
continued non-implementation of various provisions of
the agreement entails a dangerous limbo.
Mr. Alexander Hug, Deputy Chief Monitor of the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, will brief the Council
in detail on the security situation in eastern Ukraine,
including on Wednesday’s hostilities. However, I would

2/22

05/06/2015

be remiss not to note the grave concern of the United
Nations about the ongoing, almost daily deadly clashes,
the use of heavy weaponry, the laying of minefields on
both sides of the contact line, the reported continued
presence of foreign mercenaries on Ukrainian soil and
the reported flows of heavy weaponry into eastern
Ukraine, all of which run contrary to key provisions of
the Minsk package of measures.
The latest death toll since the outbreak of the
conflict stands at over 6,400 people. Since the signing
of the Minsk package, some additional 400 lives have
been lost. Sadly, just on Wednesday, 3 June, according to
the latest figures from the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, an additional 28
people, including nine civilians, were killed in deadly
clashes around Marinka. This is a sharp increase over
the past weeks, particularly as heavy shelling elsewhere
in Donetsk reportedly continued throughout yesterday.
We are either looking at a return to a deepening,
intractable conflict or a momentary upsurge in parts of
the conflict zone. We cannot afford either scenario. The
ceasefire must be fully respected and the protection of
civilians a priority. I would also like to stress that all
concerned should refrain from using threats of violence
and military leverage to influence the political process.
The humanitarian situation also remains dire.
Ukraine now ranks among the top 10 countries in
terms of internally displaced persons (IDPs), with over
1.3 million IDPs. There were none just over a year
ago. In the last week of May alone, 16,000 people were
displaced. Similarly, nearly 870,000 Ukrainians have
sought asylum, residence or other forms of legal stay
in neighbouring countries; 10,000 of those were in the
second half of May alone. The number of displaced will
only grow if the violence continues.
Of immediate concern is the now complete lack
of humanitarian access across the contact line in
either direction, which has been preventing lifesaving
humanitarian assistance from reaching those most
in need. All parties to the conflict must immediately
guarantee unimpeded access for humanitarian
personnel and cargo, both by the United Nations
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). The
Government of Ukraine must remove all bureaucratic
impediments to the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
and the 2 June decree issued by the de facto authorities
in Donetsk that prohibits international NGOs from
operating in non-Government controlled Donetsk must
be immediately revoked.

15-16933

05/06/2015

Ukraine

Since this crisis began, we have seen the Council
convene dozens of times. Security Council members
have repeatedly raised concern about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation. Yet the $316-million 2015
humanitarian response plan to assist victims of
this conflict faces a shortfall of $221 million. The
Secretary-General calls on Member States to urgently
translate their concern into action and to fully fund
the humanitarian response. This will ensure that the
capacity and resources are in place to reach those in
desperate need the moment that access is restored.
On the political-diplomatic front, we are most
encouraged by the continued and critical work in the
Normandy format, with the next political directorlevel meeting scheduled for 10 June in Paris, by the
diligent efforts of the Trilateral Contact Group, and
by the commencement of the four working groups on
political, security, humanitarian and economic issues.
In our view, these three interconnected mechanisms
are all equally important pieces of the political and
diplomatic process, and we are heartened to see that the
international community is fully committed to these
efforts.
With regard to the working groups specifically, we
understand that, although they have not been without
challenges, each group has met at least twice and that
the atmosphere has mainly been constructive. The
political working group has, we understand, focused its
energies on the modalities of local elections, which also
includes finding common ground on the special status
law. Equally important efforts to fmd political solutions
to some of the most pressing economic, humanitarian
and security questions are also under way.
From 7 to 10 May, the Secretary-General visited
Poland, Ukraine and Russia. During his visits, he
held a number of constructive meetings with regard
to the conflict in Ukraine, including with Presidents
Poroshenko and Putin. Although they had varying views
on the conflict in the east, both Presidents reassured the
Secretary-General of their continued commitment to a
peaceful resolution of the conflict. It was evident that,
although the road ahead would be long and arduous,
the full implementation of the Minsk agreements is
possible if all concerned fulfil their obligations and
engage in good faith.
The Secretary-General will continue his good
offices role on Ukraine, and remains open to
considering how best to further support the OSCE, as

S/PV.7457

well as the implementation of the Minsk agreements
more broadly. The critical work of the Human Rights
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine, evinced by its latest
report of 1 June, as well as of the humanitarian and
development actors on the ground, remain priority
areas for our Organization.
The package of measures for the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, including the reinstatement
of full control of the State border by the Government
of Ukraine, has a deadline. That deadline is less than
six months away. As we have stated on a number of
occasions, neither Ukraine nor the region nor the
international community can afford to have this process
fail. Above all, we cannot forget the tremendous human
cost of the conflict, which can only begin to be addressed
through respect of the ceasefire and fulfilment of the
political, economic, social, humanitarian and human
rights provisions of Minsk.
I would like to close by reiterating the United
Nations unwavering support to Ukraine’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. The people of
Ukraine deserve nothing less.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hug.
Mr. Hug: At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Sir, for the opportunity to brief the Security Council
on the situation in Ukraine. On 27 February (see
S/PV.7395), Ambassador Apakan gave the Council the
most recent update on behalf of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine in the aftermath of the
signing of the Minsk package of measures.
Today, I am reporting a significant deterioration
of the security situation in Ukraine. The violence
witnessed in and around the town of Marinka, close
to the line of contact, constitutes a new worrying
development in the conflict in eastern Ukraine. After
the signature of the Minsk package of measures, large
parts of the conflict region had initially remained
quiet for months. This was particularly true for the
Luhansk region. However, throughout all this period,
fighting has continued in some hot spots, such as in
the surroundings of the destroyed airport of the city of
Donetsk, and in the area of the city of Mariupol around
the village of Shyrokyne.
The OSCE Mission, during that period,
continuously observed a pattern of heavy fighting

15-169333/22

S/PV.7457

Ukraine

in these two locations, with occasional flare-ups in
other places. In the beginning of May, the security
situation started to deteriorate further. Towns in the
Donetsk region that had been quiet for months, such
as Horlivka and Hranitne, saw increased violence, and
again there were civilian casualties, mostly due to the
indiscriminate use of heavy weapons. Significantly, the
violence has also spread to the Luhansk region, with
villages immediately north of Luhansk city — namely,
Shchastia and Stanytsia Luhanska — and others further
north-west along the contact line now witnessing
regular shelling and small-arms fire engagements.
The level of violence seen at Marinka in this context
does not necessarily represent a further intensification
of violence. The Mission has, after all, witnessed
hundreds of shells fall in and around Donetsk airport,
fired by both sides for many days. Marinka instead
seems to represent a possible new development — a
refocusing of weaponry and personnel. Before, violence
was concentrated north and north-west of Donetsk city,
with the economically and strategically important town
of Avdiivka to the north the apparent focus. Marinka
does not necessarily mean that this objective has
changed, but perhaps the means have.
Immediately following the signing of the Minsk
package, the Mission witnessed the withdrawal of some
heavy weapons from the contact line. It visited so-called
heavy weapons holding areas where all sides stored
such weapons. Over time, however, the Mission has
increasingly noted irregularities. Weapons previously
recorded are now often missing. In the meantime, the
Mission has noted the movement and presence of heavy
weapons — not to mention the obvious use of such
weapons — in areas where they are prohibited by the
Minsk arrangements.
In many cases, the Mission has also been prevented
from accessing heavy weapons holding areas. It
has also been denied entry to specific areas, notably
along the Russian-Ukrainian international border. The
Mission’s unmanned aerial vehicles have been jammed
on a regular basis, causing interference in the control of
those vehicles and their video feed. Our monitors have
also faced threats and intimidation and have even been
fired upon, all of which constitutes efforts to prevent
the Mission from monitoring adherence to the Minsk
package, in particular the provision relating to the
withdrawal of heavy weapons from the contact line.
Despite these obstacles — and mostly because of
the bravery of dedicated and professional monitors on
4/22

05/06/2015

the ground — the Mission has been able to effectively
monitor the situation on the ground. On the basis of
extensive first-hand evidence of violations gathered
by our 375 monitors on the ground in Donbas and our
unarmed aerial vehicles in the sky, I can report with
confidence on the situation there.
Our assessment from the ground is that tension
levels have increased and that ceasefire violations
are becoming more frequent and more severe. In
particular, the reintroduction of Grad rockets and other
multiple-launch rocket systems is cause for added
concern. Although negotiations are always necessary,
these developments — and in particular the events in
Marinka — serve as a stark reminder for all sides of the
need to resolve their difference at the negotiation table.
The Minsk agreements form an integrated whole
and prescribe a ceasefire and a political process
towards the normalization of the situation. They remain
the only available framework for peace. In that context,
the process of implementation of these agreements
falls within the remit of the Trilateral Contact Group,
chaired by Ambassador Heidi Tagliavini, with whom
we cooperate very closely. The Mission coordinates
the working group on security of the Trilateral Contact
Group, one of the working groups established under
measure 13 of the Minsk package. That working group
has, to date, held three meetings, the most recent of
which was held on 2 June, just before the events around
Marinka. The working group has the task of increasing
security in the conflict zone. This now includes a plan
to withdraw tanks and certain weapons with a calibre
smaller than 100 millimetres and a plan to de-escalate
the situation around one of the main hotspots, in the
village of Shyrokyne, to the east of Mariupol.
Initially, issues of format had a negative impact
on the meetings of the working group. However, the
most recent meeting, held on 2 June, proved to be
constructive, and a material discussion on issues was
achieved between the sides. Despite the fact that some
issues remain open, that process of discussion and
of mutual engagement regarding the situation on the
ground must continue.
A role in the peace process is also played by the
joint centre for control and coordination. This structure
consists of military representatives from Ukraine
and the Russian Federation and operates inside the
conflict zone. The Mission closely monitors the work
of this structure and must report that the joint centre
still does not operate jointly. The sides also maintain
15-16933

05/06/2015

Ukraine

separate ceasefire violation logs, one by the Ukrainian
armed forces and one by the Russian Federation armed
forces representation to the joint centre, suggesting
a persisting structural split in their work. If the sides
would resolve to work jointly, the joint centre could
play an important role in avoiding or stopping ceasefire
violations towards a full implementation of the Minsk
documents.
The humanitarian situation in the conflict zone
continues to be a matter of much concern. As reported
by the Government of Ukraine, there are now at least
1.3 million internally displaced persons in Ukraine,
which is symptomatic of how the conflict is affecting
the civilian population in Donbas. The majority of
those are elderly people, women and children, who are
particularly exposed to the consequences of the conflict.
Civilians continue to pay an unacceptable price. They
are killed and wounded, as both sides continue to place
military positions in and around civilian infrastructure.
Their property and livelihoods have been destroyed.
The Mission has also noted the temporary closure of
Ukraine’s biggest coke and chemical plant in Avdiivka
due to targeted and sustained shelling.
There is also a significant amount of landmines and
unexploded ordnance in conflict-affected areas, which
poses a major threat to the lives of civilians and to
recovery efforts. Ongoing hostilities have had an impact
on residential areas and basic services infrastructure,
including gas pipelines and the water supply, which
has severely limited access to safe drinking water for
civilians. The latter is of particular concern with the
summer months approaching.
Compounding the difficult situation facing civilians
is a permit system in operation all along the contact line.
The delivery of humanitarian aid and medical supplies
and normal commerce have been severely affected,
resulting in a worsening of the living conditions of
people living in the conflict zone. With access across
the contact line, particularly in the Luhansk region,
almost at a standstill, people-to-people contact has been
hugely disrupted, resulting in divided communities and
even families.
The Mission will not lose sight of these aspects of
the conflict and is working, as mandated, on related
tasks throughout Ukraine. We continue to facilitate
humanitarian assistance where possible and within the
remit of our mandate. In doing so, we closely cooperate
with the United Nations and its agencies. We seek to be
helpful to the population through our broad and robust

S/PV.7457

presence on the ground. We work on the facilitation
of localized ceasefires and infrastructure repairs
across the contact line. Such efforts, combined with
our engagement on human rights issues, gender and
dialogue facilitation, will help to consolidate the basis
on which the implementation of the political part of the
Minsk agreements is built.
Allow me to reiterate that developments around
Marinka are worrying, suggesting that the military
track has not been abandoned in favour of the political
one. Those events underline the need to break the cycle
of violence now before further escalation takes place.
We urgently call on all sides to return to the
negotiating table and make use of the negotiation
framework set up in the context of the Trilateral Contact
Group. The Mission will continue to implement its
mandate with impartiality and in close cooperation
with all sides, in the context of the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Ukraine. We stand ready to assist
in the implementation of the Minsk agreements and
thereby contribute to the restoration of peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Hug for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting at short
notice. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman and Alexander Hug, Deputy Chief Monitor
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine,
for their assessments of and briefings on the reality on
the ground in Donbas, eastern Ukraine.
When in February Russian-backed forces occupied
Debaltseve in violation of existing ceasefire agreements,
many worried that that violation would not be the last and
that, just like the September 2014 Minsk agreements,
the February 2015 agreement was also signed only to
be broken. The only question was when.
For some time now, the OSCE Mission has been
reporting violations of the Minsk agreements and
an increased movement of heavy weaponry in the
territories held by the illegal militants. For example,
the 3 June OSCE Mission report states that the Mission
observed the movement of a large amount of heavy
weapons in areas controlled by the so-called Donetsk
People’s Republic — generally in a westerly direction
towards the contact line — close to Marinka, preceding

15-169335/22

S/PV.7457

Ukraine

and during the fighting. Between 10.30 p.m. on 2 June
and 5.30 a.m. on 3 June, the Mission — positioned in
the Tekstilshchik area of Donetsk city, controlled by
the so-called Donetsk People’s Republic — made a
number of observations. It observed, inter alia, eight
tracked armoured vehicles moving west, four of which
were main battle tanks, at 10.30 p.m.; four main battle
tanks at 11.03 p.m.; a military-type truck moving west,
towing a 122-millimetre artillery piece, at 11.45 p.m.;
two T-64 battle tanks moving west at 4.30 a.m.; and a
column of one infantry fighting vehicle, three military
trucks — one carrying an ZU-23-2 anti-aircraft
gun — and two T-72 main battle tanks moving west at
4.50 a.m. Such reports have been increasingly frequent
in the last few days.
The military attack against the Ukrainian positions
in Marinka and Krasnogorivka and the use of multiple
rocket launcher systems against Pisky, Nevelske and
Vodiane in the pre-dawn hours of 3 June are a most
serious blow to the increasingly fragile status quo of
the implementation of the Minsk agreements. Under
attack, the Ukrainian military has had no choice but
to inform the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission that
in order to defend themselves they would need to move
weapons toward the line of contact to respond to these
attacks by Russian-separatist forces.
Notably, the Special Monitoring Mission made
several attempts to contact the leaders of the socalled Donetsk People’s Republic, including the selfproclaimed Prime Minister, Parliamentary Speaker,
Minister of Defence and Chief of the General Staff,
in order to facilitate a cessation to the fighting around
Marinka. None of the calls were taken. According to
the Mission staff, all were either unavailable or did
not wish to speak. This is not how anyone caring for a
fragile ceasefire would behave. On the contrary, such
behaviour indicates a clear intent to go on the offensive
in breach of all existing agreements. Notably, according
to the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, last week,
outgoing automatic grenade launcher fire from within
the city was heard, indicating that the so-called Donetsk
People’s Republic is using residential areas to launch
their attacks, posing deliberate and grave risks to the
local population.
Furthermore, the self-proclaimed leaders of the
illegal armed groups do not hide their intention to
seek more territory. Just recently the self-proclaimed
militant boss Zakharchenko told journalists:
“Slaviansk, Konstantynivka, Krasnoarmiysk are towns

6/22

05/06/2015

of the Donetsk People’s Republic”, indicating intent to
take them by force. Little does it matter to him and his
peers that they have no legitimate claim whatsoever
on the sovereign territory of the State of Ukraine and
its people, to which and to whom he and his peers,
supported and armed by Russia, have done and continue
to do incalculable damage.
The Council has put its weight behind the
Minsk agreements, unequivocally demanding their
implementation in resolution 2202 (2015). Among other
things, these agreements demanded full withdrawal of
heavy weapons, foreign armed formations, military
equipment and mercenaries from the territory of
Ukraine, called for safe, free and unrestricted access for
the monitors of the Special Monitoring Mission in all
parts of eastern Ukraine, and stressed the release of all
hostages. However, all points of the Minsk agreements
have been ignored or wilfully breached by the proxy
militants.
Persistent flows of foreign fighters and weapons
from the Russian Federation, as noted in the latest
report of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, continue to fuel the conflict. Ukraine’s
eastern borders remain open to the supply of arms and
heavy weapons. Russian soldiers have been captured
on Ukrainian soil. Russian soldiers continue to die
anonymously on the Ukrainian soil. Thanks to arms
supplies, the illegal militants have a larger and better
equipped military force than quite a few European
States and NATO members; it is probably the largest
illegal army ever. The comings and goings across the
border of individuals in military uniforms without
insignia, and most recently with the insignia of the
armed forces of the Russian Federation, as reported by
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission.
OSCE monitors can observe less than 1 per cent of
the conflict border. If this is happening before their eyes,
it is quite easy to guess what is happening in places that
they cannot observe, where there are no international
monitors. OSCE observers continue to be intimidated
and, as noted earlier, threatened and systematically
denied access by the illegal Russian militant proxies;
OSCE unmanned aerial vehicles are jammed. The
training, arming and financing of militants continues
unimpeded. Heavy weapons have not been completely
withdrawn, have been moved around a great deal and
are being returned to the frontline. Ukrainian coal is
being smuggled out of the country and into Russia in
broad daylight while Ukraine itself suffers from a coal

15-16933

05/06/2015

Ukraine

shortage. The so-called humanitarian convoys continue
their comings and goings as if eastern Ukraine were
Russia’s own backyard. Prisoner exchanges are stalling.
The former United Nations peacekeeper, Ukrainian
pilot Nadiya Savchenko, remains illegally imprisoned.
Oleg Sentsov and other Ukrainian citizens are being
illegally detained in Russia.
We support the efforts of the United Nations, the
OSCE and other international actors aimed at finding
solutions to this conflict, including through the
strengthened good offices of the Secretary-General.
We call on the Secretary-General to redouble his
efforts and act fast, before the conflict claims more
lives and flares up once again. We also support the idea
of strengthening the United Nations presence on the
ground, including through the setting up of a United
Nations peace support office.
And yet today we reiterate our strong support for
the independence, unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine, with Crimea as an integral
part. And yet today, because of a Russian-supported
asymmetrical war accompanied by an aggressive
propaganda campaign, Crimea remains occupied and
Ukraine finds itself among the top 10 countries in
terms of the number of internally displaced persons.
The conflict has claimed some 6,500 lives, while many
more — including the children of eastern Ukraine — are
wounded or displaced, living in subhuman conditions
and constant fear.
Today, as tensions risk to explode once again into
open military conflict, sadly, Russia chooses once
again to blame the victim, Ukraine, for defending itself,
while protecting and arming the illegal militants. We
have said time and again that it is up to Russia to rein
in the illegal militants and put an end to this bloody
conflict which it started with the occupation of Crimea
over a year ago. For its part, Ukraine has done and
continues to do everything within its power to uphold
the fragile ceasefire agreement. But like any country
under attack, Ukraine has the right and the duty before
its citizens to defend itself in the face of aggression. No
one can take that right away.
As the illegal militants and Russian proxies
continue their blatant attempts to change facts on the
ground, we must stand firm with the people of Ukraine
and the United Nations Charter in condemning such
criminal efforts. We call on all the parties to respect
all existing agreements and the ceasefire and redouble

S/PV.7457

their efforts to move forward in the Trilateral Contact
Group.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have been discussing the situation in
Ukraine since February 2014. At that time, there was
an agreement between the President and the opposition.
If that agreement had been implemented, Kyiv would
have implemented constitutional reform by the end
of last year and we would have observed a gradual
normalization of and democratic development in
Ukraine. Instead, a different logic has been in place,
supported by people who want to see their political
preferences for the future of Ukraine and its entire
population prevail. This is the root of a tragic situation
that has gone on for too long. We need to put an end to
it. That is why the Minsk agreements exist.
We wish to express our gratitude to UnderSecretary-General Jeffrey Feltman, and the Deputy
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, Mr. Alexander Hug, for their
briefings. We share the great concern at the resurgence
of military activity in Donbas. We need to take measures
to stabilize the situation. In this regard, we welcome the
efforts of the OSCE and the Joint Centre for Control
and Coordination.
The package of measures for implementing the
Minsk agreements adopted on 12 February gives a
concise and clear road map for settling the Ukrainian
crisis. The Security Council unanimously supported
the document in resolution 2202 (2015), assuming its
part of political responsibility for settling the situation
in Ukraine. Therefore, here in the Security Council, we
need to deal with the causes of the ongoing escalation.
Almost four months have gone by since 12 February,
yet what has been done to implement the package of
measures? Pursuant to paragraph 4, on the first day after
the withdrawal of heavy weapons, a dialogue should
have begun on the modalities for conducting local
elections in line with Ukrainian legislation and laws
on the special status of Donbas, which were adopted
back in the autumn of 2014. The Supreme Council of
Ukraine — the Verkhovna Rada — was required only
to adopt a law on this territory with respect to its special
status. Instead, however, the Ukrainian parliament has
introduced amendments that were not agreed to by
Donetsk and Luhansk and which were not acceptable
to them, and the territory itself was declared to be

15-169337/22

S/PV.7457

Ukraine

occupied, which completely subverted the agreements
reached in Minsk. The amendments simply overlooked
the adoption of the special status and did not provide
for local elections.
Kyiv has begun to toughen its rhetoric, saying that
elections could only take place once the south-east of
Ukraine was under its full control. Over all this time,
Kyiv has refused to have direct dialogue with the
representatives of Dombas, despite provisions for such
dialogue in paragraphs 4, 9, 11 and 12 of the package of
measures. This is one of the obvious reasons why it has
been so difficult to start negotiations in the Trilateral
Contact Group and its subgroups.
In violation of paragraph 5 of the package of
measures, Kyiv has also not adopted the amnesty law
which would prohibit any punishment for persons
involved in the activities taking place in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions. Moreover, the Ukrainian leadership
has repeatedly stated publicly that it does not intend to
comply with that provision.
One of the central elements in the implementation
package is instituting constitutional reforms by the end of
the year. The parameters of those reforms were outlined
in Minsk with the active participation of the leaders of
the Normandy quartet. Paragraph 11 states in black
and white that decentralization must be implemented
while taking into account the particularities of specific
districts of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, as agreed
on with the representatives of those districts. The
package includes provisions on the right to linguistic
self-determination, the creation of people’s militias
by decision of local councils, the expansion of local
Governments’ powers to appoint chief prosecutors and
judges, and the conclusion of agreements with Kyiv in
various areas, as well as the implementation of crossborder cooperation with Russia.
Kyiv finally established a constitutional commission
on 3 March that included foreign experts but not
a single representative of Donetsk and Luhansk,
whose proposals for constitutional reform were
simply ignored. Kyiv’s refusal to comply with the
humanitarian and socioeconomic provisions of the
package of measures presents the population of Donbas
with serious challenges. The noose of the economic
blockade around Donetsk and Luhansk is being drawn
tighter and tighter. The Kyiv officials do not hide the
fact that those restrictive measures are purely punitive,
saying that the people of the Donetsk and Luhansk
People’s Republics are being punished for their support
8/22

05/06/2015

of the volunteers. People have been cut off from social
benefits and access to food and medicines is difficult,
since commercial transport is not being allowed
through. Kyiv has not reacted to the remonstrations of
international humanitarian and human-rights workers
regarding the fact that it is children and the elderly, the
most vulnerable, who suffer.
Thanks to humanitarian assistance from Russia,
the people of Donbas are surviving in a literal sense.
We have already sent 28 convoys with more than 36,000
tons of humanitarian deliveries in food, daily necessities
and medicines. The Ukrainian border guards and
customs officers finally began recently to participate
in monitoring them, something we have invited them
to do from the start. It is encouraging that Switzerland
recently contributed by sending a significant delivery
of reagents for purifying drinking water. But the basic
problem of difficult access for humanitarian assistance
remains, thanks to Kyiv’s bureaucratic obstacles. In
addition to all this, the response to appeals for financing
is at only 21 per cent.
The Ukrainian Government has also been unable or
unwilling to bring all the punitive battalions under its
control, in accordance with paragraph 10 of the Minsk
agreement. They continue to wreak havoc. For example,
during the truce the Aydar troops in the Luhansk region
switched to extorting and abusing civilians, including
the elderly, trying to cross the line of contact on foot in
order to get cash or buy food. After the Minsk agreement
was reached on 12 February, a fair amount was done
to implement important provisions on removing heavy
weaponry, yet attacks on civilian towns and villages
east of the boundary line nonetheless continued almost
daily, terrorizing the local population.
I will cite just a few examples. On 28 May, three
people, including an 11-year-old girl and her father, died
in shelling in Horlivka, and many of the town’s residents
were injured. On 3 June, a massive bombardment of
Donetsk killed at least six civilians died and wounded
more than 90, besides which there was firing from
the town of Marinka, as has been mentioned today,
which appears to have provoked the latest escalation
of military action. On 4 June, when Telmanovo was
attacked by Ukrainian forces, shells hit a playground,
killing a year-old infant.
Accusations have been levelled at the militias,
but we can only ask ourselves why all we hear in
statements from Kyiv is about military casualties,
while there are reports from Donetsk and Luhansk of
15-16933

05/06/2015

Ukraine

the death of civilians and the destruction of civilian
infrastructure — hospitals, schools, kindergartens and
houses. In that regard, we ask that the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission not simply focus on the violations
of the ceasefire agreement and on determining who
violated it, but also describe clearly what the targets
of those attacks were and whether their victims were
civilians or military units firing on residential areas.
We must have a clear picture of what is happening in
Donbas and who is committing violations not just of the
Minsk agreement but also of the norms of international
humanitarian law.
Against that background, it is surprising to see
the indifference of our Western partners, who are
usually so fond of pontificating about humanitarian
issues. Furthermore, there is no end to the shipments
of military supplies, including armoured vehicles,
along with the hundreds of instructors sent to train the
Ukrainian forces. There have been numerous reports
of sightings near Donbas of foreign mercenaries
and private military companies. Is that not a direct
encouragement to a resumption of hostilities, not
to mention a clear violation of paragraph 10, which
provides for the withdrawal of foreign armed forces,
military equipment and mercenaries from Ukrainian
territory?
For all practical purposes, it is no secret that Kyiv
has used the Minsk truce to rebuild and regroup its
forces, which is why the latest outbreak of hostilities,
while seriously worrying, is hardly surprising. However,
we should not ignore the fact that it occurred after a
series of very positive meetings between the Trilateral
Contact Group and its working groups, most recently in
Minsk on 2 June. And although they have yet to reach a
final agreement, there has been progress on every issue
under discussion, including on such complex subjects
as the demilitarization of Shirokino and including
mortars with a calibre under 100 millimetres on the list
of excluded weapons.
Definite progress has been made on the question
of starting direct consultations between Kyiv and
Luhansk and Donetsk on preparing for the holding
of local elections. That raises the suspicion that it is
precisely this positive news that is linked to the armed
provocations being conducted against cities in Donbas.
Perhaps Kyiv, particularly the so-called war party,
has understood that it cannot continue to sabotage
the implementation package forever. Even the capitals
that are most loyal to Kyiv have begun to betray signs

S/PV.7457

of irritation, saying that the Kyiv authorities have
overstepped the bounds of decency in violating or
simply ignoring the Minsk agreement. And military
action is the most reliable diversionary manoeuvre,
since one can blame anything on the war.
This is a critical moment. If we continue to allow
Kyiv to drag its feet in taking what are absolutely
essential political steps regarding Donbas, the situation
may again spiral out of control, with unpredictable
consequences. We urge the members of the Council
with influence over the Kyiv authorities to make every
effort to ensure that this does not occur.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey
Feltman
and
Mr. Alexander Hug, Deputy Chief Monitor of the
Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), for their
briefings.
The latest developments on the ground are
worrying. I refer of course to the resumption of fighting
on Wednesday in Marinka, west of Donetsk, and of
the increase in incidents at numerous points on the
front line. According to the information we have, the
attack was launched by separatist troops in violation
of the commitments made in Minsk on 12 February.
We firmly condemn all violations of the ceasefire
declared in February and urge the parties to respect
their commitments under the Minsk agreement’s
implementation package.
It is clear, however, that the fighting, which is at a
level of intensity not seen since February and the attack
on Debaltseve, comes primarily from limited forces
in a sector that has already been the scene of several
violations of the ceasefire, to our regret. As far as we
know, the separatist forces amount to a half-battalion
supported by armoured elements and they have been
halted. The situation, however, presents a number of
features that call for extreme vigilance, particularly
the concentration of heavy weapons that violate the
Minsk agreement, which must be stopped immediately.
Similarly, the presence among the separatists of many
foreign fighters who are radicalized, bellicose and
undisciplined shows that Moscow must do more, and
do better, to control the actions of the separatists and
mercenaries.
The deterioration of the situation on the ground
should not detract from the overall situation in Ukraine.
Despite the attack, the Minsk process is ongoing

15-169339/22

S/PV.7457

Ukraine

and there are true signs of hope. From the security
perspective, the Minsk process has launched a positive
momentum, even if it has been only unevenly applied
to date. The average number of victims per day has
dropped significantly since the adoption of the Minsk
package on 12 February. More than 2,500 Ukrainian
soldiers have been released.
Furthermore, at the second level of the process,
there have recently been tenuous but encouraging
developments in the political process. In particular,
the working groups proposed by Ms. Tagliavini in her
statement before the Council three months ago (see
S/PV.7400) have been established and have already
met. Discussions are still getting off the ground. They
have been delayed by numerous signs of distrust and
sensitivity on both sides. We note that in the groups,
substantial and productive debates have achieved
tangible progress on organizing elections in the
separatist zone. In particular, a voting method for the
separatist zone has been accepted by all, and that is a
positive sign that touches on one of the key aspects of
the crisis.
Similarly, the Trilateral Contact Group, the
cornerstone of the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, within which the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and plays
a crucial role pursuant to resolution 2202 (2015), has
met on several occasions. In that regard, we regret the
change of heart of the Russian party which, in leaving
the discussion table with great fanfare on Tuesday,
is attempting to impose the separatists as the sole
Ukrainian interlocutors in that forum. We remind
Russia, a member of the Trilateral Contact Group and,
more than any other party, subject to the provisions
of resolution 2202 (2015), that it cannot shirk its
obligations. The conflict in Ukraine is not a domestic
crisis in which Russia can simply play the role of
well-meaning mediator between two camps. Everyone
knows the role that it has played in the crisis from the
start, and Russia has been paying the consequences
since then.
We are at a moment of truth in the Ukrainian crisis.
The future of the Trilateral Contact Group is at stake
and we cannot allow that crucial part of the diplomatic
framework, which was put together so painstakingly, to
be simply withdrawn and disqualified, particularly as it
was endorsed by the Council in resolution 2202 (2015).
More broadly, we must do all we can to maintain the
momentum and methodology that we have used up til

10/22

05/06/2015

now. Our priority must be the full implementation of
both the security and political aspects of the Minsk
package, which must enter into force simultaneously
before the end of the year. Respect for the timeframe
established in Minsk is crucial and in our opinion it is
unacceptable that it be allowed to slide. The timeframe
is ambitious, but the Minsk process is the only possible
means to avoid a resumption of violence from which no
one would benefit.
A Normandy format follow-up meeting of political
experts will take place in Paris on 10 June. We call
on Russia to stop trying to extricate itself from the
negotiating process and to exercise its responsibility
over the separatists. It is, moreover, important to stress
to the Kyiv authorities that they must begin a real
dialogue with the separatists in order to organize local
elections in full respect for the Minsk timeframe, and
to implement the decentralization of Ukraine. When
proposals made by the separatists are unacceptable
to Ukraine, it must respond with its own so that the
negotiations can move forward.
At this crucial moment in the implementation of the
Minsk process, our commitment is more important than
ever. The commitment of France is unwavering. In the
context of the Normandy format, France and Germany
will continue to bring pressure to bear on the parties to
ensure that the OSCE enjoys the freedom of movement
it requires to perform the tasks entrusted to it under the
Minsk agreements, particularly in terms of monitoring
the ceasefire and the withdrawal of weapons.
Finally, we recall our commitment to the sovereignty,
independence and territorial independence of Ukraine
within its international recognized borders.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, for organizing today’s meeting to speak to the
recent developments in eastern Ukraine. join others
in thanking our briefers, Under Secretary-General
Feltman and Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) Deputy Chief Monitor Hug, for
providing the Council and the international community
with the facts underlining the escalation in violence,
which are critical in a conflict where some continue to
try to obscure the truth.
On 3 June, combined Russian-separatist forces
launched multiple, coordinated attacks west of
the Minsk line of contact in Donetsk. The attacks
were concentrated on the towns of Marinka and
Krasnohorivka. The Russian Federation and its

15-16933

05/06/2015

Ukraine

separatist allies have offered multiple, often conflicting
explanations for those attacks. In some instances,
Russia and the separatists have blamed Ukraine for
inciting the attacks. For example, a Russian presidential
spokesman attributed the violations of the ceasefire to
the “provocative actions of the Ukrainian armed forces”,
claiming that “the Ukrainian side has repeatedly made
similar efforts to escalate tensions against the backdrop
of international operations”.
Similarly, the so-called Defence Minister of the
self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic blamed
Ukraine for provocations and what he called a breach
of the Minsk agreements that led to the fighting.
Exactly what the so-called provocations are was never
explained. This set of arguments has been undermined
by some of the separatists themselves, who seem to
have forgotten to run their tweets and their blog posts
by Moscow. During the attacks, one tweeted: “Marinka
is ours”, posting a photograph of armed soldiers atop a
tank flying the separatist flag. A post on a separatist
website said: “As a result of a massive attack by armed
forces of the Donetsk People’s Republic, Marinka has
been liberated”.
In other instances, Russia has argued that the
attacks were justified because the areas that are
actually part of the separatist-controlled territory under
the Minsk agreements are these areas. They are not.
That was the case that Russia made about Marinka and
Krasnohorivka yesterday at a meeting of the OSCE. We
have seen this tactic before when combined Russianseparatist forces encircled and attacked Debaltseve
immediately after signing the package of measures
at Minsk on 12 February. As separatist commander
Eduard Basurin told Reuters on 15 February:
“Of course we can open fire on Debaltseve. The
territory is internal — ours. And internal is
internal. But along the line of confrontation there
is no shooting”.
The problem with this line of argument is quite
simply that it is false. At no point did the Minsk
agreements recognize Marinka and Krasnohorivka as
separatist-controlled territory, nor did they grant the
separatists control over Debaltseve or other areas that
combined Russian-separatist forces have seized or tried
to seize. Yet, for Russia and the separatists, it seems
the contact line can shift to include the territories that
they feel they deserve. The Kyiv-born surrealist master
Mikhail Bulgakov put this problem a different way:
“The tongue can conceal the truth, but the eyes never.”

S/PV.7457

In this case, the objective eyes in eastern Ukraine
belong to the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, and
what it tells us is that on the evening of 2 June and in
the early morning of 3 June, the Mission
“observed the movement of a large amount of heavy
weapons in areas controlled by the Donetsk People’s
Republic, generally in a westerly direction towards
the contact line, close to Marinka, preceding and
during the fighting”.
To repeat, according to the Special Monitoring
Mission, heavy weapons from the Russian-backed
separatist side moved westward preceding as well as
during the fighting. The Mission tried to contact highranking Donetsk People’s Republic personnel over an
hour-and-a-half period on the morning of 3 June but
reported: “Either they were unavailable or did not wish
to speak to the SMM”.
The eyes do not conceal the truth, and the truth here
is that the recent violence was rooted in a combined
Russian-separatist assault. Those and other joint attacks
by Russian-separatist forces have deadly consequences.
At least five Ukrainian soldiers were killed and 38
wounded in the assault on the towns. The number of
casualties is surely higher, but we do not, unfortunately,
have reliable reports from the separatist side. That is
because, as the United Nations human rights monitoring
unit noted in its report of 15 May, independent media
have been prosecuted, threatened and otherwise
muzzled in separatist-controlled territory.
We also do not know how many Russian soldiers
were killed in recent attacks, or in any of their
operations in eastern Ukraine for that matter. Russia
continues, despite incidents such as the recent capture
of two special operations Russian soldiers in Shchastya
last month, to deny any military involvement in eastern
Ukraine. And just last week President Putin signed
a decree classifying any death of Russian soldiers in
“special operations“ in peacetime a State secret — a
policy which previously was limited to wartime only.
Not content with denying their military service in life,
Russia now denies their loved ones respect and closure,
not to mention social services, for their service in death.
It denies the Russian people knowledge to which they
are entitled of a conflict their Government has been
fuelling with weapons, training and soldiers. No matter
what is one’s opinion of the open secret that is Russia’s
military involvement in eastern Ukraine and occupied
Crimea, the dignified recognition of one’s dead should
have primacy.

15-1693311/22

S/PV.7457

Ukraine

Of course, suffering is hardly limited to those
involved in the fighting. Civilians living near and along
the front lines continue to endure profound hardship.
Approximately 1.3 million Ukrainians have been
displaced by the fighting. Small children on the front
lines have become used to going to school and sleeping
in basements. Families live underground for months at
a time. The elderly and disabled are trapped, with little
access to vital medicines and other forms of assistance.
A health professional working in Debaltseve said,
“I have met elderly people who say that they would
just like to die. They do not have depression; they
just do not want to be 80 years old and living in a
basement.”
By now, the international community is quite
familiar with Russia’s playbook when it comes to efforts
to occupy the territory of its sovereign neighbours,
as it did it Crimea and before that in Transnistria,
Abkhazia and South Ossetia. The consensus here and
in the international community remains that Minsk’s
implementation is the only viable way out of this deadly
conflict.
The Ukrainian Government has made good-faith
efforts to honour that consensus, notwithstanding
the seemingly endless violations by Russia and the
separatists, and to deliver on the commitments made
at Minsk. Ukraine is holding direct dialogue with the
separatists — a bitter pill to swallow, but one that they
have swallowed for the sake of peace and for the sake of
the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
At the same time, Ukraine has undertaken critical
efforts, with the participation of Ukrainian civil society,
to address pervasive problems that it inherited from
its predecessors, like widespread corruption, as well
as to pursue crucial reforms such as decentralization.
Ukraine cooperates with the international monitors
and bodies and has committed to addressing identified
areas of concern. The United States will continue
to raise tough issues and those areas of concern,
including some raised here today by the briefers, with
the Government of Ukraine, and we will support the
Government and the Ukrainian people as they continue
their efforts towards meaningful reform.
Yet Russia — and the separatists that it trains, arms
and fights alongside and with whom it shares commandand-control systems in eastern Ukraine — continues
to ignore the consensus. Flouting the commitments it
made at Minsk, it goes right on applying its playbook

12/22

05/06/2015

in new territories, as though the Council and the world
are too blind or too easily deceived to notice. We must
not let ourselves be deceived. The consequences of
Russia’s contempt for Minsk and the rules undergirding
our international peace and security are too great both
for the integrity of the international system and for the
rights and welfare of the Ukrainian people.
We cannot fail to see and fail to act. We must not
stop applying pressure until Ukrainians get the stable
democracy, territorial integrity and sovereignty they
yearn for and deserve.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jeffrey Feltman and Alexander Hug, Deputy
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine, for their exhaustive briefings this
morning.
The relative improvement of the security situation
in eastern Ukraine over the past two months has had a
positive effect between the parties at the political level,
despite the fact that the progress achieved has been
slow and limited. Nevertheless, it is our conviction that
halting stabilization efforts would be inappropriate. We
therefore will continue to promote stability throughout
Ukrainian territory through strengthening respect
for the ceasefire agreement, limiting the conflict and
preventing its spread to other regions. The Security
Council and the international community must
therefore provide every type of support to the parties
and help them overcome all obstacles and difficulties
in order to implement the peace agreements reached
between them.
Jordan expresses its concern over the continuing
violations of the ceasefire between the Ukrainian
Government and the separatists, as well as the increased
number of violations in recent days, together with the
increase in the degree of violence in some parts of
eastern Ukraine, particularly in the region of Donetsk
and neighbouring towns. The continuing military
confrontations and provocative acts and their expansion
will only further complicate the situation and nullify
the peace agreements reached between the parties.
That will have an impact on all of the outstanding
issues between the parties and worsen the economic,
social and humanitarian situation even further. Such a
situation will threaten the security and stability of the
entire region.

15-16933

05/06/2015

Ukraine

Jordan invites all parties to assume their
responsibilities and to emphasize constructive and
direct dialogue, as well as positive discussions among
them under the Normandy format, in order to reach a
peaceful settlement of the crisis. We reiterate the fact
that the only solution to the crisis depends on full
respect by all parties — particularly the separatists — of
the Minsk agreements on the ceasefire, as well as of
resolution 2202 (2015). Those agreements and all of
their provisions must be implemented globally without
exception, particularly with regard to halting the illicit
transfer of heavy weaponry and to its full withdrawal,
together with the withdrawal of foreign fighters from
eastern Ukraine.
Jordan welcomes the recent meeting held by the
Trilateral Contact Group working group. It is a positive
step forward, and it requires that all parties continue to
hold such meetings regularly, on the basis of the Minsk
agreements. Achieving a diplomatic solution and
promoting common language and points of agreement
among the parties on certain areas of some agreements
are essential and vital to reach a lasting peace that
meets the ambitions and requirements of the parties
and the stability, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine.
Jordan appreciates all of the efforts carried out by
the OSCE in eastern Ukraine and reiterates that it has
a crucial role in monitoring borders and the ceasefire,
in addition to facilitating humanitarian access. We
call upon all parties to facilitate the work of that
organization and allow it to have access to all affected
regions in order to ensure the provision of basic services
to citizens. It is important that citizens, and refugees
in particular, avoid involvement in political diversions
or confrontations. They must be provided with the
social and humanitarian services necessary for daily
subsistence.
We pay tribute to the important role of the OSCE
in preparing local elections, and we hope that these
elections will soon be organized in eastern Ukraine,
pursuant to the Minsk agreements.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank UnderSecretary-General Feltman and Mr. Hug for their
briefings today. It is important to note the positive
elements in those briefings, in particular that the
ceasefire had generally been holding — if imperfectly
and with frequent violations.

S/PV.7457

But as they have also told the Council, there are
serious problems on the ground. Every day Ukrainian
citizens are being killed and Ukrainian towns besieged,
and the Ukrainian economy continues to suffer, all as
a consequence of continued aggression by separatist
forces supported by Russia and in violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
As Mr. Feltman and Mr. Hug have also reminded
us, the conflict is taking a huge toll on the Ukrainian
people. Ukraine now has the dubious honour of being
among the top 10 countries for the number of internally
displaced persons and, worse, humanitarian relief
supplies are not getting through. We strongly support
Mr. Feltman’s call on both the Government of Ukraine
and the separatist forces to lift the restraints on access
to humanitarian relief.
In February, the Council adopted resolution 2202
(2015), endorsing the Minsk package of measures and
calling on the parties to implement them fully, including
an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire and the
withdrawal of heavy weapons. As we have been told,
the fulfilment of these commitments remains imperfect
at best, but, at worst, those commitments have been
disregarded. We deem the Council’s ongoing scrutiny
to be crucial.
The package of measures mandated that the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) would support the process of restoring peace,
including by monitoring and verifying compliance. Yet
the OSCE faces a major obstacle in carrying out this
role due to its inability to access conflict areas. The
monitors are obstructed from doing their job due to the
security risks associated with ceasefire violations, or
because of restrictions imposed on them.
It is imperative that all sides ensure that the OSCE
be granted the access necessary for it to fulfil its role as
envisaged in the Minsk measures. We call on Russia to
use its influence over the separatists to ensure that what
was agreed in Minsk is implemented and that the OSCE
monitors are able to perform their jobs in areas under
separatist control. The important work that OSCE
monitors are doing on the ground is often difficult and
dangerous. We commend them, but their security and
safety must continue to be protected.
New Zealand remains very concerned about the
situation in eastern Ukraine. We condemn the violence
seen this week in Marinka, and reiterate the call for
restraint made by the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office.

15-1693313/22

S/PV.7457

Ukraine

Heavy weapons must be withdrawn from the contact
line and a true ceasefire must be respected. The costs
of the conflict continue to mount. A lasting solution
is needed. Genuine engagement in the political process
laid out in the Minsk agreements, in particular the
Trilateral Contact Group and its working groups, will
be critical to restoring peace and ending suffering.
As detailed in the latest report of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Ukrainian people continue to be subject to serious
human rights abuses. Until the package of measures is
implemented, including a comprehensive ceasefire, the
biggest losers, as always, will be the people of Ukraine.
But the other loss will be the long history of close
friendship between Russia and Ukraine. That cannot be
good for either country.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman and the Deputy Chief Monitor of the
Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine,
Mr. Alexander Hug, for their briefings on recent
developments in the situation in Ukraine.
We are deeply disturbed by the evolving turn of
events in eastern Ukraine. The ceasefire brokered in
Minsk is holding in general, despite difficulties with
localized violations of the ceasefire and the persistent
dire humanitarian situation, the increasing number of
displaced people and persistent killings, as detailed in
the latest report of the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights. However, the large-scale military
operations of the past few days represent a real setback
to the expectations we nourished for a real consolidation
of the ceasefire as a step towards tangible progress
towards sustainable peace in Ukraine.
As we have stated on previous occasions when this
issue has been brought to the attention of the Security
Council, we reiterate our recognition of the inalienable
right of Ukraine to its independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, in accordance with international
law and the Charter of the United Nations. We also
reaffirm our principal opposition to threats or use of
force as a means of solving disputes among States.
Therefore and in conclusion, we call for the
immediate cessation of hostilities and urge the parties
to return to the negotiating table in the framework of the
Trilateral Contact Group. We call for the withdrawal of
heavy weapons and the full return to the provisions of
the Minsk package of measures. We further request that

14/22

05/06/2015

the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission be given access
to monitor and verify the parties’ full compliance with
the Minsk agreements. Too much blood has been shed
and too much senseless suffering has already been
endured by the Ukrainian people. We urge strict respect
for the international commitments agreed to in Minsk
and international guarantees that the people of Ukraine
may be allowed to live in peace, freedom and security.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela thanks you,
Mr. President, for convening this briefing on Ukraine.
We also welcome Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman and Mr. Alexander Hug, Deputy Chief Monitor
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine,
for the information they have given us.
Our country expresses its concern at the recent
escalation in the armed conflict as a result of the
fighting in Marinka and other cities west of Donetsk,
which have led to the loss of human life and injuries.
Venezuela reiterates its call on the parties to promote a
peaceful political negotiated solution to this crisis. We
also urge them to respect international humanitarian
law, in particular the obligation to ensure the protection
of civilians.
We insist on the full implementation of resolution
2202 (2015), in support of the decision reached by the
negotiators of Ukraine, Russia, France and Germany
on 12 February in Minsk. We must pursue efforts
to achieve a political and diplomatic solution to the
Ukrainian crisis, in which the parties would commit to
working towards a firm and lasting peace. A definitive
end to the hostilities therefore remains an objective
that cannot be postponed. Any incident should be
investigated independently on the basis of reliable
evidence that should lead to the adoption of measures
that meet the aspirations for peace and stability of the
populations affected by the conflict.
To that end, the parties must continue to demonstrate
good will to achieve a joint agreement. In that regard,
the mediation and efforts of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe deserve the support
of the Council, and all parties should facilitate its
work. We must fulfil the agreements reached in Minsk
to address the underlying causes of this conflict and
respect the political and human rights of all those living
in that territory, irrespective of their ethnic origin. We
encourage the implementation of the provisions of the
15-16933

05/06/2015

Ukraine

Minsk agreement that are being implemented by the
Trilateral Contact Group. In that regard, on 6 May we
were informed of the establishment of four working
groups assigned to the areas of security, political
affairs, internally displaced persons and refugees, and
humanitarian assistance, as well as economic issues
and rehabilitation.
The parties must move to restore conditions
conducive to the maintenance of dialogue, with the
support of the international community. That is the
only way to channel the concerns of all parties in order
to find a solution to this conflict. We cannot allow
to prevail a propagandistic environment that incites
confrontation and ethnic hatred, or the thousands
of accusations that contribute only to fanning the
conflict and exacerbating the situation, all of which are
preventing the implementation of the Minsk Agreement.
Venezuela insists on restraint in order to prevent
the dialogue from being affected by unilateral actions
that would jeopardize the peace process. In that regard,
my country rejects the application of unilateral coercive
sanctions, which violate international law and erode the
necessary trust between the parties.
Finally, we reiterate our call on all parties to
redouble their efforts in the search for a just and lasting
political solution to the benefit of their peoples.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Jeffrey Feltman and Alexander
Hug for their briefings. I would also like to thank
Malaysia for having convened this meeting of the
Security Council involving the application of resolution
2202 (2015), in which we made a commitment to closely
follow up the situation in that area.
Unfortunately, in the past few days we have
seen events that have made this meeting necessary.
We have listened to the briefers talk about a serious
worsening of the situation. I believe that everyone here
agrees that the Minsk agreements are the only tool we
have. Promoted by France and Germany, they were
accepted by the parties and endorsed by the Security
Council. Consequently, we must give them our full
and unconditional support. However, during the past
weeks, there have been major violations, and we have
listened to very detailed explanations of the situation in
Marinka. In the end, what is happening?
What is happening is that those who must face
the consequences are always the civilian population.
The figures speak for themselves. We have heard the

S/PV.7457

figures of 1.3 million displaced persons, of 600,000
newly displaced in a relatively short period of time.
This occurred in a country, Ukraine, that previously
was not on the list of the internally displaced persons
but now unfortunately figures on the list of the top ten.
It is a tragic situation in Donbas, and there are major
difficulties in humanitarian access for both personnel
and supplies. The humanitarian response of the
international community has been insufficient.
Accordingly, Spain calls anew for an immediate
ceasefire and for the subsequent and also immediate
withdrawal of heavy weapons. We call upon Russia
to exercise all of its influence and to require from the
rebel groups the immediate and strict implementation
of what has been agreed, thus complying also with
its obligation as a signatory to the Minsk agreements.
We also call on Ukraine to continue to move forward
in complying with the commitments undertaken in
Minsk, including the non-military components of the
agreement. I trust that at the next meeting, on 10 June,
in the Normandy format, we will have seen progress
and be able to say that the Security Council meeting
today was useful in reaching that goal.
Like the Ambassador of New Zealand, I would also
like to refer to the disturbing situation regarding respect
for human rights and the serious violations that we have
seen. I trust that there will be no situation of impunity,
as has been the case in other parts of the globe.
With respect to the OSCE, I will make two brief
comments. Spain is concerned by the difficulties that
the OSCE Mission is encountering in complying with
its obligations, and we would like it to share, without
delay, the information that has been requested. Spain
also supports the extension of the OSCE mandate.
Hopefully, it will enjoy access to an area somewhat
larger than the 1 per cent to which the Ambassador of
Lithuania referred.
Lastly, any lasting and sustainable solution
necessarily involves respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this urgent meeting. I
thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman and Mr. Hug,
Deputy Chief Monitor for the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
It is disturbing that the Council must again
return to this issue, since fighting has flared up and
Russian-backed separatists have broken the ceasefire

15-1693315/22

S/PV.7457

Ukraine

05/06/2015

provided for in the Minsk agreements. The fighting
on Wednesday around Marinka and Kyivsky was an
alarming escalation of violence in eastern Ukraine.
It is clear from the OSCE spot report that this was a
separatist assault on Ukrainian military units. The
OSCE observed heavy weapons mobilizing in the
territory controlled by the so-called Donetsk People’s
Republic. Those weapons moved westward, in complete
disregard of the terms of the Minsk agreements. Action
of that kind and on that scale was clearly premeditated.

Secondly, we urge Russia to use its considerable
influence on the separatists so that they cease their
provocative behaviour and live up to their commitment to
implement fully the Minsk agreements. The separatists
forces are Russia’s creation; they are Russia’s tool.
Russia has the capacity and the influence to control
the separatist forces. It must exercise that influence
to ensure compliance with the Minsk agreements. If it
is not ready to do so, the Council must be clear in its
condemnation.

We have previously seen Russian-backed separatists
seek to provoke a Ukrainian response and then twist
that — as the Russian media are again seeking to
do — into claims that it was the Ukrainians who
launched an assault. These feints are transparent, and
Russian claims and those of their separatist proxies
carry no credibility. The world is watching. We know
who is supporting the separatists. We have seen Russian
soldiers captured in the Donbas. We have heard Russia’s
attempts to come up with innocent explanations for
their presence there. We have noted the amendments
to the Russian State secrecy law, which now prohibits
the release of information about the deaths of soldiers
in peacetime. This legislative action suggests that
the Russian authorities want to silence the justified
questions they are facing from families, journalists and
civil society. We have seen Russian-supplied T-72 tanks
and Uragan rocket launchers operating on Ukrainian
soil, and we have seen countless conveys of supplies
flooding across the border from Russia. Russia claims
these are humanitarian supplies but will not cooperate
with the legitimate Government in Kyiv in a way that
allow for verification of these claims.

Thirdly, it is vital that all parties engage seriously in
the process and implement the Minsk agreements. The
Trilateral Contact Group and Trilateral working groups
are essential mechanisms for making this happen, and
their roles are clearly spelled out in paragraph 13 of the
February Minsk agreement. We need all parties, both
Russians and Ukrainians, to engage in these groups in
a genuine and constructive way. We were disturbed to
hear that the economic working group was not able to
meet earlier this week because a Russian participant did
not attend and that Russian and separatists participants
walked out of a session of the Trilateral Contact Group.

The tragedy and the hypocrisy of the separatists is
that the ordinary people of Ukraine are the ones who
suffer. More than 6,000 have been killed, and more
than 1.3 million have fled their homes. We hope that
Mr. Šimonović, of the High Commissioner’s Office,
will be able to brief the Council on his recent report
on the distressing human rights situation in eastern
Ukraine later this month. There are three things that
now need to happen to prevent further escalation.
First, Russia must immediately withdraw its
military forces from Ukraine, stop its flow of weapons
to the separatists and make every effort to secure
a political solution to this crisis. This includes the
immediate release of Nadiya Savchenko, who has been
illegally detained for nearly a year.

16/22

The European Union has made clear that the
duration of sanctions against Russia is directly linked to
the complete implementation of the Minsk agreements,
and through resolution 2202 (2015) this Council has
made clear that we too expect complete compliance
with the Minsk agreements. So there is no military
solution. The Minsk agreements are the only way that
stability can be restored in eastern Ukraine. We must
all recommit to their implementation and to upholding
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Ukraine.
Let us not forget that the crisis started with the
illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia. More than a
year since that illegal annexation, we cannot lose sight
of what is at stake in eastern Ukraine. A return to
violence and conflict would come at a terrible human
cost for all sides, and it would represent a further attack
on the rules-based international system that we have
shared and valued for the past 70 years. We all depend
on that system enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. Any escalation in Ukraine calls into question
Russia’s commitment to those principles.
Our relationship to Russia extends far beyond the
borders of Ukraine, but in order to foster the cooperation
and trust we want, those relationships must be based on
honesty, mutual respect and dialogue. Until Russia is

15-16933

05/06/2015

Ukraine

able to demonstrate that commitment in Ukraine, the
Council needs to remain actively engaged in overseeing
the full and timely implementation of resolution 2202
(2015).
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman and Mr. Hug
for their briefings. In February, the leaders of Russia,
France, Germany and Ukraine reached an important
consensus in Minsk on the political settlement of the
Ukrainian crisis. The Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2202 (2015), endorsing the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements by the parties concerned, which reflected
support for a political settlement of the Ukrainian
crisis. After the Council’s adoption of the resolution,
progress was made in such areas as the ceasefire, the
withdrawal of heavy weapons and the establishment of
working groups, as outlined in the Minsk package of
measures.
For some time, the overall situation in eastern
Ukraine remained stable and a ceasefire was generally
observed. Recently, the situation in eastern Ukraine
has again deteriorated. China calls on the parties
concerned to keep calm, exercise restraint, consolidate
the hard-won ceasefire and press ahead with a political
settlement of the Ukrainian crisis in order to achieve
peace and tranquillity in Ukraine at an early date. The
international community should make joint efforts in
that direction. The Council’s discussion should also
play a constructive role in that regard.
China has always respected the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all countries, including Ukraine,
and it believes that dialogue and consultations are the
only solution to the Ukrainian issue. China calls on
the parties concerned to make joint efforts to find a
comprehensive, balanced and lasting political solution
as soon as possible so as to achieve peace, tranquillity,
stability and development in Ukraine and the region as
a whole. China will continue to play a constructive role
in promoting a political settlement of the Ukrainian
issue.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Alexander Hug for
their briefings on the situation in Ukraine.
We reiterate our support for the ongoing steps
taken by the Secretary-General and the United Nations
to bring an end to the situation in Ukraine, and we
support the vital work of the Organization for Security

S/PV.7457

and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in mediating the
conflict and implementing the Minsk agreements. We
express our deep concern over the recent escalation
of violence in Ukraine. As we have stated on many
occasions, we believe that full compliance with the
ceasefire, monitored and verified by the Special
Monitoring Mission of the OSCE under the provisions
of the Minsk agreements, and dialogue between the
parties is the only way to achieve lasting peace.
We underscore the importance of strengthening the
rule of law and the obligation to respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
General Assembly resolution 68/262 and international
law. We have also reaffirmed on many occasions the
importance of upholding those principles, which we
consider indispensable. We regret the deterioration
of the security situation and its serious consequences
for the civilian population, which continues to suffer
human rights violations and abuses. We urge the parties
to respect human rights, including full respect for the
rights of minorities, and we call for the perpetrators of
such violations to be brought to justice. We recall that
accountability is also a way of implementing the Minsk
agreements.
The complexity of the crisis in eastern Ukraine is
not limited to the security sphere. More than 5 million
people require humanitarian assistance, and the number
of internally displaced persons and those seeking refuge
continues to increase, making it is urgent to address the
problem. It is also crucial to ensure rapid and unhindered
humanitarian access to the affected population, and all
parties must respect international humanitarian law.
The international community should help alleviate the
crisis. We appeal to donors to contribute to the 2015
Ukraine humanitarian response plan, which so far has
been funded at only 29 per cent.
We are at a critical juncture when it is imperative
that the Council reiterates a message to the parties on
the importance of creating conditions for the effective
implementation of the Minsk agreements. The facts
reveal that apprehensions about the precariousness of
effective enforcement have some merit in the context
of structural tensions. Only political dialogue within
the framework of the Minsk agreements could help to
overcome those critical cycles of violence.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, and Mr. Alexander Hug, Deputy

15-1693317/22

S/PV.7457

Ukraine

Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, for their briefings.
Chad is deeply concerned over the resumption on
3 June of violent encounters between the Ukrainian
army and separatist groups in the area of Marinka,
approximately 30 kilometres from Donetsk. The fighting
with heavy artillery, including Grad rocket launcers
and cannons, has claimed a high number of victims on
both sides. Chad strongly condemns the resurgence of
violence, in violation of the Minsk agreements, which
established a ceasefire and should have opened the way
towards a comprehensive settlement of the conflict
through dialogue. Since 12 February, incursions
have been reported every day, demonstrating that the
ceasefire has merely mitigated the intensity of the
fighting and limited it to certain areas around Donetsk
and Luhansk. Nevertheless, the increased tensions of
recent days in the conflict zone raise fears of a serious
threat of escalation that could thrust Ukraine into civil
war on a larger scale and thereby seriously undermine
the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
Chad is convinced that the solution to the Ukrainian
situation is a political one that largely depends on the
resolve of the parties concerned to commit themselves
to a genuine negotiation process in order to reach
sustainable peace. To that end, we reiterate our appeal
to the parties to return to calm and restraint in order to
avoid a new spiral of violence and to resume the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements.
The human cost of the Ukrainian crisis is very
heavy. More than 6,500 people have been killed, 11,000
wounded and more than 1 million displaced internally.
Chad therefore urges all parties to take the path of a
direct and inclusive dialogue aimed at achieving a
political settlement of the crisis.
In conclusion, we encourage the countries and
organizations that have any influence on the parties
to spare no efforts to bring them to firmly commit to
seeking a lasting political solution to the crisis while
respecting the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity of Ukraine, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I would like to thank
Mr. Feltman,Under-Secretary-General, and Mr. Hug,
Deputy Chief Monitor for the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), for their very lucid
briefings.

18/22

05/06/2015

The recent escalation of fighting in eastern Ukraine
is very disturbing, as we have all heard from members
of the Council this morning. Reports of the large-scale
offensive by separatists in Marinka on 4 June, which
resulted in the deaths of over 20 persons, underscores
the fragility of the situation. There is a risk that the
ceasefire of February 2015 may totally collapse if
the unrelenting violations persist. We urge both sides
to take deliberate and concrete steps to de-escalate
the situation. We all agree that the fulcrum of such a
de-escalation is the Minsk agreement. Indeed, it was
designed to stabilize the situation. It is therefore vital
that the parties act in accordance with their obligations
under the Minsk agreement.
Need we reiterate at this point, in the Council, that
a military solution to this crisis is unattainable? We
would like to encourage both sides to work diligently
and move purposefully towards achieving a political
settlement that is negotiated, with justice and peace
as the guiding principles. We would like to see the
conflict resolved in a manner that takes into account
the concerns of the separatists while unreservedly
respecting the territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty of Ukraine.
We would like to pay tribute this morning to the
leadership and staff of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission for their unrelenting efforts in monitoring
the ceasefire. The regular media updates by the
Mission have enabled us to follow closely not only its
achievements but also the challenges it encounters. We
encourage the parties and all stakeholders to continue
to give their full cooperation to the Mission to facilitate
its very essential role.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malaysia.
I join my colleagues in expressing our appreciation
to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Alexander Hug for their
comprehensive briefings.
Malaysia is greatly alarmed by the recent escalation
in fighting in eastern Ukraine. We have heard from the
briefers on the gravity of the recent situation, which
is the worst since the signing of the Minsk agreement
in February 2015. We join other Council members in
strongly urging all parties to fully comply with the
provisions of the Minsk agreement, as stipulated in
resolution 2202 (2015). We also call for the parties to
cooperate fully with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring

15-16933

05/06/2015

Ukraine

S/PV.7457

Mission in order to enable them to carry out their
mandate as laid out in the Minsk agreement.

civilians. We also urge all parties to allow for safe and
unrestricted humanitarian access to those in need.

Malaysia welcomes the progress made thus far in
the implementation of the Minsk agreement. Until very
recently, the ceasefire has generally been respected,
despite incidents of low-intensity and sporadic fighting.
We note that both sides withdrew heavy weapons in the
early months after the signing of the Minsk agreement.

The parties to the conflict must take a step
back from the spiralling violence in Ukraine and
recommit themselves to the full implementation of the
Minsk agreement. We reiterate our commitment to a
peaceful resolution of the conflict in Ukraine based
on the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
including respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine. We appeal to the conflicting
parties not to lose the opportunity for peace once again.

We welcome and commend the establishment of four
working groups in the context of the Trilateral Contact
Group, focusing on political, security, economic and
humanitarian issues.
On a related note, I would like to highlight that the
overall improvement in the security situation between
March and April 2015 due to the ceasefire has allowed
for the return of an international team, including
Malaysian personnel, to complete the recovery mission
for Malaysia Airlines flight MH-17. We regret the fact
that it took the Malaysian recovery team almost a year
following the downing of the aircraft to be able to enter
the crash site due to the ongoing fighting in eastern
Ukraine. As our team recently managed to collect more
remains and belongings of the victims of flight MH-17,
we were provided with a grim reminder of the tragic
humanitarian costs of the conflict in Ukraine.
As we have heard from the briefers, whatever
progress made in implementing the Minsk agreement is
still far from irreversible. Despite claims by both sides
that heavy weapons have been withdrawn, we remain
concerned that movements or presence of weapons in
violation of the Minsk agreement have been observed by
the Monitoring Mission. Inspections by the Mission of
heavy-weapon holding areas also found some weapons
missing or unaccounted for.
With the most recent clashes in Marinka, the Minsk
agreement is in real danger of unravelling. The civilian
population, in particular children, would undoubtedly
bear the brunt of an escalation in the situation. It is
heart-wrenching that as of 15 May 2015, over 160,000
children have been internally displaced in eastern
Ukraine, 68 killed and almost 200 injured. Children
continue to live with their families in bomb shelters
and to be internally displaced and deprived of basic
necessities such as water and health care.
We would remind all parties of their obligations
under international law and international humanitarian
law, particularly with regard to the protection of

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of June.
It is of high importance that the Security Council is
holding a meeting on the current situation in and around
Ukraine. I would like to express my gratitude to our
briefers, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Alexander Hug,
for their important messages on the current situation on
the ground and the measures taken by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to
monitor the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
I would like to express my gratitude to all
members of the Council for their dedication to the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. I thank them
for their solidarity.
Two days ago, we listened carefully to a lecture
from the Russian delegation on what Ukraine is doing
wrong. I would like to start by reminding the Russian
authorities that Ukraine has a full right to defend its
territorial integrity and sovereignty, which are being
challenged by Russia’s occupation of Crimea and the
aggression against our eastern regions. This right
to defend ourselves is provided by our Constitution
and the Charter of the United Nations — namely,
Article 51 — and includes the right to invite other
countries to help us with self-defence.
What are the legal sources to justify the Russian
decision to send weapons, troops, mercenaries? There
are none. No justification can be found in the Charter
of the United Nations. That is why I would like to
start by drawing the Security Council’s attention
to the Russian Federation’s and the Russian-backed

15-1693319/22

S/PV.7457

Ukraine

terrorists’ grave violations of the ceasefire and Minsk
agreements in general, which were explicitly endorsed
by resolution 2202 (2015).
On 3 June, the militants, with the direct backing
of Russian regular armed forces, carried out a massive
targeted assault on Ukrainian forces around Marinka as
well as an attack near Shchastya. Some 1,000 persons,
including Russian regular military cadre, and 30 tanks
were engaged in the assault near Marinka. Ukrainian
forces were shelled 82 times, including 11 times with
the Grad system. Artillery fire was professionally
coordinated, which also attests to the presence of
Russian regular artillery crews.
These attacks were intended to test the defence
and response capabilities of the Ukrainian forces and
to seize control of territory and vital socioeconomic
infrastructure — the Karlovske water reservoir,
the Kurakhove and Shchastya power stations, and
the Volnovakha railway hub. If the attackers had
captured Marinka, they would have been able to seize
positions from which they could impose an economic
blockade on Mariupol, surround Ukrainian forces in
Avdiivka and near Donetsk airport, thereby enabling
a larger offensive along the front line. The Ukrainian
anti-terrorist operation forces fought off these assaults.
However, five servicemen were killed in action, four
of them in Marinka, and 38 were wounded. Moreover,
three civilians were reported dead.
Meanwhile, after the failure of the 3 June
assault, Russian-backed terrorists continued attacks
overnight. In the direction of Mariupol, the terrorists
shelled Shyrokyne with artillery, mortars, grenade
launchers and small arms. In the direction of Luhansk,
the militants attacked Donetske, Novotoshkivske,
Stanytsya Luhanska and Krymske. In the direction of
Artemivsk, the terrorists shelled Zolote with grenade
launchers and Leninske with small arms. In the
direction of Donetsk, the terrorists attacked Pisky with
mortars and Novotroitske with grenade launchers.
Russia and its proxies in Donbas have repeatedly
violated the Minsk agreements of 5 and 19 September
2014 as well as of 12 February 2015. The assault near
Mariynka became the second large-scale assault after
the flagrant assault on Debaltseve in February. It
occurred immediately after Russia’s attempt to disrupt
the meeting of the Trilateral Contact Group and its
thematic subgroups in Minsk on 2 June. We are sure
that the massive targeted assault around Marinka was
planned in advance by the Russian Federation, and the
20/22

05/06/2015

conclusions of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
prove it. In particular,
“Between 2230 hours on 2 June and 0530 hours on
3 June the [Mission] observed the movement of a
large amount of heavy weapons in the so-called
Donetsk People’s Republic ... in a westerly direction
towards the contact line — close to Marinka,
preceding and during the fighting”.
The Mission observed and tracked, inter alia,
movements of armoured vehicles, including battle
tanks, heavy artillery, military trucks and more. It is
noteworthy that the Mission made several attempts
to contact the high-ranking leaders of the so-called
Donetsk People’s Republic in order to facilitate a
cessation of the fighting around Marinka, but without
success. The so-called leaders did not respond to the
Mission.
Ukraine has consistently and in good faith lived
up to the Minsk agreements in full and tried to use all
possible diplomatic leverage to deter escalation. Thanks
to the Ukrainian Army’s effective defence, Ukraine
has avoided new wave of conflict escalation in Donbas
and discouraged the Kremlin’s attempts to subvert
the provisions of both the resolution 2202 (2015) and
the Minsk agreements by making accusations against
the Ukrainian side. I would like to underscore that we
promptly informed the OSCE Mission that Ukrainian
armed forces’ heavy weapons would be returned to the
contact line in order to deal with the real threat posed
by the fighting in Marinka and to defend civilians
living in the local areas.
The recent provocative steps taken by the Russian
side clearly indicate Russia’s intentions to escalate the
conflict and disrupt the Minsk process. The recent
assaults are an attempt by the Russian side to exert
military pressure on international players on the eve of
important international events. The task of the Security
Council is to prevent the aggressor from taking further
destructive actions in this direction. We have to use all
possible political and diplomatic leverage in this regard.
It is not only the OSCE Mission that continuously
witnesses the deterioration of the situation on the ground.
A few days ago, the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights published its tenth report on the
human rights situation in Ukraine. It is important that
the report clearly highlights the responsibility of the
Russian Federation for the deterioration of the situation
in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions

15-16933

05/06/2015

Ukraine

of Ukraine. In particular, it takes note of the Russian
Federation’s supplying modern types of heavy weaponry
and mercenaries and widely confirms that crimes
and human rights violations have been committed by
militants with Russia’s support. The difficult human
rights situation in the temporarily occupied Crimea is
also reflected in the document. The Office notes that the
so-called Crimean authorities continue to restrict the
rights of ethnic Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar people.
Let me go back to where I began. Taking into
account Russia’s serious violations of resolution 2202
(2015), I would kindly request that Security Council
members promptly react to those provocations and
violations and make every effort to promote a peaceful
resolution of the conflict. The international community
previously stated that an assault on Mariupol would be
a red line which, if crossed by Russia, would trigger
an immediate and resolute response. In the light of the
events of 3 June, the same approach should be applied
to the Marinka case.
At the same time, we urge the Russian Federation
and its proxies to immediately start fulfilling their
obligations under the provisions of the Minsk
agreements and resolution 2202 (2015). We demand that
Russia withdraw its armed forces from Ukraine, stop
fortifying the terrorist organizations with personnel
and weapons, cease its destabilizing and provocative
actions in Ukraine, and release all hostages. Russia
must also end its occupation of Crimea, which remains
an integral part of Ukraine.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has requested the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will not go into a discussion with my
Ukrainian colleague of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law or international humanitarian law,
for that matter, since too many of those instruments’
provisions are being violated by the Kyiv authorities
in their so-called anti-terrorist but in fact punitive
operations in eastern Ukraine.
I would like to make a few comments with regard
to the statement made by the representative of the
United States of America. In her statement, she raised
a very surprising issue — that of the Kyiv authorities’
provocation of hostilities by their systematic, monthslong attacks on cities. Is this not a provocation?
Unfortunately, the Council does not see that or Kyiv’s

S/PV.7457

many other actions that violate the Minsk agreements
and impede the implementation of the political
provisions of the package of measures.
After the Sochi meeting with President Putin and
Foreign Minister Lavrov, Mr. Kerry called upon Kyiv
not to use force. Unfortunately, the request made by
the representative of the United States was not heard.
We would like United States diplomacy to be more
consistent and to follow up on the pronouncements of
its Secretary of State. We do not want to believe that
there is a war party in Washington, D.C., like that in
Kyiv.
We cannot agree with the statement by our British
colleague that the crisis in Ukraine did not begin with
the unification of Crimea and Russia. The crisis began
with the externally supported campaign to overthrow
a democratically elected President of Ukraine. It was
exacerbated when efforts to implement the 21 February
2014 agreement failed. Political influences were also
at work, followed by the terror in Odessa in May 2014
and the campaign we are seeing now in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions.
Finally, in our discussion today we have heard a
number of unfounded and extraordinarily polemical
statements, but I would still like to suggest that this
meeting has been helpful. We affirmed our commitment
to the Minsk agreement and to resolution 2202 (2015).
We think it important that various delegations called for
direct dialogue between Kyiv, Donetsk and Luhansk.
That theme was touched on even by the United States,
although too timidly. That kind of dialogue is absolutely
crucial to full compliance with the Minsk agreement,
which Russia continues to strive for.
The President: The representative of the United
States has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Ms. Power (United States of America): In closing, I
would just like to note the absurdity of two things. The
first is the representative of the Russian Federation’s
citing of the Charter of the United Nations in the
context of a discussion about Ukraine when, despite the
fact that the Russian presence in Ukraine is an open
secret, there is nothing secret about Russia’s declared
annexation of Crimea; and that what was once denied in
this Chamber — namely, that Russian regular soldiers
were in Crimea — is now an openly admitted part of the
facts on the ground that Russia has created in Crimea,
and is what we have seen consistently, as the story has

15-1693321/22

S/PV.7457

Ukraine

shifted. I think the representative of Ukraine asked a
very important question. what is the legal authority for
Russia’s presence in eastern Ukraine? Where in the
United Nations Charter is that stipulated?
The second irony is the great emphasis on a
political process — an emphasis that everyone in
the Council is deeply invested in. And yet Russia’s
response from start to finish in this crisis has been
coercive and militarized. That emphasis on the political
implementation — the core reality that there can only
be a political solution — is something that we urge the
Russian Federation to embrace not only in words but in
actions on the ground.

22/22

05/06/2015

The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I will be very brief. Fortunately, the
Secretariat has established detailed protocols for the
Security Council that cover all the questions that the
representative of the United States touched on just
now and that save me the trouble of a more extensive
reaction to her remarks.
The President: There are no more requests for
further statements.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

15-16933
