S/PV.7361

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7361st meeting

Monday, 19 January 2015, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Bachelet Jeria/Mr. Barros Melet/Mr. Olguín Cigarroa .. . 

(Chile)

Members:

Angola .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Augusto
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Haniff
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ybañez
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Inclusive development for the maintenance of international peace and security
Letter dated 6 January 2015 from the Permanent Representative of Chile to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/6)

15-01584 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1501584*

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 9.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Inclusive development for the maintenance of
international peace and security
Letter dated 6 January 2015 from the
Permanent Representative of Chile to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2015/6)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to warmly welcome the Secretary-General and the
ministers and other representatives who are present
in the Chamber. Their participation in this debate
reaffirms the importance of the topic we are dealing
with today.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Benin, Botswana, Brazil, Cambodia,
Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, South Africa, Sweden, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, Uruguay, Viet Nam and Yemen to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent
Representative of Brazil and Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and Ms. Leymah Gbowee, President of
the Gbowee Peace Foundation Africa, to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, and His
Excellency Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.

2/86

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

19/01/2015

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/6, which contains the text of
a letter dated 6 January 2015 from the Permanent
Representative of Chile to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I thank Chile and you,
Madam President, for organizing today’s debate on
a subject that is central to the mission of the United
Nations, namely, how inclusive development can
promote peace and security.
Since this is my first time participating in the
Security Council this year, I would like to wish all
Council members and others participating today a
happy new year.
I also take this opportunity to welcome the new
members: Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and
Venezuela. I count on their leadership and commitment
in addressing world peace and security. I would also
like to thank the outgoing members — Argentina,
Australia, Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and
Rwanda — for their contributions.
I thank President Bachelet Jeria again for leading
the Council in this debate, and for her commitment
and drive as the first head of UN-Women, where she
successfully raised the profile of women’s rights around
the world. And I thank Nobel Peace Laureate Leymah
Gbowee for her contribution to today’s debate.
Our Organization is built around three pillars: peace
and security, development and human rights. In dealing
with the enormous and complex challenges of each, we
sometimes pay little attention to their interdependence.
But the founders of the United Nations well understood
that, if we ignored one pillar, we imperilled the other
two. We must break out of our silos and work together
on all three areas simultaneously. That is why I very
much welcome the Security Council’s focus today on
inclusive development.
The year 2015 is a year of action on sustainable
development. We are striving to complete the work of
the Millennium Development Goals, to launch a new
post-2015 sustainable development agenda and to reach
an agreement on climate change.
15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

I am encouraged to note that in their deliberations
so far Member States have paid considerable
attention to peace and security and to human rights.
In the General Assembly’s Open Working Group on
Sustainable Development Goals, Member States have
stressed the importance of inclusive growth and decent
work in building a better future. They have called for
reducing inequality and ensuring universal access to
basic services, including health care and education.
Significantly, they have explicitly linked peace with
social inclusion and access to justice for all, and called
for inclusive, representative decision-making.
My own contribution to this debate underscores
the importance of justice to build peaceful and
inclusive societies by promoting strong and responsive
institutions, as reflected in the synthesis report
(A/69/700) that I presented to the General Assembly
last month. With the full membership of the United
Nations beginning its negotiations later this morning,
we now have an important opportunity to broaden the
development agenda and highlight the fundamental
importance of inclusive societies in building a more
peaceful world.
All countries and all societies can benefit from
sustainable and inclusive development, whether they
are rich or poor, developed or developing, in conflict
or at peace. There is a growing consensus that the high
levels of inequality we have seen in recent decades are
socially, politically and environmentally damaging.
Development that excludes part of the population can be
socially corrosive. It can contribute to crime and create
a sense of hopelessness and alienation — conditions
that can breed extremism. Inequality can lead to
the concentration of power in the hands of the few,
undermining democracy. And it can lead to the
unregulated exploitation of natural resources, further
degrading the environment.
Despite that consensus, exclusion and inequality
persist. In many countries, the poor, migrants, people
living with disabilities, indigenous groups and older
people have little or no access to basic services and
cannot participate in political dialogue.
Discrimination against women and girls is a blatant
injustice, denying them opportunities for education,
health and other services, jobs and leadership positions
and hindering their own development and that of their
communities and societies.
Social security provision is desperately inadequate
around the world. More than half the world’s people

S/PV.7361

lack any social protection at all — no pensions, no
safety net in times of illness or unemployment.
Post-conflict societies in particular must prioritize
social, economic and political inclusion if they are to
have any hope of rebuilding trust between communities.
Gender equality and women’s empowerment are a key
condition if women are to contribute to reconciliation
and reconstruction.
Even in countries at peace, inclusive development
will not happen by accident. Governments, the
private sector and civil society. must demonstrate
their commitment to education, health, job creation
and other key steps. The institutions of governance
and political representation are some of the most
crucial determinants of inclusive development. People
need effective, responsive channels for voicing their
views and addressing their grievances and concerns.
The United Nations system stands ready to increase
its support for countries in promoting inclusive
development. The Peacebuilding Commission provides
coordinated international support targeted at countries
emerging from conflict. The current review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture should help
to make that support more robust and flexible.
The post-2015 sustainable development agenda is an
important opportunity to reinforce the interdependence
of development, peace and security, and human rights.
I urge all members of the Security Council to play their
part in making sure that this message is heard in the
continuing negotiations and in the final agreement.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Patriota.
Mr. Patriota (spoke in Spanish): Allow me at the
outset to convey to you, Madam, our warm and brotherly
welcome to New York and to commend you for having
proposed a Security Council debate on today’s very
timely theme.
(spoke in English)
I thank you for inviting me to participate in this
important debate in my capacity as the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission. The theme for this debate is
intrinsically linked to the Peacebuilding Commission’s
mandate and its objective to build lasting and durable
peace and to prevent relapse into violent conflict.
Inclusion is a central aspect of peacebuilding.
War and conflict within countries mar society’s social
fabric with deep rifts and hatred. Mending these

15-015843/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

ruptures often requires dialogue involving warring
parties and non-military groups, as well as mechanisms
to allow broader engagement in political processes,
social structures and development strategies. Political
exclusion is often a key factor behind the relapse into
violent conflict. Political exclusion is particularly
dangerous when it coincides with other forms of
inequality, for example along social, cultural, judicial
or economic lines. Grievances related to exclusion,
inequalities or outright discrimination — perceived
and real — are often at the root of armed conflict.
Competition over control of natural resources has
been shown to have a particularly negative impact
on the likelihood of violent conflict. There are many
situations where the benefits from natural resources are
unequally shared within a society and only a few are
benefiting. Groups seeking to control natural resources
exploit these grievances in order to create political
strife and fuel armed conflict.
These challenges highlight the interdependence
among security, justice and developmental initiatives in
the promotion of peace. The mutually reinforcing nature
of development, peace and security, and human rights
are well recognized and were central to the thinking
behind the creation of the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office. This action, taken at the World Summit in 2005,
sought to reinvigorate and reinforce the broader United
Nations peace and security architecture.
Recognizing the interdependence between these
distinct approaches should not lead us to suggest that
the Council should take on responsibilities regarding
development matters. Other bodies, such as the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, are perhaps in a better
position to explore those issues, in conjunction with
United Nations-mandated development organizations. It
does, however, emphasize the need for us to coordinate
our approaches and work with greater synergy.
The Peacebuilding Commission is well positioned
to provide advice on issues that touch on the concerns
of the Security Council and the General Assembly,
such as ways in which inclusive socioeconomic
development contributes to peace and security and
reduces the risk of emergence or relapse into violent
conflict. The Commission’s advisory function to both
the General Assembly and the Security Council should
be fully utilized to this end. The upcoming review of

4/86

19/01/2015

the peacebuilding architecture should help us in further
reinforcing this role of the Commission.
I would like to point to a few cases where the
Peacebuilding Commission has contributed to more
inclusive societies.
In Burundi, the Peacebuilding Commission worked
closely last year with the Government of Burundi, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the country team to promote a more inclusive political
environment. Despite concerns about some isolated
security incidents involving the youth wings of political
parties, these joint efforts have helped to promote
greater trust among the Government of Burundi,
political parties and civil society. The deepened
political dialogue involving Government and political
parties contributed to the consensual adoption of a road
map for free, transparent, inclusive and peaceful 2015
elections, a code of conduct for the upcoming elections,
and a new electoral code, which was adopted by the
National Assembly in April 2014, before being ratified
by the President. Currently, the electoral process
continues, and the voters registration phase ended
with about 3.7 million registered. The Commission
continues to encourage all stakeholders to maintain
an environment conducive to peaceful elections and to
reject violence as a way for achieving political goals.
In Guinea, the Commission supported the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for West Africa to facilitate a dialogue between the
Government and political parties. The dialogue process
resulted in an agreement that laid a solid foundation
for successful and inclusive parliamentary elections in
2013. Although there are still considerable challenges
ahead, the Parliament, inaugurated in 2014, may be
considered inclusive and representative of the political
groups of Guinea.
In Guinea-Bissau, the Peacebuilding Fund, in
collaboration with the Commission, has supported the
set-up of the first ever Women Situation Room — the
Case de Veille — which has greatly contributed to
increase women’s representation and participation
in the monitoring of the Presidential and Legislative
elections.
In Sierra Leone, the Government and the
international community have shown that a rapid
recovery from war is possible. Sierra Leone has
established political stability, restored basic security,
reinvigorated democratic processes, built important

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7361

national institutions, and generated economic growth.
In the process, it has also proved that the United Nations
can tackle complex peacebuilding and development
challenges in a coordinated fashion. It has demonstrated
that investment by international and regional partners
in peace can reap significant dividends.

conditions for inclusive security, human rights, justice
and economic development.

Let me stress the importance of gender-based
inclusion as a key element in every peacebuilding effort
in war-ravaged societies. In this context. I wish to point
out that the Commission has also called specifically for
the inclusion of women in peacebuilding and political
processes and economic recovery, including through a
political declaration adopted in September 2013 and a
special event in September 2014.

Ms. Gbowee: I am honoured to be here today. As a
peace activist and a grass-roots person, I doubt if I will
ever come back here again. So let me have my say.

In Liberia, the Commission has advocated strongly
for an inclusive reconciliation process. The statement
of mutual commitments, which the Commission
concluded with the Government of Liberia in November
2010, highlighted inclusive reconciliation as a priority.
On this basis, the Commission actively supported the
launch of Liberia’s National Reconciliation Road Map
in 2013 after a two-year consultation process.
The Commission has drawn attention to the
possible political implications of the Ebola epidemic in
Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, as the disease has
threatened to erode social cohesion and undermine
the functioning of key State institutions. An inclusive
recovery process that addresses perceived inequalities
among groups and reinforced key political institutions
will be important to protecting the gains made in the
peacebuilding processes.
In its third informal interactive dialogue with
members of the Security Council in July 2014, the
Commission underscored the importance of focusing
attention on inclusive political processes that would
reinforce national ownership, rebuild the fabric of
fractured societies and establish a new social contract.
This should be the cornerstone of our collective efforts
aimed at building lasting peace in countries emerging
from conflict.
As the General Assembly and the Security
Council prepare to conduct the 10-year review of the
peacebuilding architecture this year, we should seize
the opportunity to ensure that the United Nations
response lives up to the aspirations of millions of people
in countries emerging from conflict. The relevance
and effectiveness of the United Nations must be
assessed against its ability to help create the necessary

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Patriota for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Gbowee.

I would like to express gratitude to Chile for
inviting me here today.
Fourteen years into the Liberian civil war, a group
of women, some of whom had experienced the worst
impact, came together to form the famous Women of
Liberia Mass Action for Peace. Their ultimate goal was
to achieve peace in a nation that had been ravaged by
war. The women were from diverse ethnic, political,
economic and social classes. They also had a diverse
military agenda — due to the fact that many of them
came from ethnic groups that were deeply involved in
the civil war. When it became clear that, regardless of
on which side of the divide they stood, selfishness and
greed would constantly override the genuine need for
peace, those women were prepared to make the ultimate
sacrifice by using non-violent tactics and dialogue to
negotiate a peaceful settlement. The rest is history, and
we all know how it ended. But there are few lessons that
I would like to humbly share with the Council — lessons
that I learned as a leader of that group.
First, for the women of Liberia, achieving peace
was key before maintaining it. The reason I raise this
is that in our world today we find ourselves at a place
where the need for international peace is greater than
ever before in the history of the world. Regardless of
where you come from and of your nationality, race
or political ideology, we all — in this Chamber and
outside — live with a deep sense of fear. All of the
things that made life meaningful to us are gradually
being taken away by insecurity. The joy of getting on an
airplane is gone. The freedom to worship when, where
and how we choose is gone. Education, especially for
girls, is under serious threat. Depending on the space
in which you find yourself, as a woman there is nothing
like bodily autonomy. The freedom of expression and
the freedom of the press, as we saw in Paris, is also a
thing of the past. Militarism is viewed as the primary
solution to every local, national and international
problem — regardless of what the problem is. Several
years ago, if you had said the words “Boko Haram”,

15-015845/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

people would have said, “What?”. But today if you even
say Boko Haram in Russia, someone would recognize
what it is. The simple and significant things that made
us feel as if we lived in a peaceful and secure world
have been taken away from us. International peace,
security and inclusive development are therefore things
we must all work for.
The second lesson I bring to this body that I learned
from the group of women has to do with the spirit
of unity with which they carried out their mandate.
They decided to band together and wage a common
struggle. The idea of such a struggle is no stranger to
this body: it is enshrined in the Charter that established
it. Today we see division even when there should be
a consensus. Exclusivity is the order of the day, even
in the process of attaining peace and security. I could
sit here and spend hours making cases for women’s
inclusion in peacebuilding. Every time there is lobbying
and petitions, at the end of the day we are left out of
processes, and sometimes only added as afterthoughts.
For international peace and security and inclusive
development to be achieved — and, as I said, I may never
come back to the Security Council again, so let me have
my say — I would ask this body to undertake some deep
self-reflection. Seventy years ago, the rationale to name
five permanent members made sense, as most of the
countries in this Chamber were either colonized by the
five permanent members or did not have independence.
Today, as we talk about inclusive development, it is
my hope that we can expand the number of chairs to
seven, adding two more to that number. The dynamics
of our world are different. The things we did before
have changed. In order for us to achieve international
peace and development, we need to change the systems
and structures that make it impossible for others to try
where others are succeeding. Our world has changed in
many ways than we ever imagined. It is time that we
change some of the systems and structures that make
it impossible for us achieve international peace and
security.
My fellow Nobel Laureate Dr. Martin Luther
King, Jr., summed up very well the need for united and
collective action and inclusiveness in this quotation,
with which I will leave the Council today: “We all may
have come in different ships, but we are all in the same
boat now.”
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Gbowee for her briefing.

6/86

19/01/2015

The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today’s meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to the statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2015/3.
It is so decided.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
President of Chile.
Allow me to extend a very warm welcome to
participants and to thank them for being here in this
forum for shared reflection about ways towards
inclusion and security for our nations. This reflection
is taking place in a different reality. Today we do not
see on the international stage the large-scale inter-State
warlike confrontations that were common in the
twentieth century. However, that does not mean that
we are living in a peaceful and safe world. Those who
spoke before us have clearly referred to that.
The so-called “traditional threats to security” have
largely been replaced by “new threats” of a non-State and
non-military nature. In other words, by intra-national
wars and transnational dangers such as terrorism,
organized crime, drug trafficking, money laundering,
the arms trade, trafficking in persons, natural disasters,
the spread of disease and the deterioration of the
environment. In order to understand and tackle those
new challenges, we must adopt a multidimensional
approach that explains the causes underlying those
threats. Those include socioeconomic, gender, ethnic,
tribal, religious and ideological tensions that may have
local, regional or global effects. That is the only way
by which we can effectively contribute to conflict
prevention and peacebuilding in the world. Those are
the founding goals of this organ of the United Nations.
We therefore believe that the debate on inclusive
development and peace should be held in this forum,
because we understand that peace is a prerequisite for
the promotion and protection of fundamental rights and
that, in turn, social inclusion and inclusive development
are the conditions for peace. In that connection, I
highlight and share the opinion of the SecretaryGeneral, who said last September that:
“Over the longer term, the biggest threat to
terrorists is not the power of missiles. It is the
15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

politics of inclusion [...]. It is education, jobs and
real opportunity.” (S/PV.7272, p. 3)
Those are also effective tools for preventing other
forms of conflict, for building peace, for consolidating
democracy and the rule of law, for safeguarding
individual freedoms and, ultimately, for building fairer
societies. We are fully aware of this, which is why we
in Chile are making great efforts to narrow social gaps
and prevent segments of the population from being
left behind. We believe that closing gaps in income
and position in the social structure is as important as
promoting equal opportunities. It is not only a moral
imperative, but also a requirement for medium-term
and long-term development, for political stability and
for peace. We have made progress in that direction, but
we still have a long way to go.
Unfortunately, in many countries of the world, the
distance between the reality and the ideal of inclusion
and justice is huge, and it does not appear to be lessening
over time. This situation is particularly worrying in
multinational, multi-ethnic and multicultural States
in which the rights of minorities are not respected
and in those where powerful minorities oppress weak
and scattered majorities. In both cases, frustation and
rancor create propitious conditions for radicalization
and armed violence that, when it occurs, usually causes
incalculable suffering that crosses national frontiers
and can even destabilize entire regions.
Recent events in the Middle East and Africa provide
examples, such as Iraq, Syria, Yemen and Somalia. But
these are not the only areas of the planet affected by
violence and insecurity. Latin America, which is the
region of the world with the most inequality, is also the
region with the highest homicide rate and one of the
regions most affected by drug trafficking and organized
crime. This does not seem to be mere coincidence.
And in Western Europe, terrorist violence, which we
emphatically condemn, arises in a context of growing
malaise in which the most pessimistic speak of a failure
of the model of multicultural coexistence and where
intolerance and phobias of all kinds are on the increase.
That is why, as emphasized in resolution 1325 (2000) and
as we have pointed out on other occasions, we maintain
that conflict prevention, peacebuilding, construction
of democratic institutions and development require the
participation of all stakeholders.
Allow me to make special mention of the
contribution of women. We are called on to play a

S/PV.7361

leading role in the creation of better living conditions
for this planet. When it occurs, the exclusion of such
a significant part of the population makes it not only
difficult but often actually impossible to achieve these
goals.
The example of Liberia shows, in contrast, as
Leymah has told us, that when processes are inclusive,
they are more likely to be successful. National
reconciliation and peacebuilding were achieved
through the creation of mechanisms for inclusion of all
concerned sectors, in which women — and particularly
the work of Leymah Gbowee, who is honouring us
with her presence — played an outstanding role. In
recognition of her work, Laymah Gbowee, together with
the current President of Liberia, Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf,
and the Yemeni activist Tawakkul Karman, received
the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize.
Experience shows that the debate which we are
proposing on inclusive development is of utmost
importance, especially if we bear in mind that what
we are seeking is to contribute substantively to the
building of a more peaceful, safe and fair world for
all. I therefore invite participants to discuss and share
experiences and views with these objectives in mind.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, President Bachelet, for presiding over this
critically important meeting and for Chile’s leadership
on these issues and many others in the Council and
around the world. I thank you as well for your lifelong
efforts, including during your tenure here as Director
of UN-Women and as Chilean President, to advance the
causes of development and peace. I also thank Nobel
Peace Prize Laureate Leymah Gbowee. We can all see
why she has made the difference that she has in Liberia
and well beyond. She is truly formidable. And I thank
the Secretary-General and Ambassador Patriota for
their very important contributions.
As threats to international peace and security
have evolved, so has the Council’s conception of them.
Consider two of the great crises we face today: the
Ebola epidemic and violent extremism. While neither
represents the kind of risk that may have been imagined
by the architects of the United Nations, each threatens

15-015847/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

the stability and prosperity of multiple countries. And
both highlight the way that underdevelopment can pose
a risk to peace and security.
One of the main reasons that Ebola spread as
quickly as it did in West Africa and has killed such a
high proportion of the people that it has infected is the
acute underdevelopment of the public health systems in
the affected countries. As President Obama observed in
his remarks before the General Assembly in September,
violent extremist groups have found their most fertile
recruiting grounds
“in the Middle East and North Africa, where a quarter
of young people have no job, where food and water
could grow scarce, where corruption is rampant and
sectarian conflicts have become increasingly hard
to contain.” (A/69/PV.6, pp. 12-13).
The connection between development and peace
and security extends beyond Ebola and violent
extremism. The average civil war sets back a mediumsized developing country more than 30 years in terms
of economic growth. Trade levels after major violence
take an average of 20 years to recover. And the
global economic impact of stemming such violence is
estimated at $9.5 trillion, or approximately 11 per cent
of the gross world product. These figures show what
should be clear to all: the economic and social health
of countries is intrinsically linked to their ability to
secure and maintain peace. More than 80 per cent of
extremely poor people — those who survive on less $1
a day — are expected to live in countries affected by
conflict and chronic violence by 2025. We know that
this is not a challenge we can ignore. We have to do
something more.
One place to start is with women and girls. Leymah’s
story is testament to the critical role that women can play
in advancing peace and security. In the middle of the
second brutal civil war in Liberia, she rallied thousands
of women to pray for peace and founded a group that
staged weeks-long non-violent protests calling for an
end to the conflict. The activism of women helped
build grass-roots pressure on then President of Liberia,
Charles Taylor, to engage in peace talks with rebels.
When those talks faltered, she and 200 women formed
a human chain to prevent the Government and the
rebels from leaving the negotiating table. Of course the
Government and the rebels could have pushed their way
through that chain, but the symbolic demand of those
women for peace, together with international pressure,

8/86

19/01/2015

helped keep both sides at the negotiating table, and
within weeks they reached a deal.
If we agree that international peace and security
is bound up with inclusive development, it follows that
one of the best ways for the international community to
consolidate peace and to help end conflict is to bridge
enduring development gaps. That is why, in addition
to investing unprecedented resources — including
the efforts of more than 3,000 American engineers,
epidemiologists, doctors and others on the ground,
mainly in Liberia — in stopping the Ebola outbreak
at its source and in leaving the affected countries with
stronger public health systems than they had before the
outbreak, President Obama has launched the Global
Health Security Agenda.
The Global Health Security Agenda is aimed at
preparing countries to prevent, detect and rapidly
respond to outbreaks before they become epidemics.
During a meeting with President Obama last September,
43 countries joined us in annoucing more than 100
specific commitments to strengthen global health
security, together with the World Health Organization
and other international institutions. That is why we have
invested so much time in the post-2015 development
agenda, which aims for inclusive and equitable
development that leaves no one behind in any country,
developing or developed, and not only in terms of gender
equality and global health, but across other areas such
as education, water and sanitation, sustainable energy,
and inclusive and responsive governance.
That is why the United States has strongly advocated
draft goal 16, which focuses on promoting peaceful and
inclusive societies, providing access to justice for all
and building accountable and inclusive institutions at
all levels. If we can achieve this goal through reducing
corruption, promoting universal, free and legal identity
and ensuring public access to information, we can
ensure that the next United Nations development agenda
will help empower those who need it most.
That is why in Afghanistan we have invested
robustly in ensuring that women and girls are more
fully integrated into Afghan society. Since 2001, school
enrolment there has increased tenfold, with nearly
10 million children now signed up, 40 per cent of whom
are girls. Maternal mortality has fallen from 16 per cent
to 3 per cent. And today, women hold 28 per cent of the
Afghan Parliament seats, a higher proportion than in
my own country. All of these investments, all of this

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

progress, not only make women more equal partners in
Afghanistan’s future, they give Afghanistan far brighter
prospects for a more secure and prosperous future.
Today, as has been said, we commemorate the life
of another Nobel Peace Prize laureate and one of the
world’s greatest human rights champions, Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr. In one of his last speeches, Dr. King
spoke of what he called “the other America” — a
country he contrasted with the America of opportunity
and equality. The other America, he said, had a “daily
ugliness about it that transforms the buoyancy of hope
into the fatigue of despair”. Dr. King spoke of men
without work, families living in miserable conditions,
children denied access to a quality education; and he
spoke of how such inequality posed an enduring obstacle
to American prosperity, calling on all Americans to
bridge these gaps.
It has been nearly 50 years since Dr. King spoke of
the need to address these gaps in the United States, and
yet so many of them persist, here in the United States
and around the world. His call to action is as resonant
and urgent today as when he first made it. We must do
everything in our power to do our part to fulfil it.
Mr. Domingos Augusto (Angola): I would like
thank you, Madam, for chairing this meeting of the
Security Council on an important issue that concerns us
all. Indeed, in all its forms and expressions, inclusion is
a theme of utmost importance in this globalized world,
where expressions of intolerance and hatred, derived
from exclusion, have become a key feature of our
societies and constitute a grave threat to international
peace and security. I take this opportunity to commend
the Chilean presidency of the Security Council for the
month of January for its excellent work in advancing the
important mission entrusted to the Security Council.
The theme proposed by the Chilean presidency
for this debate is of crucial importance in the
contemporary world, as the multifaceted aspects
of inclusion — including the territorial, political,
economic, ethnic and cultural aspects — are of great
complexity and are not linked exclusively to conflict
and to international peace and security. The issue of
inclusion also concerns historically consolidated States
that, after many centuries of existence as State entities,
have yet to address the challenges of inclusion. The
existence of centrifugal forces resulting from various
levels of exclusion in some of these States is made
evident by the emergence of secessionist expressions
in countries where, from our point of view, they would

S/PV.7361

normally be unlikely to arise, given those countries’
peaceful and democratic natures.
An important element for analysis, as referred
to in the concept paper for this meeting (S/2015/6,
annex), is the issue of territorial inclusion. Indeed, this
is the starting point in ensuring that all the regions
and peoples that comprise a particular country are
treated alike, thereby strengthening national identity
and safeguarding territorial integrity. Territorial
exclusion is thus the starting point of centrifugal
forces that can lead to the territorial fragmentation of
States. Conversely, national inclusion gives all citizens
a sense of belonging and contributes decisively to
national cohesion and social harmony, and thus to the
effective mobilization of citizens towards achieving
great national goals related to peace and harmonious
development.
It is in multi-ethnic countries that the challenges
of inclusion prove to be more complex. In order to
overcome the natural tendency to exclude others based
on differences, it is essential that States address the
problems of ethnicity with particular sensitivity so as
to prevent the exclusion of any group from its national
community and promote full coexistence and equal
opportunities for all. Social inclusion is also imperative
to building societies with free and responsible citizens
who are aware of their duties and rights. In it lies the
culture of peace, tolerance and full acceptance of the
differences inherent to social plurality. Social inclusion
entails the need to fully mainstream gender issues
in the formulation of national policies. Indeed, in
today’s world it is clear that women play a key role in
the economic, social and cultural lives of peoples and
countries, and their exclusion markedly impoverishes
the life of societies that exclude them.
Economic exclusion is often based on the
exploitation of well-defined social strata and often
resides in the concept of superiority of one particular
group over the rest of society. It is in general the root
cause of social conflicts that often culminate in acts of
extreme violence. By contrast, economic inclusion, as
an expression of the participation of the entire social
fabric in the enjoyment of national wealth, remains
tangible and crucial for the consolidation of the sense
of belonging, and for the effective participation in and
enjoyment of the work of each individual.
Finally, cultural inclusion, particularly in the
context of multicultural societies, is of vital importance
to the growth of social and national cohesion. Provided

15-015849/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

there is respect for the differences and the intrinsic
nature of each culture that composes the national
cultural fabric, it is also an asset of great significance
and value.
Political stability is the foundation on which rests
the economic and social development of any country.
We are aware, however, that political stability is not an
end in itself. It should be based on a suitable system of
participation in governance by political forces and by
all social strata. This means that inclusive governance
is the best guarantee for obtaining dividends from
effective representation for economic development,
social harmony and effective human development.
Democratic and participatory governance also
guarantees that even when situations arise that may
cause feelings of exclusion in a given society, they can
be resolved in a peaceful and democratic manner in the
search for consensus in decision-making, particularly
on the key issues of national life.
Identifying and acting swiftly whenever signs of
exclusion arise in a specific country are wide-ranging
objectives that it is incumbent upon the United Nations,
regional and subregional organizations, and relevant
national actors to pursue. Indeed, national Governments,
international and regional organizations should develop
early-warning mechanisms for integrated actions to be
conducted at the national, regional or international level
in order to act immediately on the causes of tension and
misunderstanding before they degenerate into conflict.
We believe that as a facet of international life, conflictprevention is an important factor in building a more
peaceful world and one that better identifies with the
values of peace.
In post-conflict situations in societies that are
generally dysfunctional, it is imperative to formulate
policies to harmonize and strengthen political, security,
development, human rights and rule-of-law aspects
with a view to reconciliation, good governance and
the strengthening of social cohesion. In countries
emerging from armed conflict, peacebuilding must
be carried out as part of an inclusive process that
overcomes misunderstandings, restores confidence and
lays the foundations for lasting peace. This requires
building inclusive societies through the implementation
of appropriate policies, particularly in the fields of
education, social dialogue and social and economic
inclusion.
Angola, a country in a post-conflict situation,
has been conducting its peacebuilding process within
10/86

19/01/2015

parameters that are consistent with the main elements
that we have stressed and has sought to undertake
that process in an environment that has enormous
development challenges. Since 2002, the Government
has been conducting a broad economic and social
reintegration programme for segments of the population
that were marginalized during the armed conflict,
especially ex-combatants and their families.
Angola has also sought to build a society of free
and responsible citizens, developing policies of social
inclusion for that purpose. In that respect, the promotion
of gender has been an element in the formulation of
Government policies, namely, concerning the rural
woman, who is gradually taking a more assertive
role, thus occupying her rightful place in the rural
community. With a view to translating that priority
into our national policy, in line with the concern of the
international community regarding the role of women
in peace and development, 2015 has been proclaimed
the Year of the Rural Woman.
In general, our appraisal on the role of women in
Angolan society is quite positive. Indeed, there has
been remarkable progress in the advancement of women
in recent years, and women have come to occupy an
important place in the political, economic and social
life of our country.
The economic growth of recent years should be
reflected in tangible economic and social well-being
for all citizens of Angola. With that objective in mind,
the Angolan authorities have been developing economic
policies aimed at ensuring that the national community
is included in the gains obtained in recent years.
Lastly, Angola fully supports the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2015/3) adopted as the outcome of
this very constructive debate.
Mr. Ybáñez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour to participate in this high-level open debate.
This is my first statement to the Security Council since
Spain joined the Council as a non-permanent member
on 1 January. I am doubly pleased that it coincides with
the presidency of our Chilean friends and that President
Bachelet is here among us today. I recall that hers was
the first visit by a Head of State to Spain during the
reign of Philip VI, which shows the very close ties that
bind our two nations.
I would also like to thank you, Madam President,
for convening an open debate on a topic of ongoing
timeliness. I also welcome the Secretary-General’s
15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

presence and thank him, the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Nobel Peace Prize recipient Gbowee
for their informative briefings.
The three pillars on which the United Nations is
based are not independent of each other. On the contrary,
if one fails, it threatens the entire structure designed by
the Charter of the United Nations. As rightly pointed
out by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, there is no
peace without development and there is no lasting
peace or sustainable development without respect for
human rights and the rule of law. We could also add that
there is no peace or sustainable development without
inclusion in all its dimensions. That must be the main
conclusion of this debate. The concept note prepared
by the President (S/2015/6, annex) is very useful in that
respect.
No one disputes that the Security Council has as its
primary responsibility the maintenance of international
peace and security. However, the idea of peace and
security has changed since the time when the Charter
was adopted. Peace is not the mere absence of war, just
as security is not limited to reducing threats. Both are
much more complex.
In today’s world, peace and security are an
ensemble of a number of factors that range from
citizens’ personal security to overcoming deep social
fractures, from the proper functioning of impartial
institutions to the absence of widespread corruption,
from eradicating gender-based violence in all social
strata to educational reforms aimed at combating hate
speech, from clean and fair election campaigns to
respect for the territorial integrity of States. They all
form a protective framework that is closely linked to
the prosperity of nations and respect for human rights.
In other words, the notion of peace and
security is inclusive, so that inclusion in all its
dimensions — whether territorial, national, ethnic,
social, economic, cultural or gender-related — is key to
the inner stability of a country, to international peace
and, no less important, to preventing future conflicts.
Spain understands this idea very well, as it is a
pluralist nation that loves diversity. We are a nation
with different cultures and sensitivities, established on
historical alluvial deposits built up as a result of being
located at the crossroads between Europe, Africa and
the Americas, the meeting place of East and West, the
gateway to the Mediterranean and the bridge between
the new and the old continents. All that has resulted

S/PV.7361

in the mixture of ethnicities, cultures, identities and
varied expressions of humanity that we have been
incorporating for centuries. Unity in diversity is one of
our outstanding features.
More recently, the arrival of a large number of
immigrants has been a new and enriching contribution,
although not one without challenges. The principle of
inclusiveness has been one that has guided our actions,
both in the cooperation with the immigrants’ countries
of origin and with regard to social policies towards
immigrants.
As regards our international cooperation, three
of the five guidelines contained in the fourth Master
Plan of Spanish Cooperation, which is valid until the
end of 2016, are inspired by the idea that inclusive
development is essential for maintaining peace and
security. I refer to the consolidation of democratic
processes and the rule of law, reducing vulnerability to
extreme poverty and to crisis, and promoting the rights
of women and gender equality. That means that Spain
gives priority to cooperation projects inspired by those
inclusive guidelines.
At the domestic level, the social, economic and
gender inclusion of immigrants is a priority. That
has been achieved through social policies that have
involved support for immigrants’ integration into our
society, and awareness-raising and preparing Spanish
society to adequately receive them. The ultimate goal
of those policies is to prevent the creation of pockets of
exclusion, as that could easily lead to marginalization,
and to prevent xenophobia.
This philosophy of inclusion is at the root of the
preventive diplomacy that the Charter lays out in its
Chapter VI and that has certainly been revived in recent
years. It is a concept coined many years ago by Dag
Hammarskjöld, which reaches its full expression in
international situations such as the one we are currently
experiencing.
Spain has clearly opted for preventive diplomacy
as an instrument of international relations, especially
at the multilateral level. My country is a founding and
active member of the Group of Friends of Mediation,
created at the request of Finland and Turkey, and has
launched, together with Morocco, the Mediation in the
Mediterranean initiative, which aims to build a culture
of prevention on both sides of a geographical area
marked by tensions and conflicts of various kinds. Also
in the region, we have launched, along with Algeria, a

15-0158411/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

Water Strategy for the Western Mediterranean, which
aims to defuse potential conflicts in the region related
to that vital resource.
Also, as founders, along with Turkey, of the
Alliance of Civilizations, we believe that dialogue
among different cultures and religions is a crucial basis
for efforts to defuse existing tensions, prevent latent
tensions from worsening and debunk myths about the
vision of “the other” in national, ethnic or ideological
narratives of various societies. That task is important
and urgent. To accomplish it, we need powerful tools
that bring together different sensitivities with one
purpose: to avoid conflicts and to work for peace.
The King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz International
Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue is
another forum called upon to play a role in promoting
harmony, tolerance and interfaith dialogue. Spain will
do all it can to ensure that this centre can use its great
potential for this purpose.
Lastly, the maintenance of international peace and
security requires inclusive instruments to help prevent
the outbreak of conflict; this is clear in the context of
the responsibility that every Government has to protect
its citizens. Such protection in the face of potential
mass crimes means that we must take early actions, and
inclusive development is not the least of these.
Spain believes that the maintenance of international
peace and security is not a question of a purely military
or police-related nature. If we have learned anything in
the almost 70 years of existence of this Organization,
it is that it there is no point in achieving a ceasefire or
freezing a conflict if we do not address its root causes.
This requires developing preventive policies in all
areas; inclusive development forms an essential part of
such policies.
In the final analysis, we must create inclusive
development strategies in order to strengthen the role of
the United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. In order to be effective, such
strategies must be comprehensive and cover all
aspects of inclusiveness — territorial, national, ethnic,
social, gender, economic and cultural — and they
require participation by and coordination among all
of the principal organs of the United Nations system,
including the Council.
I should like to conclude, therefore, by
congratulating the Chilean presidency for having
taken the lead in introducing inclusive development
12/86

19/01/2015

as a topic of discussion in the Council. I congratulate
you, Madam President, and welcome the presidential
statement adopted today (S/PRST/2015/3), to which we
contributed on the basis of our national experience. It is
now up to us all to follow up on this initiative.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Madam President, we are very pleased to
welcome you at the helm of the Security Council. We
would express our gratitude to the Chilean delegation
for the convening of today’s meeting as well as for the
preparation of the presidential statement just adopted
(S/PRST/2015/3). We also thank the Secretary-General,
who set the tone for today’s debate, and the Permanent
Representative of Brazil, Mr. De Aguiar Patriota,
for his statement and his effective leadership of the
Peacebuilding Commission in 2014. We also listened
carefully to the statement made by Nobel Laureate
Ms. Gbowee.
The Russian Federation has always viewed the
United Nations as a unique deliberative platform for the
creation of a more sustainable and lasting architecture
for international relations, where primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
lies with the Security Council.
In today’s context of global dynamic changes,
various regions are experiencing full-scale, sweeping
geopolitical transformations, with a growing potential
for conflict. There are increasing numbers of internal
conflicts, compounded by armed clashes and difficult
socioeconomic conditions. Against that backdrop,
long-standing issues are ever more pressing, including
the trans-boundary proliferation of weapons, organized
crime, drug trafficking and new threats such as
terrorism and violent extremism.
In that context, we fully endorse strengthening
mechanisms for dialogue and conflict prevention
and improving the United Nations and in particular
the Security Council’s instruments in the areas
of preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping and postconflict peacebuilding. We remain convinced that the
unchanging guideline for such activities remains the
universal norms of international law and the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations.
The interconnected tasks in the areas of security,
human rights and development, enshrined, inter alia,
in the outcome documents of major forums held under
the auspices of the United Nations, including the
Millennium Summit, the 2005 World Summit and the

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(Rio+20), are of particular relevance for States in a
period of post-conflict rebuilding in which the United
Nations plays a central coordinating role. Peacebuilding
assistance here should aim to promote the devising of
priorities by national Governments and should target
national capacity-building. Here we see room for close
cooperation among the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council.
All aspects of the global economic agenda,
including combating inequalities and ensuring
inclusive economic growth and development, should be
considered in the framework of the intergovernmental
process being carried out under the auspices of the
General Assembly in preparation for the September
2015 summit, when a post-2015 global development
agenda is proposed for adoption. There should be no
politicization of work in the context of agreement on this
agenda. We are also opposed to a broad interpretation
of the concept of sustainable development that would
include new aspects, including the so-called political
dimension, that are not in keeping with the ideas set
forth at Rio+20.
We call for restraint and circumspection in the
discussion of development issues in the framework of
non-specialized bodies, in particular in the Security
Council. This also applies to other individualized
platforms for activity, including with respect to issues
related to justice and the upholding of human rights.
It seems that the incorporation of such elements in the
agenda of the Security Council will inevitably lead to
the duplication of work that is already ongoing and
give rise to strong political antagonisms and justified
claims that the Security Council is encroaching on
the prerogatives of other United Nations bodies. That
is why we have consistently called for an effective
division of labour among the principal United Nations
bodies and the discussion in the Security Council only
of situations that have a direct bearing on imminent
threats to international peace and security. In this
connection, we fully agree with the relevant ideas
of Ambassador De Aguiar Patriota, the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
It is clear that in every crisis there is a need for
subtlety, a balanced and impartial approach and patience
in seeking a solution that is acceptable to all parties to
a conflict. For some States, the root causes of conflict
have socioeconomic undertones. In others, they take

S/PV.7361

the form of the political and cultural exclusion of entire
regions from public life.
Furthermore, in order to bring about lasting peace,
there is a need to take account of cultural, historical and
regional issues as well as the specificities of relations
with neighbouring States. The context for stable and
equitable societies also varies from country to country,
but the common denominator must be to take account
of all social segments and groups in the process of the
State’s carrying out the relevant tasks.
In conclusion, I wish to note that the Russian
Federation, committed as it is to such an approach,
continues at the national level to consistently strengthen
and harmonize relations among various segments of
society so as to ensure social and nationwide cohesion.
This was indeed one of the aims of the 15 January
Moscow forum on “The State and civil society:
cooperation for development”.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation thanks
Chile for having organized this important debate and
for the concept note provided to guide our discussion
(S/2015/6, annex). We also thank the SecretaryGeneral; the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador De Aguiar Patriota; and Nobel Laureate
Leymah Gbowee for their briefings.
It is a widely accepted fact that there can be no
development without security and no security without
development. Lessons learned from the Millennium
Development Goals clearly confirm the link between
security and development. The theme of this debate
also resonates within the context of the ongoing global
discourse on the post-2015 development agenda. Nigeria
therefore sees merit in the Council holding a debate on
inclusive development.
The United Nations Development Programme
Human Development Report for 2014 confirms that
conflict and a sense of personal insecurity have a
pervasive impact on human development and leave
billions in precarious conditions. The Council’s efforts
should therefore focus on promoting development
that ensures that no one is left behind, through its
peacekeeping operations, peacebuilding and preventive
diplomacy.
Development can be meaningful only if all
segments of society contribute to creating opportunities,
participate in decision-making and share in the benefits
of development.

15-0158413/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

The presidential statement just adopted by the
Council (S/PRST/2015/3) underscores the importance
of allowing a space for all actors, regardless of their
racial, ethnic, social, gender, religious, cultural or
economic background. In order to ensure security and
development, the Council has, through its internvention
in conflict and post-conflict situations, recognized
the relevance of inclusiveness in the promotion of
good governance, national reconciliation, democracy,
gender equality and sustained economic growth. The
Council has promoted greater inclusiveness for women
in conflict resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding
through its women and peace and security agenda. In
countries emerging from conflict, the inclusion and
participation of women in governance and economic
activity, as well as the provision of skills and jobs for
young people, have provided the necessary impetus for
peace and security.
Lessons learned from United Nations peacekeeping
and peacebuilding activities indicate that inclusive
development activities can help to prevent a relapse
into conflict. It is therefore necessary for the Council
to continue to advance the concept of inclusive
development when authorizing mandates. It is also
vital to pay attention to the strengthening of the
national institutions, civil societies and private
sectors of countries transiting from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding. That can be achieved through greater
collaboration, cooperation and coordination between
the Council and other United Nations bodies, funds and
programmes.
At the national level, we in Nigeria are taking
concrete steps to meet our security challenges and
foster peace through inclusive development. Our “soft”
approach to countering violent extremism adopts a
multidimensional strategy in addressing the root causes
of radicalization and violent extremism. Its overall aim
is to employ practical measures to halt violent extremism
in the short-term and prevent future occurrences in the
long-term. Through the programme, the Government is
addressing the key economic, social, religious, political
and cultural issues fuelling the radicalization upon
which the insurgency feeds. Through the soft approach,
we are pursuing a wide range of reforms through our
educational system. We are also creating economic
opportunities and providing skills to those at risk of
radicalization.
At the subregional and regional levels, Nigeria
has played an active role in the restoration of peace

14/86

19/01/2015

and democracy in countries emerging from conflict.
That underscores our conviction that solid democratic
institutions are vital platforms for the participation
of all groups, including women and youth, in the
development of any country. Nigeria was one of the
early responders that provided support to combat the
spread of Ebola in West Africa. Our action was based
on the need to sustain the development already attained
in the affected countries in order to reduce the risk of
relapse into conflict.
Finally, Nigeria believes that the United Nations
should continue to act as an agent for inclusive
development. We also believe that the Security Council
should support the ongoing global discourse that
promotes inclusive development as a critical factor in
fostering sustainable peace, security and development.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to begin by welcoming Her Excellency Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, President of Chile, and by thanking the
briefers for their valuable.
Many examples in modern history demonstrate the
relationship between development and security, and in
particular the relationship between development and
armed conflicts. Nevertheless, that relationship has not
been accorded priority, either in academic literature
or in practical implementation. In our view, that
might be attributable to many traditional factors, the
most salient being the lack of communication among
decision-making circles working in development
and security, whether inside Governments or among
international organizations involved in development. A
lack of communication also exists among the latter and
other organizations interested in security with regard to
embracing new concepts like human security and other
multifaceted, complicated security-related phenomena,
such as terrorism and epidemics.
We would like to thank Chile for shedding light on
this important topic and for focusing on some aspects
that we believe have been absent in the discussion on
security and development: inclusivity, peacebuilding
and combating the threat of extremism. We hope that we
can build on the discussions that are taking place today
and on the presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/2) that
was recently adopted, which Jordan fully supports.
The United Nations must address the relationship
between security and peace through integrated policies
and programmes, particularly peacebuilding operations.
Post-conflict assistance to countries should be based on

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

a comprehensive, integrated approach that addresses
the interrelatedness among political and development
activities, human rights and the rule of law. Jordan
agrees with the contents of the concept note (S/2015/6,
annex) circulated by Chile on the role of inclusive
development in the maintenance of international peace
and security. We support the idea of concentrating on
the importance of inclusivity in development as a factor
in maintaining peace and in building peace. That is a
primary aspect of the Jordanian position vis-à-vis the
conflicts on the Security Council’s agenda.
Jordan rejects the marginalization and exclusion
of any segment of society, and warns of the spillover
effect of such an approach on political stability,
security, development and national sovereignty. Jordan
stresses the importance of addressing the concept of
national ownership in achieving sustainable peace. The
primary responsibility falls on national authorities in
deciding the priorities in post-conflict peacebuilding.
Such policies should be both specific and realistic, and
the goals attainable through well-planned coordination
among national societies and all stakeholders at
the local level. That can also be achieved through a
realistic assessment that takes into consideration the
specific needs of societies emerging from conflict and
their circumstances, as well as available resources for
implementing those policies.
Donors have the responsibilty of providing the
necessary development support for States in postconflict peacebuilding. That should not be understood
to mean that donor countries or relevant organizations
are the catalysts of change in those societies. Rather,
change must be intrinsic to that society, take local
knowledge into consideration and not ignore the
internal dynamics of such societies.
Gender relations in society play an important role
in establishing the basis on which peace is built. We
must therefore focus on including women at all stages
of peacebuilding and development projects and on
empowering them during conflict and in post-conflict
situations.
Peace and security are interlinked. Guaranteeing
their sustainability in post-conflict situations requires
addressing the root causes of internal conflicts, themes
that previous speakers at this meeting addressed. In
many situations, those may have social, economic,
ethnic, religious or tribal roots. Guaranteeing the
sustainability of peace and development must not only
be based on the absence of war, but also on replacing

S/PV.7361

the structures that led to inequality and insecurity.
Countries in post-conflict stages must be assisted
in building new structures, or in restructuring them,
so that we can instil the concepts of justice and
equality, particularly in societies that experienced war
crimes, genocide and all kinds of discrimination and
marginalization.
In conclusion, we believe that successful
development policies based on inclusiveness contribute
to addressing social and economic imbalances and the
sense of injustice that extremist groups could use to
recruit, particularly among young people. Development
policies must therefore focus on empowering young
people, building their future, unlocking their potential
and finding job opportunities for them.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): It is a great
pleasure, Madam, to have you presiding over this
important debate, which has also attracted such an
impressive number of speakers today. I would like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ambassador
Antonio Patriota of Brazil, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Leymah
Gbowee for their briefings.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made on behalf of the European Union later today.
In my national capacity, I would like to underline the
following points.
Issues pertaining to the development agenda
naturally fall within the purview of other United
Nations bodies, particularly the Economic and Social
Council. However, as was noted in the Security
Council’s presidential statement of February 2011
(S/PRST/2011/4), there is an inherent link between
security and development, and as the Secretary-General
said earlier, when we ignore one pillar, we endanger
the other two. Poverty, exclusion and marginalization
fuel many a conflict, including those on the Council’s
agenda. We cannot break the cycle of violence and
build durable peace as long as significant inequalities
prevail and issues relating to economic, political and
social inclusion remain unaddressed.
Inclusivity begins with respect for basic human
rights for all, which in their turn can flourish only
where there is a solid framework built on the rule of law,
democratic governance and accountability. Freedom
of expression and information support transparency,
foster participation and reinforce the necessary checks
and balances within the political system that act as

15-0158415/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

safeguards against corruption, abuse of power, cronyism
and graft. Promoting the fundamental freedoms of
opinion, expression, assembly and association, as
well as supporting free media, is therefore essential to
inclusive development and peace. We are concerned
about the worldwide increase in attacks on and killings of
journalists and social media workers seeking to expose
impunity, corruption and abuse of power. In particular,
their reports from conflict zones expose human-rights
abuse, war crimes and crimes against humanity, and
help to rally the international community in support of
the rights of the marginalized and vulnerable and, by
extension, the protection of civilian lives. We call on
the Council to remain vigilant and actively engaged on
the issue of the protection of journalists, human-rights
defenders and civil-society activists.
We have seen time and again that human-rights
violations are often the first early-warning signs of a
conflict to appear. Ongoing, unaddressed human-rights
violations also become an obstacle to reconciliation
and peacebuilding processes, and therefore to inclusive
development. That is why my delegation strongly
supports the Rights Up Front initiative, which, in our
view, should lie at the core of all preventive, peacebuilding
and development efforts. Sustainable peace requires
that no social group be discriminated against or left
behind. National reconciliation and peacebuilding
cannot work if certain groups or minorities live in
fear of persecution, are denied the right and ability to
voice their demands and access essential resources, and
are excluded from power-sharing arrangements and
governance. Exclusion and discrimination on whatever
grounds — gender, religion, ethnicity, race, age or
any other reason — weaken societies by robbing them
of their creative and productive potential, reinforce
a sense of injustice, harden lingering grievances and
undermine their very stability and security, thus
threatening to ignite or rekindle cycles of violence and
thwarting development efforts.
In particular, peace and development need women’s
full participation and inclusion in all aspects of a
society’s life, as equal partners in decision-making
processes and State-building, from conflict mediation
and resolution to reconciliation, peacebuilding, and
post-conflict development. Women’s full, unfettered
participation in the political, economic and other
domains of society is a key driving force for societal
transformation and economic prosperity. Numerous
studies have shown that societies where women play
active roles enjoy higher levels of well-being and
16/86

19/01/2015

development. The Security Council has created a solid
normative base, starting with resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security. While notable
progress has been achieved in that respect, we are not
there yet. This year’s review of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), as well as the forthcoming
peacekeeping and peacebuilding reviews, offer
important opportunities to move that agenda further,
especially on the implementation side. The Council
must make sure that every single mandate it creates
has a strong women’s-empowerment component,
which would definitely benefit people’s aspirations for
inclusive development, the focus of today’s debate.
Peace and development cannot be sustained
without accountability. The abuse of power, failure to
address lingering grievances, lawlessness and impunity
are deeply corrosive, sowing mistrust, hampering
reconciliation and capable of rekindling conflict at any
moment. In today’s turbulent world, such grievances and
abuses are also conducive to alienation, radicalization
and violent extremism, thus compounding the complex
task of fighting terrorism in its many manifestations.
Conversely, the rule of law, which sits at the core of
democratic governance, offers a framework of justice
and fosters empowerment and equality, by providing a
common set of rules for all members of a society and
guaranteeing their equality before the law.
Taking resolute action against impunity is essential
to ensure that victims of abuse can regain confidence in
their society and proceed towards the reconciliation and
durable peace that are so necessary for development.
Such action is also important as a preventive, deterrent
tool, sending a message to would-be perpetrators
that their crimes will not go unpunished. Support for
building the rule of law and national judicial and lawenforcement capabilities must therefore be addressed
early on, within the context of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts, and systematically sustained
as countries move from conflict to durable peace and
development. We welcome the strengthening of rule-oflaw components in United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding mandates, and call on the Council to pay
greater attention to rule-of-law issues in its debates.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Chile for initiating today’s debate and
putting the issue of inclusive development, and the
links between development and peace and security, on
the Security Council’s agenda. It is a crucial issue for
all of us, and one that has not been discussed in the

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Council since 2011 (see S/PV.6479). I welcome your
presence, Madam President, which testifies to your
country’s commitment to the subject. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Patriota,
Permanent Representative of Brazil and Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and Ms. Leymah Gbowee,
President of the Gbowee Peace Foundation Africa.
France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the European Union.
Inclusive development is a necessary condition of
security. Rebellions and conflicts are often fuelled by
a sense of exclusion and injustice on the part of a social
group or an ethnic or religious community. Many of the
conflicts on the Council’s agenda arise in the wake of
human-rights violations and an insufficiently inclusive
political process. At the same time, it must be made
clear that it is primarily up to States to institute those
processes if conflicts are to be prevented. From that
point of view, the Security Council can only encourage
States to embrace this issue and establish policies of
inclusive development aimed at preventing conflict.
Conflict prevention naturally implies respecting all
citizens’ rights, including economic, social and cultural
rights. Only institutions that represent the people’s
legitimate aspirations, the transparent management
of public monies, an independent judiciary and law
enforcement, and security forces that respect the law
are capable of ensuring sustainable development. A
State’s stability thus depends on respect for the rule of
law. In particular, such policies should focus on gender
equality and women’s participation in decision-making.
Gender equality is not only one of our most fundamental
human rights; combating every form of discrimination
between men and women is also a factor in development,
in the stabilization of countries in transition and in
peace.
In that regard, Madam President, I welcome the
foundational work you have led in New York in the past
few years as the first Executive Director of UN-Women.
France is currently working with UN-Women on
a number of cooperation programmes aimed at
strengthening women’s participation in development,
including a gender and social cohesion employment
programme for young men and women in Morocco,
Tunisia and Egypt. In our national capacity, I should
add that, working with Congolese non-governmental
organizations, we have also established a socioeconomic
rehabilitation programme for women rendered

S/PV.7361

vulnerable by the violence in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
I would also like to emphasize the importance of an
inclusive approach as countries prepare to emerge from
crisis. Reconciliation often requires the fair division
of power among the communities in conflict. In this
context, women can play a decisive role. I welcome, in
this regard, Ms. Gbowee’s commitment and the role of
women played in the transition to peace in Liberia. It
is essential that women be involved from this moment
forward in the peace negotiations in Mali so as to
prevent their exclusion from a peace agreement and
to ensure their inclusion in the post-conflict transition
period.
Finally, I would like to make some remarks on the
role of the Peacebuilding Commission, echoing our
debate on this subject last week (see S/PV.7359). Ten
years on from the establishment of the peacebuilding
architecture, whose role and achievements have just
been recalled by Ambassador Patriota, undeniable
progress has been achieved, first, in terms of a better
understanding of the specific challenges facing
countries emerging from conflict and, secondly,
in terms of better coordination of the efforts under
various international interventions in the countries
concerned. Ambassador Patriota cited examples where
the peacebuilding architecture has made an effective
contribution to improving the situation. These efforts
must continue. In this regard, France supports the
review of the peacebuilding architecture review, which
will be carried out during 2015 jointly with the strategic
review of peace operations. We welcome both of these
exercises.
I would like to conclude by recalling that the
General Assembly will adopt in September 2015 an
ambitious and renewed development programme for the
15 years to come, which will orient all of our actions
towards sustainable development with a comprehensive
approach. This programme will include ambitious goals
on fighting inequality, on gender equality, on peaceful
and inclusive societies for sustainable development, on
access to justice for all, and on transparent, accountable
and inclusive institutions. These tools will contribute to
the prevention of conflicts.
The year 2015 will also mark 70 years since the
establishment of the United Nations, and in this
context, the various bodies of the United Nations,
including the Security Council, must more than ever

15-0158417/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

strengthen the coherence of their respective activities
towards an approach that is yet more preventive and
inclusive in dealing with crises. Peace and security can
never be won as long as discrimination against groups
or individuals persists.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I welcome you, Madam
President. As this is the first time I have taken the floor
in the Security Council as Permanent Representative
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, following
our election as non-permanent member last October, I
would like to express our friendship and respect to you
as Head of State and Government of a brotherly South
American country. Likewise, I would like to express
our satisfaction at seeing you preside over this open
debate on inclusive development for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
We thank and welcome the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon; the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, my friend Ambassador Antonio Patriota;
and the Nobel Peace Laureate, Ms. Leymah Gbowee.
We also welcome the representatives of all countries
present today.
While we welcome Chile’s initiative to promote an
exchange of views on this important topic, we believe
that the overarching importance of the topic before us
calls for an open and democratic forum of discussion,
such as the General Assembly, so as to guarantee the
full participation of Member States. Although the
Security Council is not the appropriate organ to make
decisions in the area of development, we acknowledge
that its decisions in the field of international peace
and security have a positive impact on the long-term
development of nations. However, at times, its decisions
on other matters can also have adverse consequences
for the wellbeing and future of countries.
This debate gives us the opportunity to underscore
the importance of inclusive development in building
just, fair and peaceful societies as a fundamental
precondition for preventing conflicts and violence.
However, it is important to recall in this context that the
most serious threats to international peace and security
do not come from the poorest and least-developed
countries; to contend so would be to misconstrue the
current state of global affairs, historical trends and the
imbalance of power at the international level.
We are participating in the work of the Council,
as President Nicolás Maduro Moros has stated,
with a renewed optimism and firm commitment to

18/86

19/01/2015

peace, respect for sovereignty, international law,
development, social justice, cooperation and solidarity
among peoples, dialogue and peaceful coexistence
among nations, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Latin
America and the Caribbean stands out as a region of
peace, where we have built a regional architecture of
mechanisms to address matters of common interest
through cooperation and solidarity. Over the past two
decades, there have been steady improvements in the
areas of peace, security and development.
Venezuela believes that the international community
must take an open and frank approach in addressing
the root causes of the political, economic and social
imbalances in the current international system that
generate conflicts. Such an approach would help us find
solid and lasting solutions to conflicts, in accordance
with international law. In order to reverse the negative
impacts of the legacy of colonialism, the pillaging of
natural resources and unjust global social, financial and
economic structures, we must strengthen multilateral
efforts to transform socioeconomic policies and norms
bound to the capitalist model of production that is
unsustainable for world.
The international community must put greater
focus on promoting the sustainable development
agenda. In this regard, developed countries must fulfil
their duties in areas such as official development
assistance, technology transfer and climate change.
Similarly, in the economic field, developing countries
must be given preferential and differentiated treatment
and assistance in reaching the internationally agreed
development goals, without conditionality; fair trade
should be promoted; and cooperation is needed in the
restructuring of sovereign debt.
The case of Haiti deserves special attention due to
the inconsistencies in the provision of the $10 billion
in international assistance pledged at the international
donors’ conference of 31 March 2010 for reconstruction
following the devastating earthquake of January that
year. In this regard, we call on donor countries to
honour their aid commitments to Haiti, so as to help the
country overcome the economic and social problems
that have plagued it for decades and were only worsened
by that natural disaster.
Latin America and the Caribbean is an example
to the world of a region whose strength lies in the
spirit of cooperation and unity integral to its political
consensus and integration initiatives, where inclusive
15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

development takes centre stage. Our vision of inclusive
and comprehensive regional development is reflected in
our organizations, such as the Bolivarian Alliance for
the Peoples of Our America, Petrocaribe, the Union of
South American Nations and the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States.
At the national level, the promotion of inclusive
and equitable development has been a cornerstone
policy of the Bolivarian revolution through our social
programmes, whereby sovereign petroleum income
is invested in eliminating poverty, social exclusion,
illiteracy, hunger and disease. The Venezuelan
Government sees the inclusion of all members of
society, in particular women, young people and persons
with disabilities, as the ultimate goal of development,
which should provide the legal and structural conditions
required to realize their full potential. Inclusive
development is a right of all Venezuelans. Social justice
is our goal.
Finally, we reiterate that we stand fully ready to
work constructively and responsibly towards realizing
the goals, which are among fundamental responsibilities
of this body, of international peace and security.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes you, Madam President, to New York to preside
over today’s open debate of the Council on inclusive
development for the maintenance of peace and security.
I wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Ambassador Patriota, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), for their briefings. The Chinese
delegation also listened closely to the statement made
by Ms. Gbowee.
Peace and development are two main themes
of today’s world. According to the Charter of the
United Nations, the Organization has the lofty goal
of maintaining world peace and promoting common
development. Today’s open debate explores the
relationship between inclusive development and the
maintenance of international peace and security.
This demonstrates the Council’s attention to the
nexus between peace, security and development and
to the significance of addressing the importance of
development to the promotion of international peace and
security. In that connection, I would like to highlight
the following points.
First, we need to consider increased investment in
development to eliminate the root causes of conflict.
Poverty and underdevelopment are often major causes

S/PV.7361

of conflicts, crises and terrorism. The international
community and the United Nations in particular
should attach greater importance to the advancement
of the international development agenda. Developing
countries, constrained by historical factors and the
conditions of development, are faced with daunting
challenges in economic, development and social
progress. Developed countries should further assist
developing countries in official development assistance,
debt relief, market openness and technology transfer
and help them to achieve the objectives of poverty
eradication and the promotion of development.
Secondly, we should focus on mediation and
good offices to provide the basis for development.
The United Nations and the Security Council should
strongly uphold the culture of peace and reconciliation
and fully implement the responsibilities of mediation
and good offices entrusted to it by Chapter VI of the
Charter by further strengthening mediation capabilities
andimproving the means of mediation so as to play a
bigger role in the peaceful resolution of disputes, thereby
laying a solid foundation for the early achievement of
peace and development.
Thirdly, we need to focus on peacebuilding to
prevent conflict relapse. In post-conflict countries and
regions, the international community should prioritize
reconstruction in all development, political and
security areas, with special attention to the promotion
of coordinated economic and social development.
The key is to not only provide help to post-conflict
countries but to also develop their ability to help
themselves. The governance capacities of the countries
involved need to be effectively strengthened and their
ability to provide basic services enhanced so that
development and reconstruction can be advanced in
all sectors. Meanwhile, attention should also be given
to youth employment and women’s empowerment so
that the public can enjoy early peace dividends. That
would be conducive to the stabilization of post-conflict
situations, the promotion of political reconciliation and
the consolidation of existing peace.
Fourthly, we should intensify overall planning and
coordination to create synergy. Relevant United Nations
bodies and international organizations responsible for
peace, security and development should leverage their
own strengths and carry out planning and coordination
in order to maximize synergy. Meanwhile, they should
increase coordination, respect their own mandates and
division of labour, and avoid duplication of work. The

15-0158419/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

Security Council has the primary responsibility for
safeguarding international peace and security, while
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) should play
a coordinating role in peacebuilding by expanding
partnerships and increasing cooperation with the United
Nations development system and agencies, the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund so that more
resources can be mobilized for reconstruction in postconflict countries, creating the external environment
and conditions necessary for their development.
Some 70 per cent of the items on the Council’s
agenda are related to Africa, while two-thirds of
peacekeeping missions are deployed there. The
interlinkages among peace, security and development
are best demonstrated on the African continent. Without
peace and development in Africa, the prosperity and
stability of the world will be impossible to achieve. The
international community should vigorously support
African countries in addressing African problems
with African means, and promote regional and
subregional organizations, such as the African Union,
in playing a bigger role in advancing peace, security
and development. Moreover, we should also focus
on the issues of underdevelopment and insufficient
infrastructure faced by Africa in order to effectively
help the continent to translate its abundant human and
natural resources into the driving force for economic
development and substantive benefits for Africans.
As a most sincere and reliable partner of Africa,
China has consistently supported African countries’
self-strengthening through unity and their achievement
of sustainable development. In the spirit of truthfulness,
practicality, sincerity and kindness, China will
continue to participate constructively in the resolution
of hot-spot issues in Africa and play its due role in the
promotion of peace and security there. We will also
help the African people to improve their capability for
self-development so that they can live peacefully and
happily on the African continent, and increase school
enrolment and youth employment so as to eradicate the
root causes of conflicts and turbulence and to achieve
sustained peace and development on the continent.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): Madam President, I
welcome you to New York — perhaps more correctly, I
welcome you back to New York. It is a pleasure to have
you presiding over the Council. I wish to also thank the
Secretary-General and Ambassador Patriota for their
respective briefings, and Ms. Gbowee for her unique
perspectives. The Council can only be assisted by those

20/86

19/01/2015

who have actually had to make peace on the ground;
hers was a truly valuable contribution.
New Zealand has long believed that inclusive
development is central to sustainable peace, so we
were pleased to support the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/3 today and welcome its
spotlight on measures to address the root causes of
conflict, including through strengthening the rule
of law, transitional justice, promoting sustainable
economic growth and development, good governance,
democracy, gender equality and respect for and
protection of human rights.
New Zealand comes to the Council as a champion
of practical approaches and solutions. An example
of that practical approach is that we believe that
departing United Nations missions should leave
behind a strong workforce that can find long-term
employment following any mission drawdown. Against
that background, let me highlight just three issues on
inclusive development.
First, if sustainable peace is to become a reality
in post-conflict situations, effective work is needed to
address the root causes of conflict, which requires that
the Council, and the United Nations as a whole, adopt a
multidimensional, integrated approach.
Secondly, peace agreements and reconciliation
must embrace all those with a stake in that peace,
particularly the marginalized: women, youths
and former combatants. New Zealand therefore
welcomes the practice of deploying gender advisers in
peacekeeping missions to ensure the inclusion of women
in electoral systems, to support their participation in
peace processes, and to protect women and girls from
sexual violence.
Thirdly, more work is required to understand
the link between transnational organized crime and
terrorism, which, as the statement points out, can
undermine the security and stability of States and
their prospects for development. When accompanied
by efforts to engage local communities and to
develop strategies for countering extremism, such an
understanding helps tackle the enablers of conflict and
terrorism, and reduces the impact when conflict breaks
out.
New Zealand follows closely and supports the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), and
in last week’s peacebuilding debate (see S/PV.7359)
called for a strengthening of the interaction between
15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Council and the PBC, not least in making better
use of the knowledge, experience and analysis of PBC
country-configuration Chairs. I repeat that call here
today. New Zealand’s own region has, in recent years,
seen countries emerge from conflict, and that has
provided valuable lessons about conflict drawdown
and highlighted how inclusive approaches are an
essential part of a sustainable peace and development
programme.
Timor-Leste is one such example. In 2006, the
international community gravely underestimated
the importance of sustained international support,
eventually leading to a renewed crisis. Development
partners moved quickly to support the Timor-Leste
Government as it worked to formulate a strategic plan for
development. An early priority, which we very strongly
supported, was the process of dialogue as internally
displaced people were reintegrated into communities.
New Zealand has since worked in partnership with
Timor-Leste to strengthen its security sector, including
by professionalizing the police force. We also worked
with the National Human Rights Institution to ensure
respect for human rights, and helped boost private
sector activity to support livelihoods and employment
options.
Today, Timor-Leste has graduated from being a
beneficiary of peacekeeping to itself being a contributor
to United Nations peace operations. Through the Group
of Seven Plus, it is a global leader on helping vulnerable
States to transition from fragility — a fine example
of a beneficiary giving back. Timor-Leste’s recent
interventions were instrumental in Guinea-Bissau’s
return to democracy, as highlighted by Ambassador
Patriota in his briefing.
Solomon Islands is another example where, after
serious unrest in 2003, New Zealand, Australia and
other Pacific neighbours worked in partnership through
the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands
to help restore long-term stability and security. We
worked, for example, to ensure the peace and security
role of women, which saw the Royal Solomon Islands
Police Force becoming one of the best-performing
Government agencies in terms of female representation.
Small States, particularly small island developing
States (SIDS), are overrepresented among countries
threatened by fragility and instability. They are
also challenged by physical isolation, economies of
scale, limited governance structures, limited natural
resources and uneven infrastructure, and they are

S/PV.7361

threatened by climate change. To be effective, solutions
and interventions must take account of the unique
circumstances of SIDS — which is one of the many
reasons why, in 2012, New Zealand endorsed the New
Deal for Engagement in Fragile States.
New Zealand is a long-standing supporter of the
concept of inclusive development, and so we welcome
this debate and thank you, Madam, for convening it. We
support the resulting efforts of this Council to deliver
practical, inclusive development initiatives.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I commend
Chile for its initiative in convening this open debate
on inclusive development for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and welcome you,
Madam President, to New York.
I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon;
Ambassador Patriota, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission; and Ms. Leymah Gbowee, President of the
Gbowee Peace Foundation Africa, for their statements.
Today’s global security environment is dominated
not only by terrorism, violent extremism and
transboundary organized crime, but also and first and
foremost by numerous ongoing armed conflicts within
State borders. This situation has a dangerous impact
on international peace and security. In that regard, the
major challenges facing the international community as
a whole are the need to settle internal conflicts before
they threaten international peace and security and to
promote stable societies free of radicalism, violence and
extremism through inclusive, harmonious development.
Quite clearly, socioeconomic factors based on
gender, clan, tribe, ethnicity or religion affiliation, as
well as exclusion, discrimination and inequality, as
noted in the concept note before us today (S/2015/6,
annex), are some of the root causes of conflict.
Furthermore, just as development and inclusive
integration are necessary for peacebuilding and peace
maintenance, an inclusive society is critical to stability
and development.
As to the prevention and the settlement of conflict,
we note that the concept note distributed by the Chilean
presidency proposes inclusive strategies, such as those
contained in the Social Charter of the Americas of the
Organization of American States, studies conducted
by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, and the Dili Declaration. Nevertheless,
it is primarily the duty of the States concerned to
seek appropriate ande suitable strategies for creating

15-0158421/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

conditions conducive to their peoples’ inclusive
participation in their country’s development.
Furthermore, while the primary responsibility for
conflict prevention falls first and foremost on States,
we believe that the Security Council must play an
important role on behalf of countries facing a postconflict situation. In that context, we note the Council’s
role in establishing an inclusive Government in Iraq
and in highlighting the importance of the inclusive
transition process in Yemen, the necessity of concluding
an inclusive holistic peace agreement to end the crisis
in Mali, and the establishment of a national unity
Government in South Sudan and an inclusive process
in the Central African Republic, inter alia.
In Libya, a law was adopted to prevent all those
having collaborated with the former regime from
participating in the post-conflict process. We believe
that such exclusion cannot promote unity among all the
parties to the conflict in order to assist in its resolution.
The Council can also continue playing an important
role in the signing of inclusive political agreements that
contribute to the resolution of conflict.
The participation of women and young people
in political and development processes is critical to
post-conflict recovery. In that context, we strongly
urge increased investment in actions to strengthen the
empowerment of women and the youth. A country can
find peace and development only through inclusion.
That is why it is essential that Governments establish
institutions focused on countering exclusion in order
to build and maintain peace and thereby ensure
development.
Moreover, as underscored in presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/3 that the Council has just adopted, there
is a close correlation between security and development.
In the context of Africa, the Secretary-General — in
particular in his report of 24 July 2014 (S/2014/542),
on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa — has
recommended further emphasis on that correlation. We
believe it is important to combat underdevelopment in
order to contribute to maintaining peace and security.
As other speakers have underscored, underdevelopment
and poverty are the root causes of conflict in Africa.
Against that backdrop, Chad, like other countries of
the Sahel, eagerly awaits the swift implementation
of regional strategies on security, governance,
development, human rights and humanitarian matters,

22/86

19/01/2015

in particular the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel. It is important to stimulate growth and
eliminate poverty in the region by funding specific
projects that the States concerned have drawn up.
Those projects, inspired by the strategy, integrate no
only the link between security and development, but
also particularly highlight the role of women and youth
in the development process.
Given their natural resources and for various other
reasons, numerous States, including in Africa, find
themselves in situations of almost permanent conflict.
It is essential that foreign interference be halted so
that those States can enjoy the benefits of their natural
resources and the dividends of peace and development.
We urge United Nations entities to incorporate the
issue of foreign interference as a significant cause of
conflict in their discussions on conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development.
In conclusion, my country remains concerned about
the multiple conflicts across the world, in particular in
Africa and the Middle East. We encourage the Security
Council to continue to seek to prevent armed conflict,
even if this is a responsibility that falls first and foremost
on States. As prevention is better than cure, Chad urges
States, regional and subregional organizations and
the United Nations to pool their efforts to create the
conditions for inclusive and lasting development to save
the world from the scourge of conflict. In that regard,
the United Nations must better support regional efforts
in peace and security, including by making available
financing and/or human resources when necessary.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Madam President, for convening this important
debate. It is indeed good to see you back here in New
York. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Patriota and Ms. Leymah Gbowee for their
important and inspiring comments this morning.
This year the United Kingdom celebrates the eight
hundredth anniversary of the signing of the Magna
Carta, in 1215. That was a ground-breaking moment in
the history of my country’s inclusive development. The
Magna Carta introduced the concept of a fundamentally
different relationship between the State and individuals.
In essence, the monarch agreed for the first time that
his power could not to be exercised in an arbitrary and
unconstrained way, that the State was answerable to its
citizens and that there should be due process. It was the
beginning of the rule of law — the most important of

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

the principles that underpin inclusive institutions and
accountable Government.
History teaches us that where there is an absence
of inclusivity, the rule of law and political pluralism,
instability and possibly conflict will inevitably ensue.
Conflicts erupt for many reasons, but there is growing
evidence that the social, political and economic
marginalization of specific groups in society can be a
major driver of conflict.
In 2004, the Arab Human Development Report
warned us of “an acute deficit of freedom and good
governance” in the Arab World, and predicted that
it could lead to instability. Six years later, in 2010, a
street vendor in Tunis named Mohamed Bouazizi
set himself on fire in response to police harassment,
triggering seismic upheavals across the Arab World,
the consequences of which the Security Council is still
dealing with today. Our collective failure — as it is so
often in the Council — was not one of prediction, but
the lack of political will to take early action.
The United Kingdom’s Prime Minister, David
Cameron, has consistently argued that inclusive
institutions, open societies and economies, and the
rule of law — what he calls the “golden thread of
development” — are essential for countries to thrive
economically and to avoid conflict. Governments
should be the servants of their citizens, not their
masters or the servants of a narrow, powerful clique.
The Security Council should therefore reflect on how it
can support countries in developing inclusive national
institutions. I believe that there are four key challenges.
First, we need to be patient. There are no short-cuts
to building inclusive national institutions. The World
Bank estimates that, in a best-case scenario, making
meaningful improvements to institutions takes between
10 and 17 years. Sustained political and financial
support to institution-building is therefore critical.
The United Kingdom will do its part. Uniquely among
Group of 20 countries, we have kept our promise to
spend 0.7 per cent of our gross national income on
overseas aid, at least 30 per cent of which will be spent
in conflict-affected States. And we are now the secondlargest overall financial contributor to the United
Nations system.
Secondly, where national political institutions are
not inclusive, we must recognize that the potential for
conflict increases. In August last year, when the Council
adopted resolution 2171 (2014), on conflict prevention,

S/PV.7361

I said that the Council was designed to be a smoke
detector, not just a fire extinguisher (see S/PV.7247).
Too often we are trying to manage crises and failing
to take seriously our conflict-prevention role. We need
to do better at monitoring situations in which political
processes or institutions exclude or marginalize specific
groups. And we need to have the political will to take
appropriate early action, if necessary. We welcome
the Secretary-General’s “Human Rights Up Front”
initiative, which seeks to ensure the United Nations
does all it can to help protect people at risk and those
subject to serious violations of human rights before
events escalate into armed conflict and mass atrocities.
Thirdly, the relationship between violent extremism
and the absence of inclusivity is complex. We have seen
already this year shocking and deadly attacks in France,
Yemen, Nigeria, Iraq, Syria and Pakistan. Extremists,
by their very nature, are opposed to inclusivity. Their
narratives tend to be revolutionary, uncompromising,
elitist and exclusivist in nature. They foster a world
view based on “them” and “us”. And they often seek
to exclude women and persecute minorities. We cannot
allow these ideas to take root. They are the antithesis
of fundamental United Nations values and must be
confronted.
But we must also understand better the drivers
of extremism. In some cases, marginalization and
exclusion can play a part in radicalization. In addition,
weak, fragile and conflict-affected States create a
permissive enabling environment within which violent
extremism can flourish. Effective United Nations
peacebuilding interventions can play an important role
in promoting inclusive political institutions, democratic
processes and accountable security and justice services.
This is the best way to choke off extremist narratives.
Finally, inclusivity is meaningless without women’s
active participation in political institutions, peace
negotiations and policymaking. Without women, we will
only achieve unbalanced and unsustainable peace that
ignores the needs of half the population. It is now nearly
15 years since the adoption of landmark resolution 1325
(2000), which for the first time recognized the unique
impact that conflict has on women, as well as the
significant contribution women can make to conflict
prevention, resolution and peacebuilding.
There has been some progress since then, but
much more needs to be done to ensure the meaningful
participation of women in all the different processes
needed when building an inclusive society. This should

15-0158423/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

include women’s greater participation in elections,
peacebuilding processes and mediation. It should mean
more women in the police and security services, and
better training for armed forces and rule-of-law actors
in gender and women’s rights. In that context, we
welcome the United Nations decision to commission a
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which will feed into the high-level review in
October.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I wish to congratulate you,
Madam, and Chile for convening this open debate.
Malaysia is pleased to see you presiding over the
Council. We add our voice in welcoming the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/3. We are mindful
of the instrumental role you played as the first Executive
Director of UN-Women, and your presence here today
reinforces the message on inclusiveness and on the
critical linkages among development, international
peace and security and human rights, which together
constitute the pillars of the Organisation.
I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-Moon; Ambassador Antonio Patriota of Brazil, Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission; and Ms. Leymah
Gbowee, Nobel Peace Prize Laureate for 2011, for their
presentations.
We meet today against the background of an
increasingly turbulent world. From the Middle East to
Africa, from Asia to Europe, more and more civilians
have been and continue to be caught in a seemingly
endless spiral of vicious and violent conflict. An
important dimension of many of these ongoing conflicts
is their intra-State or intranational nature and the
increasing prominence of non-State actors as drivers
of conflict. By virtue of our increasingly globalized,
interlinked and interdependent world, today we are
also collectively faced with other non-traditional
threats to international peace and security, such as viral
pandemics, cross-border terrorism and climate change,
among others.
Against such threats, the Council has demonstrated
its resilience and adaptability by recognizing and
responding to their changing nature. For instance,
resolutions 2177 (2014) on combating Ebola and 2178
(2014) on combating foreign terrorist fighters are
examples where the Council effectively galvanized and
rallied the international community to recognize and
address such scourges against humanity.

24/86

19/01/2015

The Council has been at the forefront in promoting
the principles of inclusiveness for sustainable peace
with a view to preventing future conflicts, as reflected
in a number of its statements and decisions on a number
of situations around the world. Additionally, the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission was
a tangible manifestation of the Council’s commitment
in that regard. That have been said, Malaysia believes
that there is room for a more strategic and more holistic
approach to dealing with traditional and non-traditional
threats to international peace and security. In that
context, we welcome discussions such as today’s, which
allows us to take a deeper look at the underlying causes
of various conflict situations.
In Malaysia’s view, understanding the nexus
between peace and security and development is key,
given that security is a prerequisite for development
and that development is possible only in a peaceful
and stable environment. Malaysia remains convinced
of the need to proactively promote stable and inclusive
societies where radicalization, violence and extremism
are totally and completely rejected. Towards that end,
States, their partners and stakeholders must spare no
effort in identifying and subsequently addressing the
factors or conditions that could frustrate the aim of
achieving cohesive and inclusive societies. Ownership
over such efforts must lie first and foremost with States
and national Governments, supported by partners and
stakeholders. The United Nations, including the Council,
is well placed to play a pivotal role in supporting such
efforts, including through special political missions
and peacekeeping missions.
Malaysia realizes that in pursuing peace and
development, the role played by women is crucial. In
that regard, the Government has carried out long-term
strategies and programmes to ensure women’s equitable
share in the acquisition of resources, information,
opportunities and the benefits of development. The
strategies emphasize equality and justice in the
implementation of development policies so that women
can optimally contribute and realize their potential in
all sectors, in accordance with their capabilities and
needs. The Government has also taken the necessary
measures to create enough opportunities to enable the
young people of our country to play a meaningful role
in shaping their future.
Malaysia also recognizes that the advancement of
civil and political rights in the country should keep pace
with the significant progress made in the development

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7361

areas. In this regard, the Government has taken
significant measures aimed at further enhancing the
exercise and enjoyment of such rights in the country.
Malaysia’s commitment to the promotion and protection
of human rights was demonstrated, among other things,
by the establishment of the Human Rights Commission
of Malaysia, which is intended to promote awareness
and provide education relating to human rights, and
advise and assist the Government in formulating
legislation and procedures on these matters.

Villagers, succeeded in winning the hearts and minds
of the people. The security guarantees provided by the
Government meant that the people were free to focus
their time and energy on improving their economic
situation. The implementation of this and other bold
plans and strategies has borne fruit. As one illusatrion,
at independence 70 per cent of the population lived in
poverty; according to the latest United Nations Human
Development Report for Malaysia, released in 2014,
poverty rates stand at 1.7 per cent.

We share the view that the challenges faced
by multi-ethnic, multi-faith and multicultural
societies — especially those in the developing
world — seen in terms of implementing or realizing
principles of inclusion, are enormous. We further share
the view that exclusion is particularly dangerous in
multicultural and multi-ethnic States where certain
components of society are marginalized or excluded
from the mainstream. The task is even more daunting
for societies in the post-conflict or transitional phase,
given that they would be ill equipped to embark on
nation and peacebuilding, much less to address the
root causes, such as marginalization and exclusion, that
gave rise to the conflict in the first place.

In sharing that short anecdote from my country’s
history, I wish to emphasize that the notions of inclusion
and inclusiveness must be given life and must result
in tangible outcomes. Malaysia has also found that in
order to cement peacebuilding and nation-building
efforts, inclusiveness must go hand in hand with other
equally important values, including tolerance and
moderation. Those values, which are deeply ingrained
in the daily lives of our people, have allowed Malaysia
to enjoy relative peace, stability and progress since
independence. Malaysia is also perhaps fortunate, as it
is part of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
region, which, since its inception in 1967, has also
sought to promote and implement such values.

As a multi-ethnic, multi-faith and multicultural
society itself, Malaysia is keenly aware of such
challenges. Upon achieving independence in 1957,
social cleavages along ethnic lines — where the
identification of race with particular occupations
was especially pronounced — resulted in significant
inequality of income and wealth. Consequently, mistrust
and even animosity among the various communities
were widespread.
Against the backdrop of the ideological confrontations
that defined the Cold War era, there was also additional
pressure in the form of low-intensity guerilla warfare
and terrorism waged by communist insurgents. Such
challenges necessitated the implementation of radical
strategies in order to achieve the two key objectives
of security and poverty eradication. The notable
strategies included the establishment of New Villages,
which gathered communities living near the forest
fringes — where they were open to intimidation and
coercion by insurgents — nearer to the towns, where
the Government provided basic infrastructure and
amenities, including housing, water, electricity and,
most importantly, security.
The increased sense of security, coupled with
new-found economic opportunities for the New

Those are some of the lessons that Malaysia has
learned on inclusiveness and on the very real benefits
it has brought about in terms of peace, security and
stability. We realize that when all segments of societies
are guaranteed equal opportunity — economically,
socially and politically — and their separate identities
are respected, they will become a productive, vibrant
part of the State, celebrating the richness of its diversity
while building and united, strong and stable country.
I also wish to highlight that the concept of moderation
promoted and practised in Malaysia has managed to
produce a unique social cohesion, which enables the
multi-racial, multi-religious and multi-ethnic societies
in the country to live together in peace and harmony
through negotiation, consensus and compromise and to
embrace peace and reject any form of extremism and
violence for long-term mutual survival, sustainability
and resilience.
I wish to conclude by emphasizing that Malaysia
will continue to support the task of promoting the value
of inclusiveness and the holistic vision of international
security based on the interdependence of the three
pillars of the United Nations system: peace and security,
development and human rights.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than

15-0158425/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the text
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber. I also appeal to speakers to
deliver their statements at a normal speed so that the
Interpretation Service can carry out its work properly.
I should also like to inform participants that this
open debate will continue through the lunch hour given
the great number of speakers, for which we are very
grateful.
I now give the floor to the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Thailand.
Mr. Patimapragorn (Thailand): Thailand is
honoured to be part of the deliberations today. We
welcome this opportunity to contribute our thinking on
the very important topic that we are addressing today.
Since the establishment of the United Nations,
much of the world’s hopes and aspirations for peace
and security have depended upon how well the Security
Council carries out its responsibilities. What is clear
is that the issues impacting our common peace and
security have become more complex — be they
inter-State or intra-State conflicts — and that there has
been an increase in non-traditional security challenges.
It is in that changing context that the work of the Council
must go beyond conflict resolution. Increasingly, the
Council must gear its work towards conflict prevention,
in particular addressing root causes.
Many of the conflicts that we have
witnessed — be they within or between States — are
rooted in the underlying problems of poverty, social
injustice and inequalities and disparities within and
between countries. Those give rise to frustration,
marginalization and alienation, which breed extremism
and lead to conflict. We therefore have to tackle the root
causes if we are to stem the rising tide of extremism as
we have saw in recent shocking events.
We know that sanctions and military means are
simply not enough to combat extremism and terrorism.
Instead, promoting inclusive political, economic and
social policies must also be part and parcel of the
solution. Thailand believes that inclusive development
in which no one is left behind and all have equal access
to opportunities for a better future would serve to
advance our goal of sustainable peace and security for
all. That is true at both the national and international
levels. Inclusiveness must therefore be at the core of
26/86

19/01/2015

the post-2015 development agenda. In so far as peace
and security are concerned, inclusive development
must be an integral part of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding.
Thailand believes that inclusive development
is about placing people at the centre of our efforts.
Therefore, the work of the Council should always bear
in mind the nexus between development and security
and the direct impact on the lives and livelihoods of
the people. To promote inclusive development for peace
and security, all aspects of the work of the United
Nations — human rights, development and peace
and security — must go hand-in-hand. Therefore,
we must ensure coherence among key bodies in the
United Nations system. That will help us to develop
the capacity to take early and timely action to address
conflicts at their root causes.
Inclusiveness also applies to the work of the
Council. We welcome the ongoing efforts to engage
with non-members and all the relevant stakeholders so
that all voices are heard and heeded in the Council’s
deliberations, because they bear upon the peace and
security of all.
Before I conclude, I wish to pay my warmest
tribute to President Bachelet for her commitment
throughout all these years to the promotion of the rights
and empowerment of women. Thailand supports the
women and peace and security agenda. We encourage
the Council to do more to increase the numbers of
female peacekeepers, women leading peace operations
and female mediators in negotiations. I hereby pledge
my support for the “HeForShe” initiative for gender
equality and strong commitment to do more towards
that goal.
Lastly, may I also congratulate the new members
of the Council. I am confident that they will not only
invigorate the Council, but also provide it with the new
ideas and fresh thinking that will further advance the
Council’s mission in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay.
Mr. Almagro (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): It is a
great pleasure to see you, Madam President, presiding
over today’s meeting of the Security Council. It is also
a great honour to have been invited to participate. I
thank you for convening this open debate on security
and development. I especially thank you for the
15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/3), which makes a
contribution to consolidating the interdependence that
exists among the three pillars of the United Nations
system, namely, human rights, peace and security, and
development. I should also like to express my gratitude
for the important contributions by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, by my dear friend Antonio Patriota,
whom I have the honour to sit next to once again, and
by Ms. Leymah Gbowee.
There is no doubt that, in a general sense, inclusive
development is linked to the conflict-prevention agenda
and to peacebuilding. The political stability, democratic
governance and territorial integrity of States are
conditions to generate development and are also, as a
result, factors that contribute to conflict prevention. I
stress this principle by which we govern and cooperate
internationally. Although every State is responsible
for its own development, international cooperation
complements national efforts aimed at building
increasingly greater rights for increasing numbers of
people in order to strengthen human and institutional
capabilities with a view to achieving comprehensive
and inclusive development.
Allow me to refer to the Social Charter of the
Americas, agreed upon by the Organization of American
States, which establishes the basis for inclusive
development with equity in the American hemisphere
and emphasizes respect for human rights, inclusion and
non-discrimination as a basic pillar of the system. That
vision, which is shared in other regional forums such as
MERCOSUR, the Union of South American Nations,
and the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, has helped to maintain our regional space and to
keep it stable and free of conflict.
Inclusion — social, religious, territorial, national,
ethnic, social, gender, economic and cultural — is important
in governing ourselves better. It is the paradigm of
democractization, and it is relevant to build political
stability and democratic governance, which in turn
are fundamental to the preservation and building of
peace. Whenever we exclude others or fail to deal
with discrimination against a person, group or social
class, we empoverish our coexistence and impair our
societies. But fundamentally, we are being unjust.
Peacebuilding, as a long-term objective, is a crosscutting task that must begin with the initial phases of a
peacekeeping operation. It is important that the Security
Council consider ways to accentuate the dimensions
of development and respect for human rights in the

S/PV.7361

mandates of peacekeeping missions. Urugay, as one of
the main troop contributors to these missions, has seen
on the ground the strong positive impact of building
stronger, more inclusive and more resilient societies.
We recognize the importance of a political vision with
regard to rights for the resolution of conflicts.
Our societies are richer only through the promotion,
observance and recognition of full economic, social and
cultural rights. Our societies cannot further develop
without full respect for civil and political rights, which
are essential to the consolidation of democracy and
the rule of law. Likewise, achieving fairer, more stable
societies depends on the universality, indivisibility and
interdependence of human rights.
Uruguay, as a candidate for a non-permanent seat
of the Security Council for the period of 2016-2017,
expresses its commitment to that broad approach, which
links inclusive development with the maintenance of
peace and security. Our development entails poverty
reduction and the elimination of extreme poverty, the
inclusion of all in the educational system and universal
access to health services, the inclusion of women in all
spheres of participation through their empowerment,
the recognition of the rights of those who wish to marry
someone of the same sex, and the possibility of persons
with disabilities to lead a full life in all areas, including
that of employment, among others.
The best society is based on the observance and
promotion of the rights of every child, woman, minority,
refugee, victim of violence, sexual orientation. We
believe that the Security Council must help through its
work, coordinated with other United Nations agencies
on the ground, to transform post-conflict situations
into environments that promote development and longterm stability.
It is crucial that the principal organs of the United
Nations make significant contributions to the wellbeing of populations and that they have a genuine
impact on situations that have been on the agenda for
decades. Our standards for respect for and observance
of human rights must continue to rise.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, International
Trade and Worship of Argentina.
Mr. Timerman (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to express Argentina’s pride at seeing
the sister Republic of Chile as a member of the
Security Council and, on this occasion, at seeing you,

15-0158427/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

Madam, preside over it. I would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela on joining the Council, and my friend
Rafael Ramirez for being present. I am also thankful
for the invitation to take part in this debate on a topic
of crucial importance for international reality: the
role of inclusive development in the maintenance of
international peace and security. I would also like to
thank my friend Ambassador Antonio Patriota and
Ms. Leymah Gbowee for their briefings, as well as their
dedication to this very important topic.
At this very moment important negotiations
taking place in the framework the Organization in
which all Member States are democratically taking
part with the commitment and responsibility to
elaborate an agreement on a new development agenda
for the next 15 years that will be a worthy successor
to the Millennium Development Goals and succeed in
fulfilling the goal of eradicating poverty. The Security
Council cannot overlook that process, and that is why
we believe it is timely for an open dialogue that links
the outstanding task of achieving development with
other fundamental issues on the international agenda,
such as international peace and security.
Argentina believes that any development agenda in
the United Nations must be based on a human rights
perspective, that is, it should aim at ensuring that all
men and women worldwide have access to their rights
and enjoy their fundamental freedoms.
My country’s historic circumstances and the
political convictions in our society have shown that
development, human rights and international peace
and security are clearly interrelated in such a manner
that they cannot be cannot be addressed separately.
It is in the General Assembly that we have developed
the indispensable tools and capabilities to define,
agree upon, support and follow up on the efforts of the
international community for sustainable development
in its three dimensions. As a result, opportunities such
as the present one allow us to analyse the ways to keep
oopen the channels of communication and to be alert
to avoid watertight compartments or the use of double
standards.
Public development policies that incorporate social
inclusion are the path of progress that we have chosen
in our region, and we hope that the new international
agenda will continue in the direction of inclusive
development. Indeed, development without exclusion
means societies will move forward in the restoration
28/86

19/01/2015

and the broadening of rights and in the consolidation
of a national State that is present and active and that
promotes public policies while constantly cooperating
with provincial and local governments as well as social
organizations, developing and implementing initiatives
that repair social inequalities in an ongoing task of
searching for inclusion.
This necessarily leads to the perception of persons,
families and communities as rights-holders and requires
the effective recognition of all fundamental rights and
the development of active, anti-discriminatory policies.
That means that we must strengthen the United Nations
commitment with the comprehensive perspective of
human rights.
Those are the objectives that led Argentina to
establish a broader framework for inclusion, from
the promotion of cultural change, which is necessary
to combat the sources of discrimination in a
structural manner and to build a society with greater
representation, recognition and civic participation. All
of this comes with the understanding that inclusive
development and the fight against discrimination
help to improve stability and strengthen democracy,
including the governance of public affairs, the rule of
law, peaceful settlement of disputes and, accordingly,
international peace and security.
We cannot help but mention at this meeting the
close link between the development of human rights,
peace and security in the context of the underlying
causes of international terrorism. We were all moved by
the terrible attacks that took place just a few days ago in
France, Nigeria, Yemen, and Lebanon that claimed the
lives of many innocent people.
Argentina condemns terrorism in all of its forms
and manifestations. We must prioritize the prevention
and the fight against terrorism in the multilateral
framework and attribute particular importance to the
United Nations Global Counter Terrorism Strategy,
adopted by the General Assembly eight years ago,
and its four pillars. I would like to emphasize that the
Strategy recognizes and includes a first pillar referring
to measures to address the conditions conducive to
the spread of terrorism. Those include human rights
violations; ethnic, national and religious discrimination;
political exclusion and socioeconomic marginalization.
While this in no way justify terrorist acts, we must
recognize that they can lead to radicalization and
recruitment to those ends.

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Argentina is convinced that the basis of prevention
is to be found in policies that promote full respect
for human rights and the social inclusion of the most
vulnerable sectors of the population. Young people and
immigrants are potentially vulnerable to radicalization
and recruitment, especially if they are unemployed or
marginalized. No transnational criminal organization or
terrorist group would find fertile ground in societies that
succeed in developing high levels of peaceful coexistence
through social justice and where the elimination of
poverty is a main objective of their development policy.
Accordingly, the mere consideration of the use of
repression in the fight against terrorism must be
offset by efforts to promote equality, eradicate
poverty, and create decent work, education and
universal access to health care. In another words, we
must promote development with social inclusion as a
prority challenge in achieving tangible progress in the
effective mitigation of the threat posed by transnational
crime and international terrorism, thereby significantly
reducing conditions conducive to their spread.
I would like to conclude by referring to the final
document of the Open Working Group on Sustainable
Development Goals, endorsed in September by
the General Assembly, in which we agreed on the
conceptual framework for the sustainable development
goals and the 17 goals to guide the international
community’s renewed efforts on inclusive development.
This document establishes that people are at the heart
of sustainable development and that poverty is the
major problem facing the world today. Eradicating
poverty, along with the modification of unsustainable
modes of production and consumption, the promotion
of sustainable modalities, and the protection and
management of natural resources, which are the basis
of economic and social development, are the global
objectives of sustainable development and the sine qua
non for achieving it.
The result of more than a year’s strenuous work
by all Member States, with the support of the United
Nations system, civil society and international experts
within a broad consultation process, the document
reaffirms the importance of freedom, peace, security
and respect for all human rights, including the rights to
development and to a decent standard of living, as well
as to food and water, the rule of law, good governance,
gender equality, the empowerment of women and
the general commitment to achieving more just and
democratic societies through development.

S/PV.7361

We are convinced that it is only through inclusive
development, based on equal rights and full respect for
diversity and the dignity of all, will we be able to achieve
the sustainable development goals, justice and human
rights, and thereby contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security in a more lasting and
effective way.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Haiti.
Mr. Brutus (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to thank you, Madam President, the
Secretary-General, and Ambassador Patriota for their
opening statements. I would also like to express my
appreciation to the representative of Venezuela, whose
statement touched upon the situation in Haiti. Finally, I
would like to commend the Security Council for having
taken the initiative to convene this open debate, which
is so important with respect to inclusive development
and peacekeeping. I am particularly pleased to
participate as the Republic of Haiti has benefited for the
past 10 years from the presence of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), whose
mandate clearly reflects the interlinkages between
peace and development.
The relevance of the Council’s discussion is clear.
A peacekeeping operation, regardless of the scope of
the resources available to it for capacity-building in
the area of security, is never enough in and of itself
to bring peace and balance to the community in
question if the missions ignores or underestimates the
link between security and development, and between
inclusive development and peacekeeping. Development
challenges raise multiple questions. The United
Nations, backed by its experience acquired in some 50
peacekeeping missions worldwide, has established an
irreplaceable normative framework that increasingly
encompasses not only the many sources of instability
and conflict, but also the dynamic interactions between
these factors, which in post-conflict situations often set
up insurmountable obstacles to growth, development
and, consequently, to any effort to build lasting peace.
The Haitian Government fully endorses the
current efforts to adopt a comprehensive, consistent
and integrated approach to peacekeeping and security,
based on preventing conflicts or their resumption.
We believe in particular that peacekeeping and the
need for development go hand in hand. To be truly
effective in the long term, peacekeeping must be part

15-0158429/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

of an overarching political arrangement that takes
into account all emerging threats to security and
all situations that may promote underdevelopment
or contain the seeds of conflict and their possible
reoccurrence. This is why, during its long-standing
cooperation with the members of the Security Council
concerning the mandate of MINUSTAH, the Haitian
Government has always stressed its desire to see its
partners attach greater importance to development
needs, in particular the many structural deficiencies
and vulnerabilities that hinder the economic and social
integration of disadvantaged groups and the delivery of
essential services to the population.
In this regard, we welcome the convergence of
vision and efforts of the Haitian Government and
MINUSTAH in shaping and adapting the stabilization
programme. We are pleased that certain development
needs, and in particular those involving infrastructure,
post-earthquake reconstruction and the protection of
civilians have been taken into account, including in
the framework of quick impact projects, which make
significant contributions to the maintenance of peace
and stability. The two parties attach equal importance
to ownership by the Haitian Government of joint
projects and where follow-up must be guaranteed.
With regard in particular to the current political
situation, which has raised some concern among
members of the international community, I wish to
reassure all our partners that, thanks to the spirit of
compromise and consensus shown by President Joseph
Martelli and the majority of the Haitian political
class, Haiti has successfully overcome the crisis that
threatened to undermine the progress of the stabilization
programme undertaken during the past decade. This is
an indisputable example of the Haitian people’s true
political maturity and their significant achievements
attained, inter alia, with the support of MINUSTAH in
stabilization and development.
We are deeply grateful to our partners in the
international community for their support to the people
and Government of Haiti throughout the exceptional
crisis in our country. We hope that the Security Council
and all our partners in the international community
will maintain their support for the Government and
people of Haiti as they strengthen the rule of law and
democracy. In more general terms, we believe that
the example of MINUSTAH in Haiti could, in spite
of its limitations, serve in many ways as a model for

30/86

19/01/2015

establishing an effective post-conflict peacekeeping
mandate.
Capacity-building in the area of security should
go hand in hand with development concerns. Our
partners in the international community must work
with the host country, and in harmony with its national
development strategy, to create conditions conducive
to lasting inclusive development — in other words, to
improving the people’s living conditions, which is a
decisive factor in the maintenance of peace. As a result,
in future responses in terms of peacekeeping missions,
it is important for the Security Council to take into
account, at an early phase, such crucial interlinkages
between peacekeeping and development. That is, in my
view, one of the crucial conditions for the maintenance
of a lasting peace on the ground.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Human Mobility of Ecuador.
Mr. Arízaga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I bring
fraternal greetings from President Rafael Correa,
Minister for Foreign Affairs Ricardo Patiño Aroca and
our citizens revolution. My delegation would like, at the
outset, to express its pleasure at seeing you, Madam
President, presiding over this meeting of the Security
Council and our gratitude for the work that Chile has
been carrying out during its presidency of the Council.
I am all the more pleased to be here today, on Martin
Luther King, Jr., Day, which celebrates that Nobel
Peace Prize winner, someone who fought tirelessly for
inclusive development.
In the twenty-first century, peace can no longer
mean only the absence of war. Peace without inclusion
and justice is not genuine peace. Overcoming poverty
is the greatest moral imperative facing the planet today,
because for the first time in the history of humankind,
poverty is not the fruit of a lack of resources or of
naturally occurring factors, but rather the outcome of
systems that are unjust and exclusionary.
As far as Ecuador is concerned, human beings must
be at the centre of everything — not capital. For my
country, the main thing is to live well, in harmony with
nature. With that in mind, over the past eight years,
Ecuador has empowered its Government. That has
made it possible to plan and design public policies and
to regulate, monitor and redistribute wealth. Thanks to
that great effort, we have been able to lower national
poverty in terms of income by 15 per cent. We raised

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

equality levels by 8 points, as measured by the Gini
coefficient. We universalized basic education, tripled
our public health-care services and guaranteed free
higher education, enhancing our investment in such
education to bring it to the highest level in Latin
America. We have enhanced the supply and quality
of our public services, brought attention to unpaid
domestic labour and increased social security services
for over 1.5 million Ecuadorians, which is to say 10 per
cent of our population, all while maintaining the highest
rate of public investment in Latin America.
The Government of Ecuador has embarked upon
a new era, and now our country is full of ideas and
has great faith in itself and enhanced self-esteem and
sovereignty. Despite the difficulties stemming from the
global crisis and the current decrease in the price of oil,
which is my country’s main export, the Government of
Ecuador has confirmed that it will deliver its budgetary
allocations for the social sector.
We must recognize that, internationally, we are
still suffering from the fallout of a global order that
is not just unjust but also immoral. As we approach
the seventieth anniversary of the establishment of the
United Nations, my delegation would like to share the
following thoughts on the issue before us today.
First, it is our view that the origin of the global crisis
stems from the belief that everything is a function of
capital and, more specifically, financial capital. Solving
the crisis, however, must involve society regaining
control over the market.
Second, we must come up with a new international
economic order that is based on a framework of fair
trade that is in solidarity with developing economies
and a new international financial architecture that
gives priority to environmental conservation and social
inclusion projects, helps us reach food sovereignty and
guarantees that the cycles of life can continue.
Third, the crisis facing us should, in and of itself,
mark a turning point in strengthening the United
Nations role in global economic governance with
a view to initiating a comprehensive reform of the
international financial system and democratizing
international relations.
Fourth, as part of this framework, in Ecuador’s
view, human beings are still the priority. As I have
already mentioned, the moral imperative for us is to
extricate human beings from poverty. To do so, we must
ensure that we use our natural resources responsibly.

S/PV.7361

Fifth, let us promote development that is based on
human talent, education, knowledge and innovation, but
that is also sovereign and respectful of human rights.
Reducing extreme poverty, poverty and inequality
must be the fundamental parameter for gauging such
development. All efforts undertaken with that vision
in mind, in which humankind and its well-being are
at the heart of the work of States and international
organizations, must be supported, because they are
essential if we are to build genuine, lasting peace.
This year in particular, issues such as the post-2015
development agenda, the challenges posed by climate
change, the serious problems facing small island States
and landlocked States and the impact of natural disasters
compel us to look into how inclusive development is
now becoming the key focus of domestic action within
States, cooperation between States and peacebuilding.
Sixth, the drive for limitless wealth and concentrated
power leads to more human rights violations. One
example of that is the abuses committed by certain
transnational companies, whose activities should be
regulated under a universal, legally binding instrument.
We are currently reviewing and negotiating such an
instrument in Geneva.
Seventh, my country reiterates the urgent need to
make progress on our reform of the United Nations so
that the Organization can be more democratic, efficient
and transparent. After 70 years of existence, the
Organization cannot continue to reflect the reality of
the 1940s. Not only is reform necessary, but it is critical
for the future of the Organization and requires all of
us to be committed to it. Let us not miss the historic
opportunity offered us this year, and let us ensure that
we go to the General Assembly at its next session with
specific, consensus-based proposals.
Eighth, I align myself in advance with the statement
to be made shortly on behalf of the Group of 77. The
bodies of the United Nations must fulfil their mandates,
each in its respective field.
Ninth, and finally, I would like to reiterate the
important role inclusion plays in political stability,
democratic governance and our countries’ development.
Let us tackle the sources of exclusion and create earlywarning systems to that end. It is my belief that we must
learn from good practices. My country is prepared to
share its experiences and to learn from other successful
models.

15-0158431/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

Finally, I thank the delegation of Chile for its
work and its concern about tackling key issues on the
international agenda. We must be proactive, set clear
objectives and work towards specific outcomes in this
area. My country, Ecuador, will lend its full support to
achieving that objective.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Vice-Minister for Latin America and the
Caribbean of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Mexico.
Ms. Rubio (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation expresses its gratitude to the Government
of Chile for the manner in which it has been
participating in the work of the Security Council, and
we wish to congratulate you, Madam President, for the
extraordinary initiative of holding this debate on a very
important issue: that of inclusive development for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
This debate is not only necessary but also timely.
The process of intergovernmental negotiations that is
beginning today in the General Assembly, which is
aimed at defining the objectives and goals of the post2015 development agenda, is without a doubt a key
opportunity to strengthen inclusive development as a
factor in ensuring international peace and security.
The international community has long sought to
reflect in its practices an unquestionable and complex
equation: the interdependence between peace and
security, sustainable development and human rights.
We have made progress in recognizing this threefold
reality and in working in a consistent manner, but
much remains to be done. It is important to stress from
the very outset the importance of the cross-cutting
work that the United Nations system as a whole must
carry out so as to ensure peaceful, just, inclusive and
democratic societies.
Mexico believes that the new parameters for global
development must be guided by principles such as social
and economic inclusion, so that we can ensure equal
opportunities for all persons, with special emphasis on
the marginalized, excluded and vulnerable. Our position
in this respect coincides fully with what was expressed
by President Bachelet, who has our full support.
It is a fact that we are facing increasingly complex
challenges to which our societies are, quite rightly,
demanding responses from their Governments and the
international institutions. Conflicts each have their
own particular features and dimensions, and there is
no one-size-fits-all solution. However, there is one
32/86

19/01/2015

constant: the world still requires a renewed commitment
on our part to devise fresh approaches and solutions
aimed at reweaving the social fabric and ensuring, not
just promising to ensure, the conditions necessary for
inclusive development for our citizens.
Individuals and their welfare must be at the centre
of the efforts made at the national and international
level. In a genuine international community, there
should be no place for exclusion or lack of opportunity.
The effective prevention of conflict requires the
strengthening of the rule of law at the national and
international levels. I should like to stress that conflict
prevention is a bounden duty that is not limited to the
15 members of the Council. What we are dealing with
here is an unconditional responsibility of all States that
are permanent members of this universal Organization.
This requires a collective effort and political will
within the various bodies and agencies of the United
Nations system.
The processes of parallel review being carried out
in 2015 on the structure of a peacebuilding architecture,
peacekeeping operations and the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, in conjunction with the negotiations on
the post-2015 development agenda, must effectively
contribute to the promotion of inclusive development
and reaffirm the inextricable link among peace and
security, sustainable development and human rights.
We in Mexico are sure that the way ahead towards
a better future — a future of peace, prosperity and
greater opportunities — must begin with respect for
human rights law, the strengthening of transparency and
accountability, the creation of key infrastructure that
promotes development, the effective implementation
of reforms, and, of course, a combat against poverty
that features new ways to achieve inclusion and social
participation.
We reiterate our gratitude to the brotherly country
of Chile for having brought this important nexus of
issues to the table for debate today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Dominican Republic.
Ms. Liriano de La Cruz (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I wish to begin by thanking you,
President Michelle Bachelet, for your initiative to
convene this timely and decisive meeting. The leadership

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

you have shown in the various posts you have held
reflects your commitment to the loftiest international
goals. I wish also to congratulate the Secretary-General
on the clarity and depth of his briefing. Likewise, we
welcome the briefings by Mr. De Aguiar Patriota, Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, and Ms. Leymah
Gbowee, President of the Gbowee Peace Foundation
Africa.
The Security Council is the organ with primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security under the Charter of the United Nations.
Today’s meeting in particular addresses an issue that
has serious implications for international peace and
security. A review of the international environment
gives us the opportunity to renew our commitment in
the face of continually evolving challenges and promote
a bold vision to achieve peace and security.
When we focus our attention on people, we see that
the most urgent priorities of those affected by armed
conflict are often security and development, respect for
the rule of law and human rights. In other words, this
is a matter of life and death. A firm resolve to assume
the global responsibility to protect civilians in armed
conflict would certainly result in greater credibility for
the Security Council. The effective protection of the
civilian population is essential for sustainable peace,
and this should be taken into consideration whenever
peacekeeping operations intervene.
Along with the changing international context,
as we have heard repeatedly since the beginning of
this meeting, new threats are emerging that affect
security. These threats include marginalization,
terrorism, climate change, arms proliferation, piracy,
drug trafficking and its corollary, international
organized crime. The complexity of those threats
and the interdependence of the issues of security and
development issues are making the Security Council’s
role increasingly difficult, especially with regard to
the mandates of its increasingly complex peacekeeping
missions, thus weakening its effectiveness.
We believe that the Security Council, in order to
meet these new challenges, should reconsider the most
effective way for it to operate. The Council should
optimize its effectiveness, particularly on the issue of
prevention. It is better to prevent crises and conflicts
than it is to find solutions to them. In that respect, the
Security Council should do everything in its power to
improve the Organization’s early-warning system.

S/PV.7361

In addition to their operational content, peacekeeping
operations must continue to strengthen their
comprehensive and multidisciplinary nature. We
commend the inclusion in these operations of new
components that prioritize women, child soldiers,
victims of sexual abuse and, as we stated earlier, the
protection of civilian populations. In that regard, I wish
to commend President Bachelet and the SecretaryGeneral for their strong leadership in promoting
the cause of women in these sensitive topics, which,
unfortunately, were marginalized in the international
security context until only recently.
Ensuring international peace and security is a huge
task that requires collaboration and greater support on
the part of the Security Council vis-à-vis international
cooperation organizations and the international
community. The mission would be to strengthen
the capacity to really undertake peacebuilding in
the affected countries in such a way as to prevent, if
possible, the resurgence of a crisis. Countries emerging
from conflict should increasingly be able to count on
effective aid programmes to restore their political,
judicial, security and socioeconomic institutions.
If they do not have a clear vision and if they do not
appropriately address extreme poverty and deprivation,
it is certain that there will not be lasting peace. There
are cases of countries in which there were peacekeeping
operations that lasted many years and then came to an
end, but those countries had to return to dealing with
the problems. That means that the approaches followed
did not address the fundamental problems.
In the Dominican Republic we have tremendous
respect for the goodwill of the international
community, expressed through the Security Council, in
supporting our neighbour, Haiti, to overcome adverse
circumstances of every kind. Our people have worked
in solidarity to do all they can to help our neighbour
country, and in that regard it is worth noting the efforts
of the bilateral Joint Commission as a solid expression
of support for the tasks of recovery. We therefore wish
to acknowledge the efforts made by the countries in our
Latin American region and beyond that are a part of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
Mr. Barros Melet took the Chair.
We wish to make use of this important event to
exhort the international community represented in
this important international effort to devote greater
attention to fragile States and States emerging from

15-0158433/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

conflict in order to build the capacity of their national
institutions to efficiently address the problems of
development and security. The international agents as a
whole, with their financial support and capabilities, are
called to work together to address the needs of marginal
societies. In today’s world, which operates in a security
environment is rapidly changing and is unpredictable,
we have to take actions and responses that are every
more convincing and consistent. If we do not, the
United Nations and international community will lose
a great opportunity for peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We are honoured
that Micheline Bachelet, President of Chile, has
presided over this important Security Council debate.
We thank Ambassador Patriota and Ms. Gbowee for
their insightful briefings.
Peace and security, development and human rights
are the three pillars of the United Nations system and
collective security. Those pillars are interdependent
and mutually reinforcing. General Assembly resolution
66/288, entitled “The Future We Want”, adopted in
pursuance of the Rio+20 Conference, once again
established a firm correlation between sustainable
development and peace and security.
Poverty eradication; sustainable patterns of
consumption and production; sustained, inclusive and
equitable economic growth; reduction of inequalities;
fostering of equitable social development; and inclusion
and promotion of the integrated and sustainable
management of natural resources and ecosystems
create an enabling environment for peace and security
and gradually remove drivers of conflict. Draft goal 16
of the sustainable development goals, adopted in the
Open Working Group last year, stipulates the promotion
of peace and inclusive societies for sustainable
development. The Secretary-General, in his synthesis
report (A/69/700), says that participatory democracy
and free, safe and peaceful societies are both enablers
and outcomes of development.
Inclusive development shapes a salutary milieu for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The purpose of highlighting the correlation between
inclusive development and peace and security is not to
encourage the Security Council to take up the issues of
sustainable development or financing for development,
which are dealt with by the General Assembly and the

34/86

19/01/2015

Economic and Social Council, nor will the Security
Council have the capacity to do so. Those issues are
being rightfully addressed by the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, the High-level Political
Forum, the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change and other relevant forums. The
purpose is to promote synergy among various United
Nations bodies.
The Security Council and its peace operations
and missions are trying to resolve conflicts driven by
the lack of inclusive growth, inequitable distributing
of resources and weak institutions. The strategies to
resolve conflicts should therefore include economic
deprivation and marginalization. That is particularly
important in the post-conflict peacebuilding phase so
as to stem a relapse into conflict. A targeted focus on
development and long-term economic revitalization
in an inclusive manner is essential to achieving that
objective. Regional organizations and the Peacebuilding
Commission are ideally placed to build and strengthen
the nexus between security and development.
The President’s concept note (S/2015/6, annex), so
ably written, goes beyond inclusive development. It
projects a holistic view of international security and
recommends inclusion as a way to effectively prevent
intra-State conflicts and asymmetric warfare that
undermine the governance of societies and international
peace and security. The prevention of conflicts remains
the primary responsibility of Member States, but in
conflict situations prevention requires a comprehensive
approach and the constant support of the international
community, particularly the Security Council. The
concept note has, in a synoptic manner, highlighted how
the Security Council has assisted in the management
of inclusive transitions, peace dialogues, electoral
processes and governance structures in Iraq, Yemen,
Mali, the Central African Republic and West Africa
and how nations like Rwanda, Burundi, Haiti have seen
a turnaround by pursuing national reconciliation and
inclusive development.
We endorse the President’s view that peace
missions, under the guidance of the Security Council,
should continue to work for inclusive peace processes,
development and security. The very concept of
inclusion implies that the United Nations system should
work as a whole, and not operate in parts, in silos.
Nations must eliminate the exclusion, discrimination
and marginalization that lead to violence, strife and
conflict. With equal vigour, they should promote

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

national, territorial, religious, ethnic, racial, social
and cultural cohesion and inclusion. The Security
Council might consider issuing public documents on
lessons learned and best practices from various conflict
situations. Such publications could help decision
makers and peoples grappling with similar situations.
Finally, synergy on the issue of inclusion among
United Nations bodies does not mean they should
trespass on one another’s mandated space but should
rather share experiences and perspectives aimed at
enhancing the United Nations system’s effectiveness.
The jurisdictional boundaries of each forum must be
respected. The objective is to work towards lasting
peace and development that serves the people of the
world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): I would first like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Chile’s assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
The topic for today’s debate is an important one.
We have no difficulty with the concept note (S/2015/6,
annex) circulated by the presidency when it states that
inclusion and inclusive development are factors relevant
to the preservation of peace and peacebuilding. Indeed,
it has been our consistent position that there can be no
peace without development. No society or nation has
so far managed to achieve peace and stability without
eradicating poverty and providing its people with basic
human development and economic opportunities.
The grievances that often lead to conflict,
whether within or among countries, are driven largely
by a sense of deprivation linked to an absence of
development. Behind almost every conflict in the world
is a background of poverty, hunger and deprivation and
a lack of economic opportunity and social inclusion.
When people do not have the means to shape their own
destiny, when they cannot aspire to a better future for
themselves and their children, they are susceptible to
being caught in a vicious cycle of violence and conflict.
Inclusive economic growth and development, especially
when they make opportunities available to individuals
and communities, are crucial buffers to conflict. Thus,
by focusing on holistic development and addressing
the root causes of instability and conflict, particularly
poverty, exclusion and lack of development, we can
create an environment more favourable to peaceful and

S/PV.7361

stable societies and, indeed, a more stable international
order.
At the same time, peace and stability within
societies cannot be considered in isolation from their
international context: they are directly connected to,
and affected by, conditions of instability and insecurity
at the international level. As far as the issue of political
inclusion is concerned, it is equally important to
remember the oft-repeated maxim that there is no
one size that fits all. In other words, efforts to ensure
broader political inclusion within national contexts
must reflect national circumstances and realities,
and avoid repeating and reinforcing the existing
paradigm of foisting externally formulated policies and
programmes on countries transitioning out of conflict.
The imperative of political inclusion should not become
an imposition of prescriptions by the Security Council
on affected populations.
A holistic vision of international security based
on the interdependence of the three pillars of the
United Nations system — namely, peace and security,
development and human rights — does not mean ipso
facto that the Security Council should arrogate all those
functions to itself. Security does indeed have a broader
context. However, just because it has many dimensions
does not mean that the Security Council must occupy
all of them. There are separate organs within the United
Nations system tasked with managing those three
pillars. It is synergy and complementarity that should
be our watchwords, not duplication and co-option.
Where issues of inclusive development are concerned,
the Security Council should not encroach on the
mandates of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council. The fact that there are as many as
79 speakers on the list for today’s meeting does not
legitimize bringing the subject to the Security Council.
South Africa, as Chair of the Group of 77, and many
others, including us, will be saying this. In any case,
while the mandate of the Security Council is to act on
behalf of the wider membership, its non-representative
character renders it uniquely lacking in the legitimacy
necessary to counsel States on the merits of political
inclusiveness.
The question therefore is not so much how the
Security Council should embrace the notion of the
interdependence of the three pillars in order to
safeguard international security, but how the United
Nations system as a whole should do so. The system’s
development pillar has traditionally been its most

15-0158435/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

underfunded, and even in cases where the system does
focus on development, it is increasingly distracted from
the central premises of eradicating poverty and hunger
and forging international cooperation to help developing
countries find a path to sustainable development. We
talk of development in the Security Council and then
want the development agenda to focus on peace and
security. Such an approach can lead only to confusion
rather than results.
What is therefore needed is for us to seize the
momentous opportunity provided by the post-2015
development agenda to craft and implement policies
for genuine international collaboration on eradicating
poverty and promoting sustainable development. In his
recent synthesis report, entitled “The road to dignity
by 2030: ending poverty, transforming all lives and
protecting the planet”, the Secretary-General puts it
well when he says “The stars are aligned for the world
to take historic action to transform lives and protect
the planet.” (A/69/700, para. 25) That would in turn
generate the conditions necessary for the Security
Council to fulfil its mandate of ensuring international
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank your delegation, Mr. President, for
organizing this very timely debate, and for Ms. Michelle
Bachelet’s personal participation as President. We also
appreciate the briefings by, and the presence here this
morning of, the Secretary-General, the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Ms. Leymah Gbowee,
President of the Gbowee Peace Foundation Africa.
Guatemala considers today’s open debate very
timely, which, it is worth mentioning, coincides with
the start of negotiations on the post-2015 development
agenda. We are pleased that both the Security
Council and the General Assembly, within their
respective mandates, are placing greater emphasis
on the importance of inclusive development for the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
our view, over the years the complex links between
security and development have been codified and
clarified in numerous internal reports and resolutions
of this Organization, starting with Boutros BoutrosGhali’s 1992 An Agenda for Peace (S/24111), through
the Outcome document of the 2005 World Summit in
2005 (General Assembly resolution 60/1) to the current
Secretary-General’s recent synthesis report on the
36/86

19/01/2015

post-2015 sustainable development agenda (A/69/700).
Despite that, we continue to derive lessons for every
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operation and mission.
The challenges we are seeing increasingly emphasize
the interdependence between security, justice and
development in the promotion of lasting and sustainable
peace. There is much to be said on this topic, but I will
limit my remarks to five points.
First, we must understand that poverty and social
injustice per se do not necessarily lead to violence
and conflict. What we must address, therefore,
are the underlying circumstances and other, more
complex factors that can lead to conflict. When high
unemployment, especially among young people,
and widespread poverty prevail at the same time as
a minority enjoys a quality of life known only in the
first world, there is at least some risk of conflict. Those
factors must be alleviated, not only for intrinsic ethical
reasons, but, in broader terms, as a means of conflict
prevention. Peace and development must be addressed
in a comprehensive and coordinated way at all levels
throughout the United Nations system. We therefore
welcome the fact that the draft sustainable development
goals include a stand-alone objective on promoting
peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable
development, which would facilitate access to justice
for all and create effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions at all levels.
Secondly, Guatemala sees the Peacebuilding
Commission as an important institutional interface
between the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council, the General Assembly and the Bretton
Woods institutions. We therefore believe that its work
is important in terms of the institutional development
of the United Nations. We trust that this year’s review
of the peacebuilding architecture will strengthen it
and provide for better coordination among the bodies
I just mentioned. Similarly, we believe that the highlevel panel review of the various general aspects of
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
will help in using these tools more efficiently. All of
this will contribute to settling conflicts definitively and
preventing relapse into violence, which, in most cases,
undermines the gains made.
Thirdly, we are convinced that women have a
central role to play in preventing and settling conflicts,
promoting justice and reconciliation, supporting
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and in
rebuilding national institutions, which are all integral

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

pillars for building lasting peace. The review to be
carried out by the high-level panel on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, is very timely. Broad-based sustainable
development can help tackle the root causes of conflict.
By definition, this means including women, who can
play a key role in negotiations and peace processes,
and young people, who have immense potential to
contribute to the development of their societies.
Fourthly, I would like briefly to mention the wide
range of preventive diplomacy tools our disposal. We
recall that the Secretary-General’s five-year action
agenda include advancing the responsibility to protect
agenda. My delegation fully supports that priority,
which in turn contributes to the progress on the topic
of today’s debate. The responsibility to protect implies
that all members of the international community must
uphold a code of conduct regarding the treatment of
their own people. States that do not respect this basic
commitment must understand that they will face
consequences. It was our own Heads of State who
jointly accepted this concept in 2005. The least we
can do now, 10 years on, is to ensure that this agenda
continues to evolve in its practical application.
Finally, to achieve inclusive development we
must also promote the rule of law. This provides the
necessary environment for sustainable development,
inclusiveness and economic growth. As we know, the
rule of law has a special place in the agenda of the
United Nations. Upholding and promoting the rule of
law and justice must guide all of its activities, thereby
conferring predictability and legitimacy on its work.
We believe that the Security Council must continue
to work in support of inclusive political dialogue and
must continue to cooperate with all the relevant actors
to implement the lessons learned and knowledge gained
to promote peace and human well-being.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia

S/PV.7361

and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
Allow me to start by thanking President Bachelet,
you, Sir, and the Chilean presidency of the Security
Council for the initiative to convene this timely
debate. We also wish to thank the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Patriota of Brazil and Nobel Peace Prize
Laureate Gbowee for their comprehensive briefings.
Regrettably, we are reminded by numerous conflict
situations of the imperative need to address the
underlying causes of conflict by promoting sustainable
development, inclusion, equality, the rule of law, respect
for human rights and inclusive political processes that
leave no one behind. The promotion of all of these
things might not fall primarily within the remit of the
Security Council; however, the results of the lack of all
of those factors can be found across the agenda of the
Council.
Security and development are closely interlinked,
mutually reinforcing and key to attaining sustainable
peace. Building sustainable peace is inextricably linked
to inclusive development. Sustainable peace requires
respecting the needs of the most disadvantaged and
vulnerable and realizing their economic, social and
cultural rights. The economic and political integration
of marginalized populations is a determining factor for
peace and security.
Sustainable development requires that human rights
and fundamental freedoms be respected, protected and
fulfilled. It requires the promotion of the freedoms of
expression, opinion, assembly and association, both
online and offline, as the representative of Lithuania
and other speakers have already recalled today.
Sustainable peace requires that we ensure that
no person is denied universal human rights and
basic economic opportunities. It requires that we
promote freedom of religion or belief and that we
fight discrimination in all its forms on grounds of
race, ethnicity, age, gender or sexual orientation and
advocate for the rights of children, persons belonging
to minorities, indigenous peoples, refugees, migrants
and persons with disabilities.
Sustainable peace requires gender equality and
the participation and empowerment of women and
girls. Women are agents of peace and development.
They should no longer be victims. At all stages of the
process of building peace, signing peace agreements

15-0158437/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

and introducing development programmes, we need a
stronger role for women.
Sustainable peace requires combatting discrimination
and addressing the structural causes of poverty,
inequality and violence, including by strengthening
effective inclusive and democratic institutions, good
governance and the rule of law. Sustainable peace
and sustainable development require peaceful and
inclusive societies, democratic governance and the
rule of law. Inclusive development based on consensus,
participation and consultation diminishes the risk of
conflict and enables long-term stability and sustainable
peace. Development requires an independent judiciary,
a reliable police force and a public sector free of
corruption. Development depends on an active private
sector, acting as a partner. To allow for this, institutions
need to be legitimate, accountable and efficient. A
stable, predictable and transparent legal regime creates
an environment conducive to investment, enterprise
and growth; it ensures equal opportunity and equitable
access to basic services, which are indispensable for
social development and inclusive societies.
Countries that have come out of conflict have also
highlighted the importance of tackling these issues. In
that context, I would like to commend the work done in
follow-up to the Dili Declaration by the fragile States
concerned.
Illicit financial flows from trafficking, smuggling,
corruption or money-laundering endanger both peace
and development.
We need strive to address most of this outside the
Security Council. The requirements for sustainable
peace are, first and foremost, our own responsibilities,
in regions and in Member States. But if these
requirements are not met, it will often be the Security
Council that will have to address the consequences in
an effective and timely manner.
The Council has often included such considerations
of inclusive development and political processes in
statements, resolutions and mandates. In order to be
prepared for timely and effective responses, the Council
could explore new and innovative ways of working with
different actors, including with civil society. Existing
tools, such as Arria Formula meetings, should be better
utilized. The best prevention of conflict remains support
for democratic governance, respect for human rights
and economic development. The EU’s development
policy today emphasizes our strong engagement in

38/86

19/01/2015

countries most in need, including those that are fragile.
Significant support granted by the European Union
goes to security sector reform, the rule of law, justice
and governance.
With the adoption of the comprehensive approach
of the European Union’s development policy and
our resilience policy, the accent is also put on better
connecting different interventions and instruments of
the EU so as to become a more effective and strong
partner for Governments and other international actors.
In Mali and Somalia, we are deploying the full range
of our instruments, from the Common Security and
Defence Policy missions to development programmes,
which address, with a longer-term perspective,
governance, the rule of law and building resilient
livelihoods. Our development toolbox has improved
with the design of conflict-sensitive and human rightsbased development interventions. An important part
of our work is supporting national authorities to tackle
transnational threats — such as terrorism, narcotics
trafficking and piracy — and working both with
national Governments and with regional organizations.
The European Union is also enhancing its early-warning
capacities in order to identify risk trends, address the
gap between warning and response, and foster a longterm, comprehensive approach to preventive action
before violence erupts.
The Security Council should address peacebuilding
as early as possible and strengthen the use of the
advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission. The
various reviews to take place this year need to fully
take into account the security/development nexus. This
year’s review of peace operations must also particularly
take into account the multidimensional nature of
peacekeeping operations. Peacekeepers have helped
organize participatory political processes, including
elections, in various conflict-affected countries. In
doing so, they have been supported by the European
Union. In 2014, peacebuilding achievements have come
under threat, due in particular to the Ebola epidemic.
Lastly, the security/development nexus is also
relevant as we seek to address the threat of terrorism.
In its counter-terrorism work, as in other areas of our
work, the European Union tries to take a comprehensive
approach, including integrating capacity-building
measures into the overall development and security
assistance to third countries and coordinating with
key partners. We recognize that concrete progress in
the areas of security, justice, human rights and the rule

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

of law are critical both for tackling terrorism and for
achieving sustainable development.
In view of the other important events that are
happening here in this building today, I would also
like to conclude by underlining that we call for a post2015 development agenda that is people-centred and
based on human rights, and combats discrimination,
including gender inequality and gender-based
violence. The agenda should address the structural
causes of poverty, inequality and violence, including
by strengthening effective, inclusive and democratic
institutions, good governance and the rule of law. Only
by addressing all these elements will the new agenda be
truly transformative.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Sajdik (Austria): It is my great honour to
speak on behalf of the members of the Human Security
Network, a cross-regional network composed of Chile,
Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway,
Panama, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand, South
Africa as an observer, and my own country, Austria.
The Human Security Network is an informal group of
States that advocates for the greater usage of the human
security approach in policies and programmes at the
international, regional and national levels.
At the outset, let me thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Antonio Patriota; and Nobel Peace Prize
laureate Ms. Leymah Gbowee for their comprehensive
briefings.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa took the Chair.
On behalf of the members of the Network, I would
like to express our strong appreciation to the presidency
of Chile for convening this very important open debate.
The Human Security Network has been traditionally
engaged in debates on critical issues in the Security
Council. We are very pleased by this timely initiative,
which appropriately highlights the connection between
inclusive development and the maintenance of
international peace and security.
We welcome the adoption earlier today of
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/3, which calls on
the United Nations and its Member States to adopt
a more comprehensive and integrated approach to
peacebuilding, to promote the inclusive participation
of all stakeholders in post-conflict reconstruction,

S/PV.7361

and to adopt more preventive actions. These are core
elements of the human security approach that can
make a significant contribution to today’s discussions
on the maintenance of peace and security. When
confronting multiple challenges and vulnerabilities that
affect different countries, societies and communities,
human security proposes responses that encompass
the elements of peace and security, development and
human rights — the three interdependent pillars of the
United Nations system.
Its prevention-oriented approach allows for timely
and effective policy planning that addresses the
underlying causes of threats that may endanger the
prospects for peace, stability and development. Those
underlying causes of both domestic and cross-border
conflicts include growing socioeconomic and gender
disparities, ethnic or religious tensions, the lack of
respect or denial of human rights, discrimination and
exclusion in general.
By disaggregating social and economic indicators
at the national and local levels, the human security
approach is able to uncover the various factors of
exclusion that impede women; minority, ethnic and
religious groups; and economically marginalized
populations. By engaging communities in the
development and implementation of solutions to their
daily challenges, the human security approach has led to
more effective and sustainable responses that promote
the inclusion of all relevant stakeholders, especially
women and marginalized groups; capitalizes on
existing local capacities; and promotes greater national
ownership. Such an approach must be a key element in
thwarting the emergence or spread of pervasive threats
that could constitute real obstacles or challenges to the
promotion of development, stability, peace and security.
In conflict situations, our group has constantly
emphasized the security and dignity of civilians affected
by armed conflicts, particularly those belonging
to more vulnerable groups. The multidimensional,
people-centred, context-specific approach that human
security proposes is also relevant in supporting the
efforts of societies in post-conflict situations and in
ensuring the better passage of critical transition periods
to greater normalization, stability and development. In
that sense, we are seeing encouraging examples for the
strengthening of institutions and the participation of
people.
In cases such as th of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the human security approach is being
applied in response to the reintegration of ex-

15-0158439/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

combatants, disenfranchised and marginalized youth,
the lack of sustainable livelihoods, struggling health
and educational services, persistent tensions among
community members, and acts of gender-based violence.
The integrated human security approach complements
various efforts led by the Security Council in postconflict situations.
Our challenge is to apply the human security
approach more systematically at the national level
through national ownership involving all local organs
and parties concerned, as well as across the entire
United Nations system. The Human Security Network
believes that this should allow for greater coherence and
efficiency in the use of resources and in the exchange of
good practices and lessons learned.
Ultimately, this approach would ensure that topdown protection strategies, including strengthening
the rule of law, promoting good governance and
protecting human rights, are complemented by policies
and progammes that empower conflict-affected
communities and build social cohesion. Together, they
would foster greater participation and ensure that the
dividends of reconstruction and development, as well as
the enjoyment of fundamental freedoms, can reach all
corners of society. In conclusion, this should generally
benefit the goal of international peace and security for
all, and also provide an operational framework for the
post-2015 agenda.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Thöresson (Sweden): I thank you, Sir, and
through you President Bachelet for the opportunity to
address the Council on behalf of the Nordic countries
on this very important topic. The Nordic countries also
wish to thank the Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Ambassador Patriota of Brazil and Nobel Peace Prize
Laureate Leymah Gbowee for sharing their valuable
insights today.
Development is always political, and particularly
so in contexts marked by armed conflict and violence.
Neither peace nor development is only about agreedupon words on paper; both are societal processes,
upheld and pushed forward by people. As the Security
Council remains seized of threats to peace and security,
it is crucial to consider, as we do today, the underlying
factors and causes of conflict and relapses into conflict.
How can we prevent situations from ever having to end
up on the Council’s agenda?

40/86

19/01/2015

Inclusive development holds a key to the answer.
As this debate attest, there can be neither peace nor
development without the active participation of the
many, including of course the most marginalized. For
example, systematic economic and social exclusion and
inequalities drive a lot of today’s conflicts. At the same
time, it is people in conflict-affected and fragile States
that lag the most behind in fulfilling the Millennium
Development Goals. People in conflict-affected and
fragile States are stuck in a trap of poverty and violence.
Root causes and drivers of conflict and violence
must therefore inform development cooperation.
Conflict analysis — outlining and understanding these
causes and drivers — is key. We need to understand
the factors — for example, political, economic, social,
and historical — that directly influence the forms
and dynamics of conflict and violence. We need to
understand what separates and what connects people
and groups.
If, for instance, your group identity or belonging
determines your access to security, to justice, to land, to
jobs, and to political influence — or, to put it differently,
if your group identity puts you at risk of exposure
to harassment or violence on the part of the national
police, systematic discrimination by the authorities,
land deprivation, and lack of influence — then all
development efforts targeting these areas will have
a bearing on the conflict. Building trust between the
State and society and within groups will increase
social cohesion, which is at the centre of inclusive
development.
Development can be inclusive and thereby reduce
poverty, break the cycle of violence, and prevent new
conflicts from emerging or returning to conflict if all
groups of people, including the most marginalized,
contribute to creating opportunities, share the benefits
of development, and participate in decision-making.
Inclusive political participation in peace processes,
elections, constitutional processes, or decentralization
efforts are ways to non-violently resolve and prevent
conflict. The Security Council has a crucial role to play
in formulating mandates to support such participation,
and should continue to do so effectively.
In this context, let us also remind ourselves that
women represent, in many cases, more than half of
the population. Any effort that does not involve them
is doomed to fail. Women’s participation is critical to
peacemaking, to peacekeeping and to peacebuilding.

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Security Council has a special responsibility to
ensure the presence and active involvement of women.
We commend the Council for its efforts in this regard,
and encourage it to continue to focus on the issue of
women, peace and security in all its aspects.
Having spoken about the Council, the Nordic
countries would like to see the Council encourage
the Secretariat, including Special Representatives
and Envoys, to pay increasing attention to inclusive
development, and in particular the lack of it, in their
briefings and reports. We also urge the Council to
utilize the whole variety of formats it has at its disposal;
the more the Council can learn from the experiences
and work of other actors, the better prepared it will be
to respond efficiently to challenging situations.
Let us also take a moment to reflect upon the overall
United Nations involvement in the nexus of security
and development. We all agree that the United Nations
needs to deliver as one. In its resolution 2086 (2013), the
Council recognized the important role of peacekeeping
missions in assisting host countries in developing critical
peacebuilding priorities and strategies and in helping
to create an enabling environment for relevant national
and international actors to perform peacebuilding tasks
and to implement early peacebuilding tasks themselves.
The use of inclusive United Nations mediation
should be further developed. Mediation should be used
in all stages of the conflict cycle. In this sense, the
Council sets the path for the ensuing peacebuilding,
for example by meeting the need for a professional,
legitimate, accountable and impartial security sector
and judiciary to build trust not only with people for
peaceful conflict-resolution, but also with economic
actors. As peace operations often do the initial work
in supporting the host country, it is important that
the rest of the United Nations and other development
actors follow suit. Currently, several layers of actors
work in development, peacebuilding and State-building
at the international, national, regional and local
levels. In order to enhance and make development
and peacebuilding initiatives more effective, greater
coherence and coordination are needed. Common and
nationally owned and led strategic goals should be
pursued by all actors.
As part of building sustainable peace, healing the
wounds of society can determine whether peace and
stability will be sustained in the long run. Dealing
with grievances or hatred over past atrocities through
reconciliation or transitional justice processes is

S/PV.7361

necessary for societies to move on and break with the
violent past. Development cannot be business-as-usual
after a conflict, but needs to be inclusive also in the sense
of dealing with issues central to sustainable peace. To
prevent future conflict and insecurity, decisive action
needs to be taken to face climate change. Climate
change is a threat multiplier. Today, unfortunately,
the world is facing the risk of additional temperature
increases of over 2 degrees Celsius. Climate change is
therefore expected to pose a major strategic security
threat in the future.
The year 2015 is the year of the three reviews: on
peace operations, peacebuilding and the global study
on women, peace and security. This year will thus bring
us an opportunity to examine our overall efforts to
building sustainable peace. The Nordic countries hope
that all three reviews will enlighten us as to how to do
this better, inclusive development being an important
piece of the puzzle.
The Nordic countries have been promoting standalone goals on peaceful and inclusive societies, gender
equality and good governance in the post-2015 agenda,
which are key contributors to poverty eradication and
sustainable development. Inclusivity is at the heart of all
this. The post-2015 agenda will be central in identifying
where to direct our efforts in coming years, and should
serve to inspire the Council’s actions as well.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my sincere appreciation for Chile’s initiative
in convening today’s open debate on this important
topic. I am also grateful to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, and
Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Ms. Leymah Gbowee for
their briefings.
According to the World Development Report 2011,
published by the World Bank, 90 per cent of conflicts
initiated in the 2000s were relapses of previous civil
wars. As many researchers point out, the recurrences
of conflict are attributed in part to failures to promote
peacebuilding in an inclusive manner. In light of the
maintenance of international peace and security,
inclusivity is an extremely important factor in
peacebuilding processes. Therefore today’s meeting
is very appropriate and timely. Japan has given
considerable attention to this topic. Since 2013 my
Mission has jointly organized seminars on “inclusivity

15-0158441/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

in rebuilding States with the Missions of Tanzania and
Slovakia. In building upon these initiatives, I should
like to discuss two points in today’s open debate.
First, on political inclusivity, Japan has actively
contributed to the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
since its inception in 2005. The PBC was established
to address the so-called gaping hole in the United
Nations system, where there had been no institution to
effectively help countries with the transition from war
to lasting peace. Last year in the PBC’s Working Group
on Lessons Learned, which Ambassador Motohide
Yoshikawa, Permanent Representative of Japan, has the
honour to Chair, we had extensive discussions on the
issue of transitions of United Nations missions.
In his final report, the Chair pointed out that a
major challenge faced by post-conflict countries is
sustaining inclusive political processes. The withdrawal
of United Nations missions invariably results in the
limited capacity of the United Nations to support
inclusive political processes on the ground. The report
emphasized that the PBC should play a role by offering
a political platform to help sustain international
attention and engagement with countries experiencing
transitions. Furthermore, the report notes that as an
advisory body to the Security Council, the PBC has a
crucial role in preventing the relapse of conflicts. At
the time of transition of United Nations missions, the
PBC can support the Council’s efforts by advising it
on the holistic peacebuilding progress on the ground. It
can also draw the Council’s attention to possible risks
of relapses when any symptom of reversion, including
serious situations of exclusion, is presented after the
withdrawal of United Nations missions. In this regard,
we would like to call on the Council to work with the
PBC to further improve the Council’s early warning
and conflict prevention functions.
My second point concerns inclusive development,
which is an essential part of human security and
should also be one of the key principles of the post2015 development agenda to be adopted in September.
Japan has provided post-conflict countries with
seamless assistance for the consolidation of peace.
In Africa, for more than 20 years, Japan has actively
supported African countries’ own efforts to consolidate
peace and advance development, through the Tokyo
International Conference on African Development
process. Through this process, Japan has not only
implemented its assistance with a deep understanding
of the interrelationship between peacebuilding and

42/86

19/01/2015

development, but has also promoted an inclusive
society, particularly by assisting women and young
people. For example, Japan’s technical cooperation
in Kenya and Tanzania helps to promote the role of
women in agriculture and to realize gender equality
in farm management. Such assistance further leads
to the empowerment of women and enhanced social
inclusivity.
Japan is determined to continue its active role in
promoting peace and an inclusive society through
the activities of the PBC as well as through bilateral
assistance. We hope that the Security Council will
continue discussions on inclusive peacebuilding and
development to further strengthen its role in maintaining
international peace and security as well as to improve
its complementary relationship with the Peacebuilding
Commission.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President,
and through you Her Excellency President Michelle
Bachelet, on the assumption by Chile of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January. We
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement this morning. Equally, we wish to express
our sincere gratitude to Ambassador Antonio Patriota
of Brazil, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
Ms. Leymah Gbowee, Nobel Peace Prize Laureate of
2011 and President of the Gbowee Peace Foundation
Africa, for their interventions.
The Group of 77 does not traditionally speak at
meetings of the Security Council. Our mandate as a
group is to focus on economic and social development
issues. However, today’s discussion by the Council on
the topic of inclusive development for the maintenance
of international peace and security has prompted us to
request the floor in order to put on record the views
of more than two-thirds of the States Members of the
United Nations.
The link between peace and security and development
is undeniable. The fulfilment of development goals
would lessen the likelihood of conflict breaking out.
Internal conflicts in various parts of the world have
at their very core the plight of the population to their
development aspirations. Many Governments that have
failed to meet these aspirations have been threatened

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

by internal unrest. The failure to honour development
assistance, provide debt relief to developing countries,
opening of markets and transferring of technology have
all played their negative role in consolidating stability.
These are the issues that should be considered in their
appropriate forum where we, as Member States, should
make concrete commitments in this regard.
The Group of 77 and China would like to point
out that the primary mandate of the Security Council
is the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Charter of the United Nations clearly sets out the
roles and responsibilities of the principal organs of the
United Nations. As the Group has stated in this Chamber
before, the principle of separation of the mandates of
the United Nations organs must be respected.
The Security Council is considering the issue
of development in relation to peace and security at a
critical time when the intergovernmental process of
negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda
commences. In fact, the intergovernmental process,
which begins today, is getting under way as we speak.
The Group maintains its view that the mandate of
the different organs of the United Nations should be
respected as the General Assembly remains the highest
deliberative body that affords all Member States an
equal opportunity to participate in development-related
debates.
The President of the General Assembly has
appointed co-facilitators to lead a process of
negotiation on the post-2015 development agenda in
which all stakeholders will participate in accordance
with the rules of the General Assembly. As the G-77
we will engage in a constructive dialogue to ensure
that the United Nations remains central in addressing
these global development challenges. Our engagement
at the intergovernmental negotiations on the post2015 development agenda is intended to ensure that
the United Nations develops a global development
agenda which contributes to international development,
thereby resulting in long-term prosperity and peace and
security.
In conclusion, I should like to reiterate that the
Group of 77 and China will continue to pursue the
achievement of sustainable development and the
eradication of poverty, as well as the fulfilment of
the commitments made by developed countries in
all development-related relevant bodies. As Member
States we are under an obligation to ensure that these
issues in all their complexity are addressed in the

S/PV.7361

mandated United Nations bodies to ensure the broader
participation of Member States.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): First, I
should like to thank the President Bachelet of Chile for
her presence at this important meeting. We congratulate
Chile on acceding to the presidency of the Council for
this month. We would also like to wish for all Member
States a good year full of peace and security for
everyone.
We thank you, Sir, for holding this important open
debate on inclusive development for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We also congratulate
Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela,
the new members of the Council, and wish them a
successful and fruitful mandate within the Council. I
must also congratulate Chad on the excellent way in
which it conducted the work of the Council last month.
We thank Chile for its efforts in preparing
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/3, adopted today.
There is no doubt that all peoples of the world aspire
to the best possible development so that they can
benefit from welfare and prosperity. However, without
security there will be no development. Although it has
considerable human potential and resources, Iraq is
faced with conflicts and danger that threaten its national
project, which is to build a democratic political regime
representative of all elements of Iraqi society and seeks
to guarantee the participation of all Iraqis in the choice
of their leaders through a transparent and fair electoral
process. We are of the firm conviction that this will
be the first step on the right path to build a stable and
safe future for Iraq and all Iraqis so that they can have
inclusive development as they wish.
Threats caused by terrorist activities are one of the
greatest dangers faced in Iraq. Iraq is at the head of the
list of those States most affected by the various forms
and manifestations of terrorism for 2014. Terrorism
has affected infrastructures and cities in Iraq and
thereby impacted economic activities. That in turn
has had a negative impact on sustainable development
and economic progress in all of its aspects, including
socioeconomic and environmental. Iraq is in great
need of development, good governance and sustainable
democracy. It also is in need of a favourable environment
for foreign investment as it needs stability at the level
of macroeconomic policy.

15-0158443/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

It is comforting to note that the international
community is currently more aware and more coherent
in combating the various facets of the threat posed by
terrorism, which has expanded beyond local areas and
is becoming a transnational and even a transcontinental
problem, and thus a threat to international peace and
security. Building on international efforts meant to
assist Iraq in its efforts, and with a sense of collective
responsibility to combat international terrorism, we
urge the international community, which has made
additional efforts in this regard, to combat terrorism,
which through its actions exploits resources and
engages in organ-trafficking in order to finance its
terrorist activities. The international community must
focus its activities to guard against collaboration with
the Islamic State. We would like to recall here that
the commitment of Member States to implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions is the best way to
combat the effects of terrorism on the global population.
In conclusion, peoples suffering from a lack
of security are unable to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals, which indicates an overall failure
of the current sustainable development framework,
and is the result of the organized violence of terrorism
and a lack of overall security. We hope for a post-2015
development agenda that would be more effective in
order to limit and put an end to the impact of terrorism
in the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
should like to congratulate Chile on having organized
this open debate on the topic of inclusive development,
which is of fundamental importance to the maintenance
of international peace and security. The SecretaryGeneral, the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Ms. Leymah Gbowee, recipient of the Nobel
Peace Prize, have demonstrated this very well in their
briefings.
I fully associate myself with the statement of
the European Union. I should like to add several
observations in my national capacity.
As we approach the global summit of 2015, the
interdependence of the three pillars of the United
Nations — peace and security, sustainable development,
and human rights and the rule of law — is no longer in
doubt. During our recent term in the Security Council,
we sought to promote an integrated approach, faithful

44/86

19/01/2015

to our strong conviction that peace and security cannot
be guaranteed without development, the protection of
human rights and democratic governance. My country
has long worke for lasting, sustainable development
that is also inclusive. We therefore continue to dedicate
1 per cent of our gross national income to development
cooperation by supporting cooperation programmes,
specifically in such areas as social education and health,
in order to assist our partner countries in favouring
inclusive development in their societies.
The international community is increasingly aware
of the need to address the root causes of conflicts:
poverty, discrimination, exclusion, and the lack of
the rule of law, to name just a few. We see it in this
debate today in the Security Council as we see it in
the intergovernmental work under way in the General
Assembly, which is seeking to establish a post-2015
sustainable development programme. We welcome that.
For my part, I should like to focus on two aspects of this
debate: post-conflict peacebuilding and addressing the
specific needs of women and young people.
Peacebuilding is a long-term effort that must
mobilize all the vital forces of the countries and regions
concerned and enjoy the coherent and long-term support
of the international community. Peacebuilding efforts
will have a lasting impact only if they contribute to the
establishment of inclusive political processes and enable
the establishment of competent national institutions
that must also be accountable to their citizens. The
situations in the Central African Republic and South
Sudan, among others, have shown us that the risk of a
resurgence of conflict is unfortunately elevated if these
things are not done and if the root causes of conflict are
not adequately addressed.
As other speakers have already stated, it is also
essential to guarantee the participation of women,
young people and other groups in society that are too
often excluded from decision-making, not only because
women and young people are agents for change but also
because they are the most vulnerable in conflict and
post-conflict situations. It is important to give prospects
for the future to the young, who represent a growing
portion of the population in developing countries. The
marginalization of young people and the absence of
career prospects make them easy prey for hate-inciting
and extremist speeches. From being agents for peace
and development, they run the risk of becoming agents
of instability and violence.
To conclude, I should like to reiterate our support
for initiatives seeking to improve early earning, in
15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

particular the Secretary-General’s Rights Up Front
initiative, which should sound the alarm whenever
human rights violations and negative exclusion
movements are detected. We hope that this initiative
will enable the Security Council to better perceive the
signs that precede conflicts and to act before it is too
late.
The maintenance of international peace and security
and preventing conflict are two sides of the same coin.
History will judge the United Nations on our capacity
to work together for a future with dignity for all. We
are convinced that it is possible to get there, and that we
can conquer poverty and violence and adopt sustainable
development models that will enable future generations
to have better lives. That will require us to redouble our
efforts in all forums, including the Council, in order to
bring an end to exclusion and the inequalities that we
see in all their forms.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): It was a great honour to have
President Bachelet here earlier today. Allow me to
thank and congratulate Chile on bringing this important
subject to the attention of the Council.
It is fitting that a debate on inclusive development
falls on Martin Luther King Jr. Day. Dr. King was a
champion of human rights and human dignity. He
taught the world that strong societies do not succumb to
division. They teach tolerance and embrace diversity.
He also taught us that we must commit ourselves
wholeheartedly to the values that we believe in. He said:
“The ultimate measure of a man is not where he
stands in moments of comfort and convenience, but
where he stands at times of challenge”.
The challenge before us is immense. In the coming
year, the United Nations will unveil a new development
agenda. It is our duty to ensure that it is truly
transformative and can serve as the key to unlocking a
better future for millions of people throughout the world.
We must create an enabling environment for inclusive
and peaceful societies by promoting good governance,
supporting strong institutions, and advancing the rule
of law at both the national and international levels.
Fifteen years ago, the Council adopted resolution
1325 (2000), which recognizes the critical role that
women play in promoting and maintaining peaceful
societies. The situation on the ground in many nations

S/PV.7361

has yet to match the Council’s aspirations. Throughout
the world, too many women continue to be treated
as second-class citizens. From Nigeria to Syria,
from Pakistan to the Sudan, women are subjected to
unspeakable violence and discrimination. In many
places they are barred from participating in political
life, cannot work or attend school, or are victims
of sexual violence that is often overlooked by local
authorities.
Societies that oppress women are doing a double
disservice. First, they are committing an injustice
against half the population, and secondly they are
obstructing development. We know that when half of
the population is sidelined, the path to development
is blocked. We also know that women promote peace
and reconciliation in these societies. As an example, in
Rwanda women have been the driving force in postconflict reconstruction and peacebuilding. Today,
Rwanda is ranked seventh in gender equality and
women are fully engaged in the country’s economic and
political leadership.
Martin Luther King Jr. taught us that “Change
does not roll in on the wheels of inevitability, but
comes through continuous struggle”. The challenges
to development — the hardship, the despair, the
poverty — can seem overwhelming. The security
challenges that we face are equally daunting.
Nonetheless, I am optimistic because I have seen at
first hand how inclusiveness enriches a society.
From its earliest days, Israel opened its door to
all people of all nationalities and faiths throughout
the world. We championed an education system that
teaches tolerance and a justice system that safeguards
the rights of every person. Today one can find people
of all colours, creeds and religions succeeding in every
area of society. Israel also understands that empowering
women is the foundation of thriving societies. The
pioneers who founded Israel’s kibbutz movement built
a society centred on cooperation and equality. Women
contributed to every aspect of kibbutz society, from the
agricultural fields to the political field.
Gender equality is also enshrined in our 1948
Declaration of Independence. More than 40 years ago,
when Golda Meir was elected Prime Minister, Israel
was the third country in the world to elect a woman to
its highest office. In fact, Israel is the only country in
the Middle East where women have presided over each
and every one of the three branches of Government.
Today, we continue to invest in women. The Israeli

15-0158445/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

Government funds a number of high-tech vocational
training programmes to enable Arab, Bedouin and
Jewish women to reach their full potential.
The prosperity and stability of societies also
depend on enabling young people to play a meaningful
role in shaping their future. The current generation of
children and youth is the largest in human history. Of
the 7 billion people living on the planet, nearly half are
under the age of 25. These young people have hopes
and dreams. When young people see a future devoid of
jobs and opportunities, frustration sets in. If it is not
addressed it is a ticking time bomb.
Members may have read about a 14-year old Syrian
boy named Usaid Barho. Like other boys of his age,
Usaid dreamed of growing up and finding a job that
would make his family proud. But there are no simple
dreams for a boy growing up in Syria. Last year, Usaid
was recruited by Sunni extremists from Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham who threatened to rape his Mother
if he did not join them. Seeing no alternative, Usaid
volunteered to be a suicide bomber. He strapped on a
suicide vest and made his way to a Shiite mosque and
revealed himself to the local guards.
Usaid’s story is not unique. Extremist groups thrive
in regions with poor governance, weak rule of law, and
a rampant social exclusion. It is no coincidence that so
many of the countries that threaten global peace and
stability are the very places where millions of people
are deprived of their basic dignities and freedoms.
Throughout the world radical Islamists are waging war
against our way of life, our values and our freedoms.
Development can lay the groundwork for stability, but
it is not enough. We must confront the extremists who
sow the seeds of hatred. We must uproot radicalism and
we must weed out the terrorists who seek to destroy our
way of life.
Working together, we are succeeding in doing what
the United Nations was created to do, improving the
lives of hundreds of millions of people. We are the
first generation with a chance of eliminating extreme
poverty. There is an African proverb that teaches that if
you want to go fast go alone, but if you want to go far,
go together. We have come so far and achieved so much
that we cannot stop now. Together, we must struggle
to break down the barriers that divide us. Together we
must build more peaceful societies and together we
must be united in achieving the common dream of all
people, a better future for our children and a chance to
live in peace and security.
46/86

19/01/2015

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Winid (Poland): I should like to thank the
presidency of Chile for having convened today’s open
debate. Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the delegation of the European Union.
The year 2015 provides a special opportunity to
have a discussion on the relationship between inclusive
development and international peace and security. We
hope that the upcoming review of the peacebuilding
architecture and the review of peacekeeping
operations, as well as the high-level review to assess
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), will
lead to a deep reflection on this issue. The seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations and preparation for
the summit for the adoption of the post-2015 agenda
will also be a good opportunity to discuss progress in
this respect.
We understand that development is not a main issue
within the scope of the Security Council deliberations.
However, too many times in the past the Council has
had to deal with the effects of underdevelopment and
fragility. Too frequently, the international community
has had to react at the very last moment. That is why
we appreciate that in recent years the linkages among
peace, security and development have been increasingly
recognized by the members of the Security Council.
There is a fruitful cooperation between the Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
Multidimensional mandates of peacekeeping
operations and political missions allow for greater
effectiveness. More often, the mandates of United
Nations peace operations are constructed in a way
where more peacebuilding tasks — inter alia, support
for economic reconstruction, electoral processes and
institution-building — are assigned to peacekeepers.
That is why the security/development nexus should be
reflected in this year’s reviews of peace operations and
peacebuilding architecture.
There are still places in the world where we need
to prevent the cycle of recurring violence. We believe
that the Council can make greater use of its working
methods in this regard, in particular through more
frequent Arria-formula meetings with representatives
of civil society. Security is not only the lack of conflict
but also the lack of threats that natural disasters and
climate change pose to human safety and well-being. As
we are all aware, climate change is a threat multiplier.

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Possible sea-level rise and the loss of territory resulting
from climate change may seriously affect the future
of many vulnerable States. There are countries that
might disappear and entire nations might need to seek
refuge far away from home. It is our global challenge of
adaptation to climate change, a global challenge of risk
management and a global challenge of sustainable use
of non-renewable resources.
We are satisfied that the Climate Change
Conference in Warsaw in 2013 adopted very important
decisions in this regard — the Warsaw International
Mechanism on Loss and Damage, which provides
assistance to vulnerable populations, and the Warsaw
Framework for REDD-plus to compensate and track
developing countries’ efforts to reduce emissions from
deforestation and forest degradation.
Let us not forget about the third element of the
triad, that is, human rights. Respect for fundamental
freedoms, including freedom of expression, media and
association and the inclusion of women in all parts of
political and social life as well as the rule of law and
good governance are critical for reducing the likelihood
of violent conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union. I should like to add a few remarks in my national
capacity on some specific questions.
We fully share the logic and purpose of the Chilean
presidency’s initiative to convene an open debate of
the Security Council on inclusive development and
its centrality in maintaining international peace and
security. As highlighted in the concept note (S/2015/6,
annex), only a holistic approach towards issues of
peace, the safeguarding of human rights and economic
development, can make the vision of the founders of the
Organization — a world without war — a reality.
It is highly significant that this debate is taking
place on the eve of the launch of the intergovernmental
process to determine the post-2015 agenda on
sustainable development. Our moral imperative is to
promote inclusive societies, which in itself is a strategic
investment in terms of enhanced security, greater
economic development and stronger institutions. In this
spirit, inclusive development has become a constant
in Italy’s actions, in its cooperative programmes
since its launch of pioneering initiatives such as the

S/PV.7361

PRODERE Programme in Central America in the
1990s — a multi-disciplinary development programme
for refugees, displaced persons and returnees in six
Central American countries, assisting 700,000 people.
In light of our development cooperation experience,
and in full alignment with the action taken to date to
prepare the post-2015 development agenda, we are
particularly pleased to find the concept of inclusion
across the board in all of the objectives highlighted in
the outcome document of the Open Working Group on
Sustainable Development Goals (see A/68/970).
Minorities today are among the most vulnerable
against the many crises at hand, often based on
religious, ethnic and social factors. Precisely,
individuals belonging to minority groups are among
the main victims of violence. Their civil and political
vulnerabilities are worsened in many situations by
economic and social disparities, which are a particular
impediment to ensuring the enjoyment of the economic,
social and cultural rights of every citizen. An answer
to this double challenge could be the inclusion of
minorities in decision-making processes.
Italy has long supported the early warning
mechanisms of the United Nations aimed at offering a
timely detection of risks of mass atrocities. Italy has
supported the updating of the “Framework of Analysis
for Atrocity Crimes” drafted by the Office of the
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama
Dieng, and of the Special Adviser on the Responsibility
to Protect, Jennifer Welsh, launched in December 2014
here in New York.
A field in which Italy is very active is that of
professional training of officials from law enforcement
bodies of countries in transition. Among these are
training courses for Afghan government officers and
attachés, ongoing since 2010, offering theory and
practical applications of international humanitarian
and human rights law, with a particular focus on the
more vulnerable groups. The programmes of the Centre
of Excellence for Stability Police Units (CoESPU),
launched in 2005 in Vicenza and directed by the Italian
Carabinieri for instructors of specialized police units,
maintain in all of their modules the protection and
promotion of human rights, including in reference to
minorities. CoESPU courses are attended by officials
coming mainly from African and Asian countries, who
make up approximately 70 per cent of the participants.
What is more is that any discussion on inclusive
development must necessarily, in our opinion, focus on

15-0158447/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

gender issues. Since the inception of resolution 1325
(2000), Italy supported its adoption and implementation.
It is among the countries that adopted a national action
plan to implement the resolution and has taken a
number of actions to combat violence against women.
Moreover, Italy was the first Member State to stress the
introduction of women and peace and security issues
in the framework of the Universal Periodic Review. In
the same spirit, we have developed specific projects in
relation to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
in Afghanistan, Lebanon, Somalia and the Palestinian
autonomous territories.
It is ultimately essential that we closely follow
the connection between crime prevention, criminal
justice and the rule of law for the sake of inclusive
development. This is a field in which we believe we
must endeavour to find a balance, even at times when
security needs and efficacity in responding to crime
can be at odds with the principles of the rule of law and
the separation of powers. This belief is expressed, first
and foremost, in the General Assembly resolution on
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime (resolution 55/25), of which Italy was
a sponsor and facilitator. The resolution clearly recalls
the values tied to the rule of law, understood as respect
for international and national legality, and those tied
to respect for human dignity, particularly of the more
vulnerable components of society — minors, women,
migrants.
To that end, in view of the thirteenth United Nations
Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, to
be held in Doha in April, five countries, including Italy,
have called for a debate on 24 February to be chaired
by the President of the General Assembly and centred
specifically on the interlinkages between criminal
justice, the rule of law and development. Another highlevel side event on issues linking human rights and the
rule of law to criminal justice against transnational
crime will be organized by Italy and Thailand for the
opening days of the Congress.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank Chile
for convening this debate. We see how acute economic
problems and social injustice fuel discontent, terrorism,
extremism and radicalism in many parts of the world.
Therefore, economic and social progress, with inclusive
development, are the most effective ways to diminish
risks and enable long-term stability.
48/86

19/01/2015

It is critical to examine how societies are governed
based on the rule of law, how resources are distributed
and how new risks and vulnerabilities are responded
to. Hence, in the preventive, conflict and post-conflict
phases in Africa, we should ensure that inclusive
economic, political, legislative and judicial institutions
are strengthened, made effective and accountable
and respond to the needs of all, including the poorest
and most vulnerable, especially women and youth.
Therefore, United Nations peacekeeping operations in
Africa should take on increasingly complex and hybrid
operations, as well as specific and comprehensive social
reconstruction tasks designed to create legitimate,
inclusive and effective States.
The work of the Peacebuilding Commission and
its Support Office will have to be better equipped,
in close cooperation with the European Union, the
African Union and subregional structures, to build
inclusive governance systems that withstand shocks
and vulnerability, with a strong role for women in peace
and development.
In the context of the post-2015 agenda, Kazakhstan
is committed to inclusive, people-centred development
as the bedrock for peace and security, through
our Kazakhstan 2050 Strategy and the recently
launched Nurly Zhol programme. Both are political
and macroeconomic stabilization plans aimed at
establishing, at the same time, social protection, quality
health care, education, housing and employment.
Kazakhstan has enacted progressive legislation to
recognize its 130 ethnic groups and almost 20 religious
denominations on its territory.
My country is committed to inclusive development
at the global level as well. To ensure harmony among all
ethnicities on its territory and in the region, my country
has taken the lead in regularly convening the Congress
of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions. Astana
is going to host the fifth Congress in June this year on
the theme “Dialogue of religious and political leaders
for peace and development”. My Government thanks
the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations for its
continued support to the Congress.
The Astana Economic Forum that Kazakhstan
has been hosting, together with the World Anti-Crisis
Conference, has provided new road maps for economic
stability. Notable among them is the concept of the
World Anti-Crisis Plan, which the United Nations can
consider and elaborate on.

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

As the chair of a number of regional organizations — the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-building Measures in Asia — Kazakhstan
has been trying its utmost to ensure security and keep
the region safe from conflicts, transnational crime and
terrorism. Our country is now proposing to host the
United Nations regional hub in Almaty, with a focus
on sustainable development, humanitarian assistance
and building resilience. We believe that a strong and
stable Central Asian region contributes to global peace.
Valuing the importance of inclusive development,
Kazakhstan’s campaign for a non-permanent seat on
the Security Council is focused on human security
through reaching nuclear security and food, water and
energy security.
My country will remain fully supportive of the
activities of the Security Council and the international
community in seeking solutions for global peace and
security in the context of inclusive development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I want to thank the Chilean delegation for its
commitment to development issues and for preparing
the concept note (S/2015/6, annex) that is guiding our
debate.
As this is the first time that my delegation addresses
the Security Council this year, I want to congratulate
and wish every success to the new non-permanent
Council members: Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Spain and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
As we have heard in the Security Council on
several occasions, security and development are closely
interlinked and mutually reinforcing and key to attaining
sustainable peace. The Council has also recognized
that that relationship is complex, multifaceted and
case-specific. That is why the Council, in the framework
of its competencies and in addressing the issues on its
agenda, has a very distinct role in promoting decisions
that significantly contribute to sustainable and inclusive
development in those countries that are immersed in a
conflict or emerging from conflict it.
It is clear that, in and of themselves, purely military
or security strategies are not enough to address the
current conflict situations. The Security Council must

S/PV.7361

consider how to encourage the establishment and
development of conditions propitious to sustainable
peace, in which economic and social welfare are key
elements to which it can contribute. The Council has
taken steps in that direction and has incorporated
some relevant reconstruction tasks in some of the
peacekeeping operation mandates. However, these
practices are still emerging, and there are still sectors
in which we must deepen and strengthen our efforts.
As the Secretary-General said, what is needed is more
robust support and strengthening the work being
undertaken with the Peacebuilding Commission, the
other agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations system, international financial institutions and
regional and subregional organizations.
Furthermore, and as was mentioned several times
in the course of this debate, a central element is the
participation and empowerment of women in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. Women should be
part of the discussions and play a principal role in
the implementation of strategies for the prevention
and resolution of conflicts, inasmuch as the gender
dimension is a sine qua non for establishing successful
strategies for peace.
I believe it is timely to recall the words of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, who in an
open debate of the Security Council of 2011 said
“It is clear that the Council is not the body to make
decisions regarding development. Nevertheless, we
must not ignore that its decisions have an impact
on the long-term development of countries and that
this is a fundamental component of any sustainable
peace.”
The Minister went on to say that
“it is imperative that the activities of its main organs
effect real change, make a meaningful contribution
to the well-being of populations and have a genuine
impact on the situations that have been on their
agendas for decades.” (S/PV.6479, p. 10)
That is why Colombia considers it necessary to
continue working with greater collaboration among
the various components of the United Nations system
on those issues related to development and security.
The aim here is not to turn the Security Council
into a development agency. Rather, what it can do
is collaborate and draw on specialized experience
and knowledge, and develop synergies with other
components of the system tasked with addressing

15-0158449/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

development. A clear and appropriate division of work
is indispensable to achieve the best results and use
resources efficiently. The Council could make full use
of its working methods to benefit from the value added
offered by United Nations agencies and work with them
to achieve lasting solutions to these conflicts.
In conclusion, allow me to highlight two key
concepts in the relations between development and
security and the role of the Security Council.
National ownership is a fundamental principle that
should be continued, strengthened and supported by the
Security Council, recognizing that the State concerned
is the main stakeholder and under whose leadership
the priorities, programmes and integrated strategies to
resolve conflicts and promote development should be
established.
Secondly, creating and strengthening national
capacities and institutions is a priority issue.
Encouraging inclusive development in conflict-affected
countries requires knowledge, capacity and national
institutional structures that make it possible to achieve
the legitimate aspirations of the population.
The Security Council possesses considerable
potential for development in the framework of its
mandate and to contribute to that goal.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Mr. Hetesey (Hungary): I wish to thank Chile for
convening this timely open debate. I also wish to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ambassador Patriota
of Brazil and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Ms. Leymah
Gbowee for their informative briefings this morning.
Hungary, as co-Chair of the Open Working
Group on Sustainable Development Goals, worked
with Member States to ensure that draft goal 16 of
the outcome document explicitly recongizes the link
among peace, inclusion, sustainable development,
justice and accountability. Based on those joint efforts,
Member States agreed by consensus that the rule of
law, equal access to justice, effective, accountable
and transparent institutions, as well as responsive,
inclusive and representative decision-making at all
levels are equally necessary for establishing peaceful
and inclusive societies.
Hungary fully supports the statement of the
European Union. Building on that, allow me to add
some remarks on some special challenges.
50/86

19/01/2015

Hungary recognizes the power, unique skills and
role of women in peace and development. Empowering
women by investing in their education, providing
them with economic opportunities, strengthening
their leadership capacities and engaging them in
decision-making are in each society’s best interest.
That is especially relevant in places where peace had
broken down and conflict has shifted focus away
from cooperation towards division and hatred. We
also commend the Secretary-General for choosing the
empowerment of women and children as one of his
priorities for 2015.
Gender equality is an important public issue in
Hungary and is reflected in policy decisions. We also
support draft sustainable development goal 5, on gender
equality. In the framework of gender equality, aspects
related to the family as a whole and to its members need
to be duly considered. We strongly support development
efforts that are aimed at strengthening and protecting
the vulnerable by creating policies in particular in the
areas of work, social security, social protection, dignity
and integrity, education and public security. The 20year review of the implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action provides another
opportunity to highlight these issues.
In our corner of the world, and in Hungary in
particular, one of the most serious impediments to
inclusive development is the situation of vulnerable
groups living in poverty, including the Roma
population. In order to overcome that challenge, the
Hungarian National Social Inclusion Strategy sets
forth a comprehensive approach with projects in the
areas of child welfare, education, employment, health
care, housing and the fight against discrimination. As
part of those efforts, Hungary supports the education
of Roma children through a scholarship programme,
promotes entrepreneurship and job opportunities
for Roma women through microcredit projects and
skills development and supports the access of Roma
families to improved housing. We have also established
mechanisms to ensure the effective participation of
minorities, including the Roma, at various levels of
political decision-making, from the local government
level to Parliament.
Hungary strongly condemns all forms of
discrimination and exclusion based on race,
ethnicity, religion or any other status. For example,
the Hungarian Government has announced a zerotolerance policy against anti-Semitism. Across the

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

world, crimes committed against religious and ethnic
minorities or other vulnerable groups demonstrate
where radicalization and hatred can lead us. It also
helps us realize that the only way to achieve and
preserve peace within and among societies is through
dialogue, tolerance and respect for cultural diversity.
In that context, we actively promote interreligious
and intercultural dialogue and cooperation. We will
continue to make every effort to build bridges among
various faiths, cultures and traditions.
Lastly, Hungary is of the view that education is one
of the most powerful weapons against discrimination
and inequality. We believe that the realization of the
right to education is the cornerstone of lasting peace,
since ignorance, misunderstanding, the erosion of
culture and the loss of cultural identities are often the
starting points for fanaticism.
Education has an important role both in preventing
conflicts and in post-conflict peacebuilding. For that
reason, Hungary welcomes a strong, stand-alone
sustainable development goal on inclusive education,
which includes a target on the promotion of a culture
of peace, nonviolence and appreciation for cultural
diversity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): First of all, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
on this important topic. By the same token, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General, Ambassador Patriota
and Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Leymah Gbowee for
the statements they made today. Let me also welcome
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2015/3
earlier today.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on
behalf of Estonia and Latvia. Our two countries align
themselves with the statement delivered earlier by the
observer of the European Union.
We welcome the topic of today’s debate, which very
accurately links together the three pillars of the United
Nations system: peace and security, development and
human rights. There can be no development without
peace and security, and clearly there can be no lasting
peace and security without respect for human rights.
Furthermore, development is not true development
without the realization of human rights.

S/PV.7361

It is true that there are fewer conflicts, less violence
and greater peace in democratic countries and regions
where the rule of law is a firm basis of society and all
people fully enjoy human rights. Also, average poverty
rates are significantly lower in those countries. It is also
true that violent conflict has been the largest obstacle
to achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
I would like to stress the importance of conflict
prevention. As today’s world illustrates, it is very
hard to end ongoing crises, which often even turn
into armed conflicts. However, it is easier and less
costly in every sense to prevent violent conflicts from
escalating. Good governance, respect for human rights
and economic development are the best prevention for
violent conflicts.
As outlined in the concept note (S/2015/6, annex) by
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, inclusion,
be it national, territorial, social, gender, tribal or
cultural — and thereby also inclusive development — are
the most relevant factors for preserving peace and
security and preventing conflicts. Inclusion means that
no-one should be discriminated against on any basis. As
stated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
“It is essential, if man is not to be compelled to
have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against
tyranny and oppression, that human rights should
be protected by the rule of law” (General Assembly
resolution 217 (III) A, preamble).
That leads me to the second point — the need
to actively shape inclusive societies as guarantees
for peace and security, namely through the rule of
law, if necessary, by designing particular policies
and programmes that advance the inclusiveness of
all. Strong adherence to the rule of law encourages
sustainable development, as progress is best guaranteed
by good governance, transparency in decision-making
processes and the minimization of corruption. Effective
and accountable institutions are powerful enablers of
inclusive and sustainable development.
The rule of law accords predictability and legitimacy
to the actions of States, forming a fundamental
framework for the conduct of relations between them,
which, on its own, helps to prevent conflicts among
States. The rule of law is also a tool to improve the
fundamental human right of access to justice, which
is inherently linked to the promotion of a culture of
accountability over impunity.

15-0158451/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

19/01/2015

In that context, peacebuilding efforts are extremely
important, as peacebuilding is about reducing the
risk of relapsing into violence. That risk needs to be
reduced by addressing the root causes of violence and
building resilient institutions and peaceful societies.
A broad approach to development focusing on justice,
human rights, inequalities, jobs and inclusive politics
will reduce violence and contribute to peacebuilding.
Therefore, the Security Council should address
peacebuilding as early as possible in conflicts or crises.

be addressed comprehensively. Therefore peaceful
societies, good governance and the rule of law should
have a central place in the post-2015 development
agenda.

As to the concept of inclusive societies, I would
like to stress, among other things, the importance
of involving both halves of humankind, namely by
including women and girls in the decision-making
processes. It is a fact that peace is more sustainable if
women are included at all stages and all times as equal
members of society, be it in time of peace or conflict or
a period of transition.

In 2015, we will celebrate the seventieth anniversary
of the establishment of the United Nations and the
anniversaries of the adoptions of the Beijing Platform
for Action and resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security, we will review the United Nations
peace operations, and we will of course shape the
post-2015 development agenda. Looking at all of those
different processes, it is important to understand the
synergies between them and the interdependence of the
three pillars of the United Nations: peace and security,
development and human rights.

This year we will mark the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
twentieth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action. Several reviews are under way,
including the global study of the resolution on women
and peace and security and reviews of the peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding architecture of the
United Nations. We must ensure that all those reviews
support and complement each other’s aims and that the
recommendations emerging from them are in line with
each other, leading us to tangible results in terms of
gender equality, women’s empowerment and human
rights in general.
Sustainable peace and development can only be
ensured if economic development and social benefits
are closely interlinked with good governance, strong
and accountable institutions and the realization of
human rights. Freedom of expression and association
and access to independent media, including social
media and the Internet, are integral parts of good
governance and the rule of law. There can be no real
inclusiveness in societies if restrictions are placed on
the realization of those freedoms.
Achieving inclusive and sustainable development
is essential in order to achieve long-term stability and
sustainable peace. We must take care of the future of
the planet and work towards a world in which everyone
can live a dignified life, free from poverty, violence
and exclusion. That cannot be achieved without peace
and stability. Development, human rights and peace
and security are inextricably intertwined and need to
52/86

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): Let me first of all thank
the Chilean presidency for organizing today’s debate
and for choosing such a timely topic for discussion.

Sustainable peace and security can be achieved only
if societies are inclusive, minorities are respected, the
rule of law is observed and poverty is effectively tackled.
Conflict, on the other hand, will undermine social and
economic development, social cohesion and respect and
therefore lead to more and deeper conflict and social
disruption. Inclusive and sustainable development
processes that pursue a human rights-based approach
and are guided by the rule of law are a precondition
for peace and stability. Development efforts must
focus on humans and should especially include the
most vulnerable and disadvantaged people and groups:
persons with disabilities, indigenous people, religious
or ethnic minorities and children. Human rights
principles, such as non-discrimination, the reduction
of inequality, participation and transparency can
contribute to strengthening sustainable development
processes and thus result in positive development
outcomes.
Let me provide an example. When we end
discrimination against women and include women in
development processes by protecting and fulfilling their
human rights, we are likely to achieve more effective
development outcomes. Gender equality is essential
for stable societies and sustainable development. Both
women and men alike need to shape the destiny of their
country. Against that backdrop, the empowerment of
women in all sectors is essential. The empowerment

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

of women in economic life, such as entrepreneurship
and professional education, will therefore be one of
the areas of focus during Germany’s presidency of the
Group of Seven in 2015.
Sustainable peace and security also require effective
conflict prevention and peacebuilding. Peacebuilding
efforts are aimed at preventing societies from relapsing
into conflict. The Security Council should be engaged
in peacebuilding as early as possible and should make
better use of the advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We expect the Peacebuilding Commission
to help identify peacebuilding contexts in which a
concrete need for international assistance arises. In
that regard, closer coordination between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission is needed.
We should use the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, as well as the review of peace
operations, to further develop and strengthen the United
Nations prevention and peacebuilding instruments. We
need to look at conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping in a holistic manner. This means also
including all stakeholders, especially women. We need
to integrate the goals of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, into all peacebuilding
efforts. The existing normative framework already
provides a sound basis for such links. On the fifteenth
anniversary of that landmark resolution, we need to
focus on its global implementation across the board
and identify gaps and challenges in order to ensure that
its provisions are included in all prevention measures,
peace processes and conflict-resolution efforts.
We applaud the Secretary-General for launching
his “Human Rights Up Front” campaign last year.
Increased human rights violations are often a first
indication of imminent conflict. The United Nations
system, including the Security Council, must act more
proactively in order to prevent future conflict. We
are looking forward to seeing more concrete results
of the Human Rights Up Front campaign and remain
committed to its goals.
The most effective tools for ensuring peace and
stability and preventing conflicts are always respect
for human rights, the rule of law in inclusive societies,
and economic and social development. In its capacity
as Chair of the Human Rights Council and beyond,
Germany will continue to support these essential
elements in the post-2015 development agenda. Only if
we achieve this will we create peaceful societies and

S/PV.7361

come a step closer to sustainable peace and security in
our world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Panama.
Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
We wish to begin by congratulating the non-permanent
members of the Security Council and wishing them
every success in their deliberations.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Austria as Chair of the Human
Security Network.
We also welcome the briefings given this morning
by Her Excellency Michelle Bachelet, President of the
Republic of Chile; the Secretary-General; the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission; and Nobel Laureate
Ms. Leymah Gbowee, all of whom have been inspiring
today’s debate on this important issue on the agenda of
the Security Council.
As a consequence of the interdependence of
today’s world, we are continually affected by global
threats that know no political borders. Conflicts of
ethnic and religious origin, international terrorism,
extremism, environmental problems, resource scarcity
and competition for such resources, organized crime,
mafias, pandemics and global militarization pose a
challenge to human security, which is a necessary
precondition for the social, political and economic
development of countries.
Through the Human Development Reports, we have
learned that people require economic, food, health,
environmental, personal, community and political
security if they are to achieve their potential, exercise
their freedoms, take advantage of opportunities and thus
contribute to the development of their communities.
Exclusion in all its forms, be it social, religious,
ethnic or territorial, is by definition a violation of
human rights and therefore lies at the root of conflicts
throughout the world. The problem is not conflict
per se; the problem is that when it becomes violent,
it results in the loss of human lives and in insecurity.
Peace and security are fundamental to dignity and
human development; however, insecurity and conflict
always pose a threat to the sustainable development of
peoples and cultures. Therefore inclusive development
is a key factor in preventing violence and in the process
of building and consolidating peace.

15-0158453/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

Today we are seeing the start of the intergovernmental
process on the post-2015 development agenda. We
cannot speak of inclusive development — our main
challenge in this new phase — without the assistance of
agents of chance: persons and all citizens.
As the Secretary-General rightly stated in paragraph
28 of his report contained in document S/2014/694,
“Where peacebuilding efforts are rooted
in inclusive societal consultation and efforts to
minimize exclusionary practices, they generate
trust and legitimacy in the State and its institutions.”
In the world we live in, which is subject to constant
threats, we deem vital States’ way of addressing and
promoting the prevention of such threats through
inclusion, social cohesion and dialogue, as we seek
to build resilient societies, one of the pillars of
responsibility to protect. A cohesive and integrated
society is better equipped to prevent conflicts and
violence.
In this context, we believe that in this year that is is
so critical in terms of the development agenda, we must
have exactly this kind of inter-organ debate at the United
Nations, without, of course, creating a precedent that
could undermine the mandate of any organ, but, rather,
laying the groundwork for a free-flowing exchange of
ideas and best practices, so that each body can enhance
its mandate. It is important to realize that not only
are these issues interrelated, but also that in the past
some may have eclipsed others. For example, how do
we explain to our children that today we are spending
more on weapons than on development and that we are
investing more in wars than in social inclusion projects?
We are challenged as Member States by the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations to think
outside the box and to think creatively, so as to devise
innovative ways of addressing this issue. In that
connection, as we are also celebrating the twentieth
anniversary of the World Conference on Women, we
invite the Security Council to ensure greater leadership
and participation by women and gender-related training
in peacekeeping missions.
Panama will soon host a historic Summit of the
Americas entitled “Prosperity with equity,” where one
of the main issues will be that of security. We hope
to contribute through a transformative push towards
regional commitment, with a view to achieving a more
inclusive development in this region of peace.

54/86

19/01/2015

Finally, the Republic of Panama welcomes the
adoption of the presidential statement submitted by
Chile (S/PRST/2015/3), which focuses on the existing
interlinkage between inclusive development and the
maintenance of international peace and security, which
are fundamental pillars of this Organization.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity
to take the floor.
(spoke in English)
Canada recognizes the importance of inclusiveness
in conflict prevention and post-conflict peacebuilding.
Of importance to Canada’s international efforts in this
regard is the promotion of religious freedom and the
participation of women.
Canada considers it of the utmost importance
that all individuals are able to practice their faith in
safety and security. We know that societies that protect
religious freedom are more likely to protect all other
fundamental freedoms and are typically more stable
and prosperous societies. Canada itself is a country of
many ethnicities and religions, sharing one common
humanity, one of tolerance, acceptance and peace.
Lasting peace and stability requires the full
participation of all of its citizens, especially with
religious groups. As demonstrated visibly by conflicts
across parts of the Middle East and Africa, there can
be no peace or security in regions where there is no
religious pluralism or dialogue, trust and stability
between the religious communities themselves.
(spoke in French)
Canada firmly believes that the full participation
of women and girls in all aspects of the social, political
and economic lives of their communities and countries
is a prerequisite to the attainment of sustainable peace,
prosperity and development. A community or country
cannot develop if half of its population is not allowed to
fully contribute.
That is why Canada calls for the elimination of the
legal and social barriers to the empowerment of women
and girls. Child, early and forced marriage, a permissive
attitude towards violence against women and girls, and
discrimination against women and girls, including with

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7361

respect to access to education, health services, justice
and economic resources, are simply unacceptable.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.

The role of women and girls is particularly
important in times of crisis. In crisis situations, women
and girls are usually agents of stability and resilience
for their families and communities and important voices
for moderation and peace. Yet, as we see all too often,
and most recently in the areas affected by the terrorist
group known as the Islamic State, in crises women and
girls are often subjected to terrible abuse, specifically
rape as a weapon war.

Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): Mr. President, allow me to
use this occasion to congratulate you on your excellent
work and to wish you success in your future endeavours.
Let me also congratulate you and your country on
a successful presidency of this eminent body. We
appreciate the initiative taken to organize this debate
on inclusive development for peace and development,
and for the comprehensive and inclusive presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/3, which is in line with a
principle Slovakia very strongly and firmly adheres
to. I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Permanent Representative of Brazil, Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Patriota; and Nobel Peace Prize
Laureate Ms. Leymah Gbowee for their briefings.

(spoke in English)
Inclusive development is especially relevant to
peacebuilding efforts. As Chair of the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), Canada supports the Government of Sierra
Leone and will continue to work with it to ensure that
the necessary attention and resources are available to
support national peacebuilding efforts in the country.
The 2015 peacebuilding review will be an opportunity
to revisit how the PBC can and should change to
better advance peacebuilding priorities in conflictaffected countries. As such, it must be consistent with
and complementary to parallel United Nations policy
reviews, including the review of peace operations and
the post-2015 development agenda.
Inclusive development is a key consideration. It is
also a core principle of the New Deal for Engagement
in Fragile States. For example, the New Deal puts
a premium on supportive and inclusive political
settlements. Building from that starting point, we
support each of the targets associated with goal 16
proposed by the Open Working Group on Sustainable
Development Goals to promote peaceful and inclusive
societies, provide access to justice and build effective,
accountable and inclusive institutions. However, we
strongly believe that one of the missing elements in that
goal is the inclusion of a target for increasing female
participation in peace processes.
(spoke in French)
In sum, the practice of exclusion is too common,
to the detriment of security. Religious communities,
women and girls, local stakeholders, civil society,
Governments and the international community must
cooperate fully in striving to understand each other’s
perspectives in order to meaningfully effect inclusive
development, a concept that is critical to the promotion
of peace and security.

Slovakia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by Ambassador Thomas Mayr-Harting on behalf of the
European Union, but let me also make a few remarks in
my national capacity.
Slovakia firmly supports a complex discussion
leading to the establishment of strong links among
peace, security, development and human rights — the
main pillars on which the work of our Organization
rests. The comprehensive approach to international
security, which takes into account all dimensions of
our work, was recently highlighted by the SecretaryGeneral during his briefing on the priorities for 2015.
In many United Nations documents, we can read that
the consequences of violence on various dimensions of
sustainable development are significant and long-term,
and occur on both the macro and individual levels.
Violence causes death, debilitating injuries, disease,
distress and displacement, destroys jobs and physical
and social capital, damages the environment, prevents
educational attainment for generations and discourages
investment. The number of indirect victims of armed
conflicts is often much larger than the number of direct
deaths.
Sustainable peace and development therefore cannot
be achieved without considering the needs of everyone:
children, boys and girls, women, disabled victims of
violence, refugees and displaced persons. All relevant
stakeholders, including civil society, should participate
at all levels and contribute to the transformation
of societies from war to stability, development and
democratic governance. Just a few days ago, we held
the successful Barbershop Conference. I would like to

15-0158455/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

congratulate Iceland, Sweden and Suriname on their
splendid initiative. When we discussed full inclusivity
as a necessary prerequisite to reach sustainable peace,
we could not do so without addressing the inclusion
of women in all post-conflict processes. Often after
conflicts, they are left solely responsible for supporting
their family. They face disruptions in social systems,
food distribution, health care and educational services.
Often they must assume leadership in those areas.
Without their participation, the restoration of stability
is not possible.
The participation of women and full inclusivity are
core principles of security sector reform (SSR), which
forms an integral part of that peacebuilding effort
and which Slovakia proudly advocates. Moreover, it
is clearly stated among the United Nations principles
of SSR that the United Nations approach to security
sector reform must be gender-sensitive throughout
its planning, design, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation processes.
It goes without saying that there is a nexus
among peace, security and development. Sustainable
development is possible only in an environment of
peace and security, while peace and security can be
sustained only in an environment where people enjoy
development opportunities and have realistic hopes and
avenues to escape poverty. As part of the development
agenda, peace, the rule of law and governance are
about ensuring an inclusive approach and building
institutions that ensure violence reduction, safety,
participation, accountability, equitable social service
delivery and access to justice for all, especially for
the poor and most vulnerable. Peace, rule-of-law and
governance issues are all closely interlinked. In all of
the aforementioned processes, not a single member of
society must be excluded.
The evil of potential conflicts is hidden in
exclusion. On the other hand, inclusion improves the
prospects for sustainable peace. In order to highlight
the importance of inclusive development for the
maintenance of international peace and security, we
would like to encourage Member States to also bring
the issues discussed today to the attention of the highlevel meeting of the Group of Friends of Security Sector
Reform to be held on 12 February, organized jointly by
the co-chairs of the Group, Slovakia and South Africa.
In regard to secure implementation of peace
agreements, Slovakia fully supports the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission and Peacebuilding Fund,
56/86

19/01/2015

as well as the Secretary-General’s initiative to review
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. We are
pleased that this review shall be undertaken along with
the strategic review of United Nations peacekeeping.
We look forward to the findings of both panels, in
particular on how the linkages between both areas can
also be further strengthened in regard to the issues the
Council is discussing.
In conclusion, let me assure you, Mr. President,
that Slovakia will spare no efforts in contributing to
the implementation of the commitments contained in
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/3, adopted today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give now the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the outset,
I would like to convey my delegation’s appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate, with
a focus on the crucial linkages among peace, security
and development, and for Chile’s skilled leadership of
the Security Council this month and its presentation
of the concept paper before us (S/2015/6, annex). I
would also like to express my delegation’s thanks and
appreciation to the briefers.
General Assembly resolution 60/1, the 2005 World
Summit Outcome, highlights the important broadbased consensus that we live in a global, interdependent
world and that collective security depends on effective
cooperation against transnational threats, in accordance
with international law. We urgently need to build
consensus on major threats and challenges, and we are
committed to translating such consensus into concrete
action, including by addressing their root causes.
We have acknowledged time and again that
development, peace and security and human rights are
interlinked and mutually reinforcing. They form the
major pillars of the United Nations system. Each pillar
should be focused on its specific mandate, but at the
same time they must all act in harmony and conformity
in order to maximize the efficiency and effectiveness of
functions of the United Nations as a system.
We agree with the concept paper’s emphasis on
inclusiveness, but at the same time we believe that
such inclusiveness must be established and preserved
at both the national and international levels if we are
to overcome injustice and provide equal opportunities
for all countries and nations at the national level, as the
international community usually asks for.
15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

It is an established fact that countries with the
lowest human-development indicators experience most
of the world’s conflicts. Just as a lack of development
can feed the flames of conflict, economic and social
progress can help prevent it and secure peace. Sustained,
broad-based development can help address the roots of
conflict through such steps as ensuring that wealth is
shared equitably, providing better access to agricultural
land, strengthening governance and ensuring justice
for all. Countries and regions facing stark inequalities
and weak institutions are at an increased risk for
conflict; a lack of sufficient jobs and opportunities,
particularly for young people, can also increase the
risk of instability. Drug trafficking and international
organized crime have found fertile ground in places
that lack basic services and economic opportunities.
Development based on consensus and consultation
is perhaps the most effective route to diminishing risks
of conflict and enabling sustained peace and stability.
Development is a central goal in itself, and sustainable
development in its economic, social and environmental
aspects should be considered a key element in the
overarching framework of activity on the part of the
international community and the United Nations.
Without security there can be no development and
without development there can be no security.
It is a mistake to look at conflict, unrest and
tension in a fragmented way. If we fail to address them
comprehensively, connecting the political, security and
development challenges, we must be ready to face tragic
situations. Political commitment and determination are
essential to sustained economic growth, sustainable
development and the eradication of poverty and
hunger, frustration, hopelessness and helplessness,
the major causes of insecurity and instability around
the world. In order to promote international peace and
security, the international community should commit
to advancing human welfare, freedom and progress
everywhere and for all. That endeavour should be
supported by encouraging tolerance, respect, dialogue
and cooperation among different cultures, civilizations
and peoples.
Peace is another name for development. They
are interlinked and mutually reinforcing. Security is
a prerequisite for development, and development is
possible only in a peaceful and stable environment.
Development is a guarantee of security. Sustainable
peace is possible only by maintaining the momentum of
development. The Security Council, within its mandate,

S/PV.7361

must pay greater attention to the nexus between security
and development if it is to fulfil its primary mandate
of maintaining peace and security in a pragmatic and
efficient way.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): Ireland commends you on
your initiative in scheduling this debate, Mr. President,
and we welcome the adoption today of presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/3. We thank the SecretaryGeneral, Ambassador Patriota of Brazil and Nobel
laureate Ms. Leymah Gbowee for their insightful
briefings on the topic this morning. Ireland associates
itself with the statements made on behalf of the
European Union and by the representative of Austria
on behalf the Human Security Network.
In its Preamble, the Charter of the United Nations
defines the purpose of our Organization as saving
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. With
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners
responding to four severe, large-scale humanitarian
crises in Iraq, South Sudan, the Central African
Republic and Syria — all of them the result of conflict,
and with the highest number of refugees, asylumseekers and internally displaced persons on the planet
since the end of the Second World War — the most
charitable verdict is that our collective record in this
respect has been mixed. While each of the conflicts has
unique features, reflecting the diversity and complexity
of each country, there is one common feature. Each
has tensions at its core that are the result of sectarian,
ethnic, socioeconomic or ideological differences. Time
and again we see how conflict erupts where people
are excluded, marginalized and denied meaningful
participation in the political, economic and social life
of their countries. We need a better approach to counter
this.
With the adoption in August of resolution
2171 (2014), the Security Council recognized the
interconnectedness of the three pillars of the United
Nations system and the need to comprehensively
address the underlying causes of conflict. Peace and
security, development and human rights cannot be
siloed in the United Nations system when we know
how interdependent they are in reality. In taking this
forward, there are of course limitations on the level of
engagement that is possible for the Security Council
and the degree of welcome there would be on the part of
Member States. However, the Council does have a clear

15-0158457/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

responsibility to prevent situations from developing
into full-blown crises and must do more to enhance its
preventive capacities.
Let me touch on three key aspects that are
central to the theme of today’s debate. The first is
institution-building. When it comes to ensuring lasting
peace, the links between political settlements and the
possession of strong and trusted State institutions are
well understood. We know that 90 per cent of all civil
wars in the past 15 years have occurred in countries
that had also experienced a civil war in the previous
30 years. The crises in the Central African Republic
and South Sudan are painful reminders of the fragility
of peace and the need to promote effective transitions
from conflict and fragility to peaceful and resilient
States and societies.
Ensuring strong institutions requires national
ownership, leadership and political will. On the island
of Ireland, we have experienced this at first hand. In
1998, a comprehensive political framework for the
settlement of the Northern Ireland situation, the socalled Good Friday Agreement, was agreed on in a
negotiation process that involved not just the Irish and
British Governments but the political representatives
of all of Northern Ireland’s communities. It was a
watershed moment, in that it set out a road map for
new political institutions and structures based on an
approach of inclusion and trust. The example of South
Africa, where the political opening in 1994 created a
environment conducive to enabling a new national
identity to take shape, is also noteworthy.
The establishment of a new and comprehensive
post-2015 development framework is also of vital
importance. Including goals and targets on peace in the
framework presents an opportunity to enable peaceful
and inclusive societies to be built and to address the
dynamics of conflict, violence, exclusion and instability.
The second aspect I would like to mention is
inclusivity, and the critical role that women play in those
efforts is another crucial aspect to sustaining peace. As
Ireland’s former President Mary Robinson put it,
“Women’s participation in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts is critical to
building sustainable peace because no society
can develop — economically, politically or
socially — when half of its population is
marginalized.”

58/86

19/01/2015

Women are often powerful and capable actors in
their communities, and the knowledge, information
and insight provided by women’s groups can be
valuable in detecting and understanding tensions.
We welcome the increasing attention to supporting
women’s participation and leadership in peace-related,
political, development and economic decision-making
at the international level, but we must do more to
create opportunities, particularly for women and other
marginalized groups, at regional, national and local
levels. In order to set out a transformative agenda on
women, peace and security for the years ahead, we must
fully grasp the opportunities that the high-level review
and global study of resolution 1325 (2000) present. On
Wednesday, Ireland launched its second national action
plan on the resolution, aimed at strengthening women’s
leadership and participation in decision-making in
conflict and post-conflict situations and ensuring that
a gender perspective is incorporated into all aspects
of Ireland’s foreign-policy engagement, through a
whole-of-Government approach.
The third aspect I want to highlight today is the
correlation between severe human-rights violations
and threats to international peace and security. The
Secretary-General’s Rights Up Front action plan
portrays with great clarity what is at stake in situations
of massive violations of human rights. With its key
mechanisms of the regional quarterly review and a
Senior Action Group now established, we encourage
the United Nations system to build on those efforts to
ensure swift and timely responses to early-warning
signs of conflict.
As has already been said many times today, 2015 is
a crucial year for the United Nations system. In shaping
a more effective and impactful United Nations, we
must seize the opportunities presented by the post-2015
development framework, the reviews of United Nations
peace operations and peacebuilding architecture, and
the high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000).
Ireland joins many others here today in calling
for positive synergies with these initiatives and looks
forward to actively contributing to them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): Allow me to start by
thanking Chile for its initiative to convene this meeting
at a time when the United Nations will undertake
several important review processes and as we negotiate

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

the post-2015 development agenda. I also express
my great appreciation to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Antonio Patriota; and Nobel Peace Prize
Laureate Ms. Leymah Gbowee for their comprehensive
statements.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. We would like
to recall the requirements for sustainable peace and the
notion that the best way to prevent conflicts remains
supporting democratic governance, respect for human
rights and economic development. I also wish to say that
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Austria on behalf of the members
of the Human Security Network. I would like to make
some additional remarks in my national capacity.
The interconnectedness of peace, good governance,
the rule of law and sustainable development is not a
new subject. Addressing all of these issues may not fall
fully under the responsibility of Security Council, but
the results of failing to address them can be seen across
the agenda of the Council. We believe that a strong
focus must be placed on addressing the socioeconomic
inequalities that are major drivers of conflicts and
organized crime, generally rising from and nourishing
political exclusion, human rights violations, injustice
and a culture of violence. These are all universal
challenges that require joint action.
In order to effectively address key drivers of
conflict, we also need strong institutions, especially
in fragile States, and enhanced mutual trust through
cooperation and dialogue. These are fundamental for
realizing freedom from fear and violence, freedom from
want and the freedom to live in dignity. Another key
component of maintaining durable peace and achieving
sustainable development is the rule of law. Justice and
reconciliation must be among the main focuses and
realizing these things by all means necessary, including
through international courts and tribunals, should be a
common endeavour for all countries.
When discussing the interlinkages between
development and peace and security, the third pillar
of United Nations should not be left behind. Human
rights violations hinder efforts to achieve peace and
security and the subsequent development of the affected
community, country or region. The international
community has seen many times that a human rights
situation can provide credible early-warning signs
of underlying conflicts. Respect for human rights

S/PV.7361

is therefore important not only for the prevention
of conflicts, but also for durable peace and inclusive
sustainable development.
I wish to point out the importance of gender
equality and the empowerment of women for both
inclusive development and durable peace and security.
The equal participation of women in all spheres of life
represents an advantage that will improve the lives of
all, in all areas.
Recovery and development in post-conflict areas
are directly related to the issue of landmines and
explosive remnants of war, which hinder post-conflict
rehabilitation and reconstruction. This human security
approach improves the daily lives of people, their wellbeing, personal security and environment. Addressing
these issues also contributes to arms reduction. The
Slovenia-based ITF Enhancing Human Security has
broad and longstanding experience in managing
projects clearing landmines and explosive remnants
of war, assisting mine victims and providing capacitybuilding.
Resolving conflicts and addressing their root
causes and their possible spillover effects into other
geographical areas will remain among the main
challenges to international peace and security over
the coming year. Conflict prevention is at the core
of Slovenia’s foreign policy priorities and we pay
particular attention to the use of mediation as part of a
larger toolbox for preventing and resolving conflicts and
achieving sustainable peace. In this context, we believe
that no effort should be spared to strengthen conflict
prevention and the peaceful resolution of disputes,
including by enhancing United Nations mediation
efforts and further promoting the use of mediation
and capacity-building at the national, regional and
international levels.
In conclusion, the United Nations must remain the
ultimate comprehensive framework for addressing the
security-development nexus, and must turn challenges
into opportunities. The more inclusive that process
becomes, the more balanced and achievable will be the
goals that we can realize.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister of State in Charge of Cooperation
of Rwanda.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for having convened this important open debate
and for the concise concept note shared with us to guide

15-0158459/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

19/01/2015

our discussions (S/2015/6, annex). The presence of Her
Excellency Ms. Michelle Bachelet, President of Chile,
is testament to the importance that Chile attaches to
this topic.

bear witness to the importance of inclusiveness in
harmonizing the competing interests and priorities of
various segments of society, particularly in countries
emerging from conflict.

Since this is the first that Rwanda has taken the floor
in the Council this month, I wish to congratulate you, Sir,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. We also express our congratulations to Chad for
its excellent presidency during the month of December
2014. I also wish to join previous speakers in thanking
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ambassador Antonio
Patriota, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
Nobel Peace Prize laureate Leymah Gbowee for their
respective briefings.

Due to our inclusive political process after the 1994
genocide, Rwanda has experienced steady economic
growth and a sharp reduction in poverty and inequality,
mainly due to various Government results-oriented
interventions, including the performance-based
financing of health services, performance contracts
between local authorities and the central Government,
the introduction of universal health insurance, an
increased share of Government expenditures in the
health sector, the introduction of 12 years of basic
education, an intensive family planning campaign and
the promotion of gender quality.

Mr. Barros Melet took the Chair.
As outlined in the concept paper, development
and peace are inseparably connected. Rwanda’s recent
history has shown that those two notions have common
prerequisites to occur and to be viable. The principles
of equity, efficiency, transparency, civic engagement,
security, inclusiveness and good governance all
contribute to the creation of resilient and stable
communities. They also promote accountable and
transparent processes and institutions that are vital for
sustainable peace and development.
Regarding inclusive development, the subject of
today’s discussion, Rwanda faced myriad challenges in
the wake of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi. These
included the obligation to deal with the immediate
aftermath of a devastating genocide, in which one
Rwandan out of every seven had been killed in just 100
days. There was a need to establish a climate of peace
and security for all, to build governance structures
and to promote economic and social developmen. This
process started in an extremely difficult environment
and required all Rwandans to make considerable
sacrifices to achieve successful and inclusive postconflict recovery.
From that experience, we have learned how
inclusive decision-making has not only strengthened
our governance structures, but also been essential in
furthering reconciliation and promoting opportunities
for positive change towards peace. In addition, the
inclusion of all previously marginalized groups, such
as women and young people, has been a cornerstone
in our strategy to build consensus and reconciliation,
which led Rwandans to a common and shared vision
of a prosperous and peaceful country. We therefore

60/86

However, achieving gender inclusion and the
participatory involvement of all segments of society
is not simple, especially where social and ethnic
divisions are deep-rooted. For us in Rwanda, this has
required focused and strong leadership with a clear
understanding of our history and a vision of where we
wanted to be. It was simply not an easy task; it was
not an easy process. We believe that Governments have
a unique role to play in ensuring inclusiveness and
remain critical actors in promoting collaboration with
various stakeholders in efforts to resolve contentious
issues in a constructive manner.
In a conflict situation, we believe that the peace
process and peace agreements can offer an opportunity
to transform political settlements, including the
early consideration and participation of previously
marginalized groups. That is why all stakeholders in
the peace process, including the Security Council and
the Secretary-General through his good offices, should
ensure that those processes are inclusive and that
they incorporate broad sectors of society at varying
levels of negotiation. That will allow for the greater
likelihood of long-term peace and stability, which is
the foundation of sustainable development. The lack
of such competence would expose the whole process to
greater risk of relapsing into conflict, as was the case
in Iraq and Libya.
In countries emerging from conflict, the role of
the international community is critical in ensuring
inclusivity. National Governments often require
substantive support in strengthening their technical
and institutional capacities to address the challenge
of security and protection as well as to practice
15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7361

participative and accountable governance in support of
conflict prevention. In that regard, the Peacebuilding
Commission is well placed to offer such support. We
hope that the upcoming review of the peacebuilding
architecture will identify and disseminate best practices
and models for inclusive development. Rwanda, of
course, stands ready to work with other Member States
in sharing its experience.

to prevent a relapse into conflict. But do we have the
time, will and resources to address today’s challenges
while sustaining our interest in post-conflict countries?
Does the current peacebuilding architecture provide
a realistic and feasible response to conflict and postconflict situations? Are exit strategies well tuned
to prevent the recurrence of conflict? Those are all
questions the review processes should address.

Allow me to quote our President Paul Kagame,
speaking at the sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly in 25 September 2012:

One tool involves fostering coordination between
different conflict-response tools. There is a need to
build increased synergies among the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Office, the
Peacebuilding Fund, the Security Council, the general
United Nations membership, regional and subregional
organizations and international agencies. We should
build strong partnerships with civil society and the
private sector. That way, the United Nations system can
better respond to security and development challenges
in a cost-effective and sustainable manner.

“When we see leaders work with the people in an
inclusive manner; when development can proceed
unhindered by conflict; when regional groupings
take greater responsibility in tackling their own
issues; and when international cooperation takes
place in a spirit of true partnership, I believe
that the results will speak for themselves”
(A/67/PV.7, p. 2).
With that said, Rwanda stands ready to work with other
Member States in sharing its very humble experience.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): Today, while the number
and intensity of violent conflicts and asymmetrical
threats around the globe is on the rise, budgetary and
administrative constraints, coupled with increased
divisions within the Council and the United Nations,
impede the effectiveness of our response capabilities.
Civilians are losing their lives on a daily basis
in conflicts. Peacekeepers are operating in grave
danger, as exemplified by the latest attack on United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali on Saturday. These are combined
with the challenges of globalization, epidemics,
terrorism, cybercrime and beyond. Rising xenophobia,
discrimination, attacks on migrants, and intolerance
risk threatening the very nature of peaceful societies.
In those grave circumstances, a soul-searching
on our approach to international peace and security is
critical. In that respect, the various review processes
this year on peace operations, peacebuilding and
gender are very timely. We know that lasting peace
and stability require addressing the root causes of
problems. We know that our response should be
comprehensive and multidimensional to address the
interconnected nature of current global threats and

Capacity-building, which lies at the heart of
establishing peace, does not mean merely building
institutions and enacting laws; it also means fostering
a culture of democracy and development, in the spirit
of national ownership, as the path to viable peace.
Encouraging policies that lead to increased participation,
inclusiveness and the economic empowerment of all
segments of society — including women, children,
young people, older persons, minority groups and
migrants — in peace and development processes is key.
We have a shared responsibility to embark on a path
to inclusive and shared prosperity in a peaceful and
resilient world where human rights and the rule of law
are upheld and no one is left behind.
Inclusivity breeds resilient societies. Sustainable
peace requires national dynamics that foster resilience.
I would like to touch upon the importance of promoting
tolerance and respect, while combating discrimination
against various religious and ethnic groups, minorities
and migrants in societies. Fostering the feeling that
all segments of society are included in all political
processes and economic development, enjoy their rights
and are respected is a crucial step towards combating
radicalization.
The priorities stated in the synthesis report of
the Secretary-General entitled “The road to dignity
by 2030: ending poverty, transforming all lives and
protecting the planet” (A/69/700) — dignity, people,
justice, partnership and prosperity — should guide our

15-0158461/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

peace and development work ahead. There is need for
a serious international debate about these matters to
narrow the gaps between diverging views on issues such
as stigmatization, stereotyping, intolerance, racism,
discrimination and the freedoms of expression, religion
and belief. The Alliance of Civilizations, launched
by Turkey and Spain, provides a vital framework to
overcome the artificial divides and build bridges across
cultures and religions.
A final issue is the importance of mediation.
Mediation is not only a tool to bring warring parties
to the table and sign peace agreements. Mediation
has to do with fostering a culture of compromise,
understanding and inclusivity. Building the mediation
capacities of conflict countries is a cost-effective way
to help them solve their issues through comprehensive
and inclusive dialogue.
The Group of Friends of Mediation, co-chaired
by Finland and Turkey, strives to increase the role of
mediation in the United Nations system, including
promoting the proper funding of mediation activities
and supporting national mediation capacities. Increased
interaction with regional and subregional organizations
in the area of mediation is another tool to foster
inclusivity at all stages of the conflict cycle.
In conclusion, I would like to mention the
importance of building synergies between the post2015 development agenda and peacebuilding. An
inclusive development agenda focused on combating
discrimination and fostering empowerment for all
segments of society, in a spirit of national ownership,
will inevitably help to tackle the challenges faced by
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture today.
We support all efforts to that end.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me first to express our sincere thanks to President
Michelle Bachelet Jeria of Chile for presiding over
today’s Security Council meeting. We also express
appreciation for the initiative to hold this important
meeting on inclusive development for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Without any
doubt, a close correlation exists between the pillars
of development and of peace and security. So long as
conflicts continue to pose major obstacles and there is
no genuine, comprehensive development, it will be very

62/86

19/01/2015

difficult to maintain peace and security in States and
communities.
I also note that today’s discussion takes on added
value given that it is happening concurrently with
other important events. First, there is the launching
of the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture and the assessment of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions by the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations, both of
which are among the most important tools of the United
Nations in maintaining peace and security, including in
countries emerging from conflict and in preventing the
recurrence of violence.
This year will also witness the convening of
three important intergovernmental negotiations,
the third International Conference on Financing for
Development, to be held in July, the intergovernmental
negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda, the
first meeting of which was held today, and, finally, the
twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, which will address agreement on an
international decision by December. Those three events
form the framework of international cooperation in the
coming 15 years; they will build on prior achievements,
including the Millennium Development Goals, and
adopt a totally new agenda on sustainable development.
The high cost of conflict — including material
and resource losses and losses of human life, waves
of refugees and displaced persons and the generation
of heinous humanitarian situations — must prompt us
to adopt a new form of preventive diplomacy aimed at
addressing the root causes of conflict and preventing
its emergence in the first place. Such efforts must be
based on prevention. The most important pillars in that
regard are promoting inclusive development on behalf
of all of society, fostering the principles of democracy
and the rule of law and eliminating poverty and
marginalization, which are also among the root causes
of many conflicts. Allow me to address some points in
that context.
First, in accordance with international instruments,
as well as Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2171 (2014), States have the primary
responsibility for preventing conflicts and protecting
civilians. Egypt therefore underscores the need to
respect national priorities as identified by national
authorities and according to considerations of national

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

sovereignty, with the participation of political parties
and civilian society in drafting national strategies aimed
at achieving comprehensive development and building
peace, in order to guarantee national ownership of the
strategies in a manner conducive to ensuring social
stability and peace.
Secondly, peace and sustainable development
cannot be achieved without the participation of
all sectors of society, particularly women and
youth, not only in maintaining peace but also in
institution-building, political transformation processes
and the implementation of development strategies.
In that context, I would emphasize the importance of
progress in the implementation of Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolution 1325 (2000).
Thirdly, the discussion on building inclusive
societies would not be complete without discussing
issues pertaining to immigrants, in particular youth,
and the need for programmes and strategies to assist
them in areas including providing education, work and
training, so as to ensure their full integration within
the social, cultural and economic fabric. That would
enable them not only to positively contribute to the
development of society, but also in becoming channels
for communicating with their societies of origin.
Fourthly, inclusive and comprehensive development
is not only necessary in achieving stability and
preventing the recurrence of violence, but it is also
important in addressing cross-boundary security
threats, which are considered to be among the major
challenges to international peace and security. In that
regard, I would like to point out the fact that poverty,
marginalization and a lack of education and work
opportunities, particularly among youth, as well as
ongoing foreign occupation, widespread racism and
the activities of organized crime figures, are among
the major elements contributing to an environment
conducive to extremism and terrorism, from which the
world has been suffering, as recently witnessed.
Finally, we cannot fully consider the idea
of development without addressing the broader
framework, both regionally and internationally. It is
therefore important to support regional cooperation and
development initiatives, including the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development, which serves as a continental
work programme to promote good governance,
eliminate poverty and achieve development in Africa.

S/PV.7361

That programme is African-owned and aligned with
strategies designed in Africa.
We must establish the foundation for a new and
more just world economic order, as well as reform
the governance structures of the system to allow
developing countries to draft economic policies. That
must lead to achieving higher growth rates, increasing
productivity, using modern technology and creating
a balance between the use of natural resources and
the requirements of sustainable development while
preserving the environment. Those are all issues
that must be discussed while drafting the post-2015
development agenda.
The close correlation between the three pillars
of the United Nations system — peace and security,
development and human rights — cannot be ignored.
Given that each has its own specificities, they must be
addressed individually. Furthermore, it is important
to avoid burdening the Security Council with tasks
lying outside its mandate according to the Charter of
the United Nations. We would not like to end up with
a Council that interferes with or affects the rules or
mandates of other bodies. We hope that the Council’s
initiative will not serve as a precedent leading to the
weakening of other international organizations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Kullane (Somalia): I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the delegation of Chile
for taking the initiative to organize this debate on
the maintenance of international peace and security,
focusing on inclusive development. I also wish to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and this morning’s
briefers: the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota of Brazil,
and Ms. Leymah Gbowee, Nobel Peace Laureate and
President of the Gbowee Peace Foundation Africa.
We also welcome the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/3 earlier today.
The Government of Somalia is keen to learn and
to develop all strategies that will foster inclusive
development in Somalia. Our country has entered a
new era of pursuing peace, stability and prosperity
for all Somalis. The Somali Government has built a
foundation and laid down the necessary groundwork,
not only for stabilizing the nation but also for ensuring

15-0158463/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

reform. The New Deal Compact for Somalia has been a
significant force for change.
The Somali Government’s approach to support
inclusive politics encompasses three strategic
areas — State-building, constitution-making and
preparing the nation for elections — while taking into
consideration and encouraging the involvement of
all groups, especially women, youth and minorities.
The Compact goals have guided the Somali Federal
Government, civil society and the international
community in laying the necessary State-building
blocks and developing a legal framework and
governance structures. The Somali Government is
restoring the provision of health-care services in areas
liberated from extremist groups. The Government has
also kick-started education campaigns to open schools
to reduce the level of illiteracy, thereby enrolling an
additional 78,000 children.
As discourse on peacebuilding in Africa continues,
it is important for policymakers to consider the plight
of women on the continent, where they are a poorly
represented majority that tends to suffer greatly in
times of war. With an understanding of the devastating
impact of Africa’s endemic conflicts on women, the
Security Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000).
Through this resolution, the Security Council, for the
first time in history, acknowledged the plight of women
living in African war zones, as well as the manner in
which most peacebuilding and peacekeeping efforts
had excluded them. Another solution that the United
Nations has implemented regarding the exclusion of
women is the commissioning of a study that will look
into the implementation of additional resolutions on
women and security, including resolutions 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009), 1960 (2010) and 2122 (2013). With this
study, the United Nations will understand how well
the resolutions are aiding women in conflict zones and
the additional ways in which it can involve them in
peacebuilding.
The African Development Bank has commissioned
a report — put together by a high-level panel chaired
by President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf — entitled Ending
Conflict and Building Peace in Africa: A Call to Action.
Youth unemployment and urbanization are reported as
two of the main challenges that Africa will face and
that will need to be addressed. Special focus should be
placed on empowering women in peacebuilding and
State-building processes at all levels.

64/86

19/01/2015

We strongly welcome the efforts by African leaders
and scholars to try to find solutions to Africa’s chronic
problems. There are certain issues that need to be
considered. First, the rapid change that the continent
is currently experiencing places Africa in a precarious
position. Whereas population growth and economic
progress are positive factors, they can increase the
fragility of the continent if policymakers do not handle
them properly. Managing the change that the continent
is undergoing is the key to ensuring that Africa does
not become fragile and that it continues to grow.
Youth employment ensures that the millions of
young people on the continent contribute to their
nation’s growth and do not become disenfranchised. In
that way, a potential problem becomes an advantage.
This is especially the case for countries with ongoing
conflicts, such as Somalia, Nigeria and Libya.
In conclusion, over the past decade the Security
Council has been of great assistance in Somalia’s
steady progress towards peace, something that the
Somali people deeply appreciate. In return, the country
is working hard to become a strong member of the
international community so that it may contribute
positively to global development. As the country moves
forward, it still faces numerous challenges, some of
which can be solved through inclusive development.
Indeed, the Federal Government of Somalia recognizes
the need for inclusive politics, justice and economic
progress if the country is to move forward. Inclusive
development for a country such as Somalia will involve
the implementation of projects on a grass-roots level
so that they can involve average Somali people. In
particular, special focus should be placed on empowering
women in peacebuilding and State-building processes
at all levels. The success of this new strategy would
allow Somalia to emerge from the 24-year civil war
a stronger nation than it had been before the conflict
started.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
initiative to convene this open debate, which gives us
an opportunity to consider an issue of great importance:
inclusive development and the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that regard, we
welcome the preparation of the concept note (S/2015/6,
annex), which provides us the background information

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

for participating in this debate. We also thank the
Secreted-General, the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Nobel Peace laureate Leymah Gbowee
for their briefings.
The Charter of the United Nations puts the
tasks of the Organization into three fundamental,
interdependent and mutually reinforcing categories:
ensuring international peace and security; achieving
development, which we now understand as sustainable
development; and promoting and protecting human
rights.
Many of today’s armed conflicts have deeprooted structural causes, which in some cases have
been developing over a long period of time. There is
consensus among the international community on
the urgent need to address the deep-seated causes of
conflicts, including exclusion or discrimination on any
grounds, which generates instability and can therefore
become a factor for confrontation and violence.
In these times of increasing demands for political
and economic participation by groups that have been
historically excluded in different societies, there is
an urgent need to implement social and economic
inclusion policies to reduce inequalities and disparities
that generate dissatisfaction, as well as to create
the conditions for inclusive development with equal
opportunities. This is particularly important in societies
that are ethnically and culturally diverse, where there is
a greater risk of discrimination and exclusion. Cultural
diversity at the national and international levels require
governance structures that are based on recognizing
our differences and the value of those differences. On
the basis of that recognition, intercultural dialogue,
inclusive development and strengthening social
cohesion become possible.
Given this scenario, social inclusion policies make
it possible to build stable, fair and peaceful societies,
help to promote the enjoyment of and respect for
human rights, empower people by enabling their active
participation in the political, social and cultural life of
their country and, above all, they guarantee peace.
Peru is committed to building inclusive societies.
That is why my country promoted and facilitated General
Assembly resolution 66/122, entitled “Promoting social
integration through social inclusion”, which calls upon
States to promote sustainable, inclusive and equitable
development, and to implement social inclusion
policies to combat inequality in our societies. We have

S/PV.7361

also promoted the theme of social inclusion in the
framework of the post-2015 agenda.
Peru believes that combating economic inequality
and social exclusion, promoting respect for the rule
of law, ensuring the full and effective enjoyment of
all human rights and fundamental freedoms by all
individuals, and safeguarding and promoting cultural
diversity contribute to stability and social cohesion,
which in turn promotes a climate of peace. This holistic
view is reflected in the multidimensional mandates of
many of the peacekeeping operations established by the
Council. The work aimed at developing and restoring
the rule of law occupies an increasingly important
role in the mandate of those missions and promotes
the missions’ working together with United Nations
agencies directly involved in development work.
The United Nations also supports the work of
inclusive development and social inclusion during the
peacebuilding process in post-conflict situations in
order to break once and for all the cycle of conflict
by directly attacking its root causes. In that regard, I
would stress the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
in providing support to States that have suffered
from conflict, while always bearing in mind the
interdependence of security, inclusive development and
respect for human rights.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize Peru’s
commitment to building inclusive societies, not only
domestically, but also at the international level. My
country will remain an active partner in building an
international community that promotes equitable
participation without any discrimination among
all States and in which international relations are
based on respect for national sovereignty, good faith,
international cooperation, respect for the rule of law
at the international level and the peaceful settlement
of disputes. The existence of an inclusive international
community will be the best guarantee for maintaining
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): My delegation wishes
to join previous speakers in commending the Chilean
presidency for organizing this important debate. We
also wish also to thank the Secretary-General, the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, and the
President of the Gbowee Peace Foundation Africa for
their respective briefings.

15-0158465/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

The interlinkages between inclusive development
and security are evident in the work of the United
Nations. It is widely recognized that peace, security
and development are interconnected; indeed, the
2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1)
underlined that security, development, and respect for
human rights and the rule of law are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing. We therefore cannot overstate
the importance of taking into consideration inclusive
development perspectives to the work of the Council in
addressing the challenges relating to the maintenance
of peace and security.
In our view, inclusive development refers to
development that observes democratic principles,
respect for human rights and the imperative of
equal opportunity and participation, as well as
non-discrimination. It also recognizes the important
role of women in all fields. As a country with a
multiplicity of cultures, religions, ethnicities and
languages, Indonesia strongly upholds the values of
diversity, inclusion, tolerance and harmony. Equitable
development, coupled with the locally and nationally
owned peaceful settlement of disputes, has been among
the major reasons behind Indonesia’s stability and
progress.
Today’s debate on the nexus between inclusive
development and peace and security in the context of
the responsibilities in situations within the purview of
the Security Council provides a valuable opportunity
to explore ways to mainstream inclusive development
perspectives into the broad spectrum of the Council’s
mandate and functions relating to peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and preventive diplomacy.
I wish to highlight the following four points in that
context.
First, the integration of inclusive development
perspectives into the overall work of the Council would
contribute to common efforts to develop a robust and
comprehensive framework of conflict prevention. We
understand that the Council is not the appropriate United
Nations organ to deal with the issue of development.
However, we cannot disregard the significant impact of
its decisions on the long-term development of countries,
which is a fundamental element of any sustainable peace.
The Security Council should therefore enhance its
engagement and coordination and form synergies with
the relevant United Nations agencies and international
organizations responsible for security and development.
Any measures taken by the Council should support or

66/86

19/01/2015

at least give consideration to inclusive development
programmes carried out by United Nations agencies
and relevant organizations in the framework of conflict
prevention.
Secondly, the Security Council should align its work
with the overall endeavour of United Nations system
entities to develop common peace and prosperity,
beyond its engagement within the framework of the
Peacebuilding Commission. The Council should be part
of collective efforts to ensure that the United Nations can
act as one across the security/development spectrum,
and adopt a single approach across the multilateral
system. Coherence is key to the overall effectiveness
of the Organization. In this regard, we therefore believe
that the Council should engage with and contribute
to the ongoing process in the United Nations through
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, along with its relevant subsidiary agencies, to
establish a global framework to implement an inclusive
and comprehensive sustainable development agenda.
Thirdly, the Security Council should, within its
mandate, put the interlinkages between inclusive
development and peace and security into operation in
the field. The Council should make effective use of
the relevant work, practices and doctrines developed
within the Economic and Social Council and the
General Assembly, as well as the lessons learned from
the evolving work of the Peacebuilding Commission.
All United Nations presences in countries where
there is both a United Nations country team and a
multidimensional peacekeeping operation or political
mission should develop an integrated strategic
framework to guide their work in promoting peace
consolidation. In our strong view, however, they should
respect and ensure the ownership and leadership of the
host country in the development process, including in
identifying priority areas.
Fourthly, we should invest more in our joint efforts
to address the root causes of conflict and instability
in general, as well as in conflict resolution. Inclusive
development to eliminate poverty, backwardness,
injustice and marginalization, along with peaceful
conflict prevention, should be the core. While there
remains no single panacea to cure the variety of
conflicts unfolding in the world today, it is, however,
extremely important that there be a comprehensive
approach that is well supported and sustained
financially and politically, and fully conforms to the
principles of justice, fairness and human rights, while
upholding international law.
15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7361

In conclusion, Indonesia stands ready to continue
its engagement in further elaborating the role and
contribution of the Security Council to the promotion
of inclusive development and conflict prevention.

strengthening the policy of engagement with the
Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali, South
Ossetia, and to providing a favourable environment for
reconciliation and a comprehensive settlement.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.

Engagement through cooperation, which is the
State’s strategy with regard to the occupied territories,
includes in particular the provision of health-care
services to the residents of the occupied territories; the
establishment of advanced mechanisms to receive and
continue education in the rest of Georgia and abroad;
the maintenance of effective instruments, such as
the status-neutral travel document, for exercising the
freedom of movement; and support for and facilitation
of confidence-building measures and people-topeople contact through meetings among professional
communities, the training of experts and teachers, study
visits, including to foreign countries, the updating of
archive documents, and the improvement of knowledge
about cultural heritage areas.

Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, I would like to
join others in thanking the Chilean presidency for having
brought this very important issue to our attention. I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Patriota; and
Nobel Peace Prize laureate Leymah Gbowee for their
comprehensive briefings, which provided good food for
thought for our discussions.
We fully share the holistic vision of international
security, as proposed by the Chilean presidency,
in which the three pillars of the United Nations
system — peace and security, human rights and
development — are closely interlinked. Indeed, the
main challenges to the legitimacy and stability of
nation States and governance of their societies lie in
socioeconomic, gender, ethnic, tribal, religious and
ideological tensions, and addressing those challenges
in a timely manner at the domestic level is paramount
to preventing threats at the international level.
The United Nations, as the flagship of the
international community, should take a leading role in
conflict prevention, assisting Member States in dealing
with transnational challenges and negative foreign
influences, which represent some of the major factors
that fuel internal conflicts in many countries that no
single nation could tackle on its own. Promoting stable
societies in which there is no place for radicalization,
violence and extremism; promoting universal respect
for and compliance with the fundamental norms and
principles of international law; and strengthening the
rule of law at the national and international levels could
provide a long-term strategic solution to these problems.
As Georgia is a multi-ethnic and multi-confessional
nation, inclusive development is especially crucial
for my country, and my Government is committed
to doing as much as humanly possible to prevent the
marginalization of its communities on any grounds,
be they racial, ethnic, social, gender, religious,
cultural or economic. My country, having over 20 per
cent of its territory under illegal foreign occupation,
remains committed to a peaceful, pragmatic, flexible
and constructive course of action with a view to

Cooperation, and in certain cases integration
processes with international organizations play a
special role in reconciliation and lasting conflict
resolution. In this context, the European Union-Georgia
Association Agreement and Association Agenda
represent a special element. Georgia is seeking ways
to share the benefits and opportunities resulting from
the European Union-Georgia cooperation with the
populations residing in the occupied regions. In this
way, establishing open and human-centric policy is at
the core of the peacebuilding process. In this context,
one of the key directions of the work undertaken by
the Government of Georgia has been to alleviate the
consequences of the installation of barbed-wire fences
and other physical barriers by the occupying forces in
villages adjacent to the occupation line. Addressing the
needs of the local population on both sides of the divide
and improving the living conditions of communities
that have been torn apart are important not only from
a purely humanitarian view, but also from the human
security and peacebuilding perspectives.
On the subject of dividing lines and artificial
barriers, I cannot fail to touch upon another important
aspect, which is the negative foreign influence
when addressing the challenges to efforts to achieve
inclusive development. In today’s world, no single
country can be considered in isolation from others.
As I mentioned at the beginning of this statement,
in too many instances transnational challenges and
negative foreign influences are important factors in

15-0158467/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

creating domestic tensions, often resulting in dividing
lines such as those witnessed in Georgia and Ukraine.
These dividing lines did not appear naturally as the
result of the local socioeconomic situation or cultural
fabric; rather, they were artifically established through
outside involvement, such as foreign occupation and the
annexation of territories.
Last year was especially dreadful for our region.
Following the annexation of Ukraine’s Crimea, today
Russia is taking further steps towards the annexation
of Georgia’s occupied territories of Abkhazia
and the Tskhinvali region of South Ossetia. The
so-called treaties on alliance and strategic partnership
or integration signed with the de facto authorities in
Abkhazia and being prepared for signature shortly
with the Tskhinvali region of South Ossetia are clearly
directed against Georgia’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, as they envisage further integration of the
occupied regions into the Russian Federation in all
spheres. The direst effects of these so-called treaties
will include the reinforcement of the occupation
line, which will undermine person-to-person contact
and freedom of movement and, consequenrly,
confidence-building between the communities. It
will also seriously affect the situation of internally
displaced persons and refugees by placing a permanent
obstacle to the implementation of their right to safe and
dignified return. All this will seriously undermine the
efforts aimed at ensuring inclusive development.
Having suffered enough from this plague, and while
dealing with the negative impacts of foreign occupation,
my country firmly believes that the path to a peaceful
and secure future will be through good governance
and the resilience of inclusive political, economic
and legal institutions. Armed conflict, by destroying
the political, social, economic and cultural fabric of
societies, seriously undermines development and is
perhaps its greatest obstacle. In conclusion, therefore,
I wish to fully subscribe to the statement contained in
the concept paper to this discussion (S/2015/6, annex)
and to mention again that Georgia aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the head of the delegation of the
European Union.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Chile for organizing this open debate of
the Security Council on a topic of great importance
and timeliness, especially given the fact that 2015
68/86

19/01/2015

marks the seventieth anniversary of the founding of
the United Nations and the international community
is preparing the post-2015 development agenda. A
holistic approach to addressing peace and security,
development and human rights issue is particularly
necessary because we live in an increasingly globalized
world characterized by the interdependence of States
and societies that influence one another in the political,
economic and security spheres, among others, thereby
requiring coherent and coordinated efforts on the part
of the international community.
The achievement of the development goals can be
achieved only in the framework of stable and peaceful
societies that respect human rights. Morocco remains
convinced that the promotion and protection of human
rights, the rule of law and sustainable development are
closely linked and mutually beneficial. The stability
development of States and their respect for human
rights are indivisible, for without peace there can be
no development, and that without development lasting
peace remains an elusive, if not impossible goal.
The active participation of all citizens in their
society, the fight against discrimination and inequality,
and the promotion democratic and legal practices and
rules remain essential elements in achieving sustainable
development. Notably, the enjoyment of human rights,
and in particular the right to development, and to live
in peaceful conditions require the empowerment of all
people through inclusive growth that creates decent
jobs and social policies that guarantee human dignity to
the entire population, shielded from poverty and want.
Unquestionably, countries affected by conflict
achieve the least amount of progress towards achieving
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and other
internationally agreed development goals. Nowadays,
most conflicts erupt within States. Exclusion, political
or economic marginalization and a lack of effective
mechanisms that promote and protect human rights are
factors that favour political instability within States
and threaten regional and international peace and
security. For poor countries and those emerging from
conflict, international cooperation remains vital. It is
essential that international cooperation seek to help
these countries in rebuilding their economies and in
strengthening their human and institutional capacities
in order to address the economic and social causes of
conflicts.
Strong national institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights are of critical importance to
15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

complementing development strategies at national and
local levels. Development and good governance at the
local level, guaranteeing the adequate participation of
the population, allow us to better target the poor and
the underprivileged. Local development policies also
promote the better use of resources and accountability.
Youth unemployment is often cited as a potential risk
that may lead to insecurity and instability. Having
a job does not only mean the availability of income,
but also implies above all respect for the dignity of
the individual, reinforcing social cohesion. For these
reasons, we believe that the creation of jobs and the
delivery of effective responses to the needs of young
people should be the focus of any future development
programme. The Kingdom of Morocco also recognizes
the need for equal rights and opportunities for women
and men in political and economic decision-making,
and for empowering women in all spheres of society in
order to unleash their potential as agents of change and
drivers of sustainable development.
Today, terrorism is a constant and major threat not
only to stability and security within States, but also to
peace and regional and international security. Morocco
advocates an integrated approach to fighting terrorism,
based on the consistent complementarity of three
pillars: strengthened security governance; the fight
against poverty, exclusion and social inequality; and the
promotion of the values of religious tolerance. Morocco
remains convinced that the security approach, which
is an essential element in the fight against terrorism,
cannot alone effectively address the rise of extremism,
terrorism and obscurantism. It must be reinforced with
economic and social inclusion and appropriate religious
and secular education. Regional and international
cooperation at all levels is also of crucial importance
both to effective action against terrorism and to
addressing its root causes. Development and human
rights can be successful only if they are supported by
international governance that is also equitable, is in the
best interests of developing countries and respects their
political and economic choices, as long as those choices
are made in the best interest of their populations and
are based on the principles of democracy, the rule of
law and human rights.
International cooperation and solidarity and the
coordination of States’ efforts are crucial elements
for achieving development, peace and security goals
around the world. In the address delivered on his behalf
to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, His
Majesty King Mohammed VI of Morocco stated that:

S/PV.7361

“The world stands at a crossroads today. Either
the international community supports developing
countries in their quest to achieve progress and
ensure security and stability, or we shall all face
the consequences of more conflicts and greater
fanaticism, violence and terrorism — all of which
feed on feelings of injustice and exclusion — and no
part of the world will be safe.” (A/69/PV.11, p. 26)
Cooperation and understanding between countries
at the regional level is therefore a powerful tool
for combining efforts in order to best respond to
the challenges of regional development, peace and
security. Regional cooperation plays a crucial role in
policy coordination, whether at the political, economic,
security or other levels, with the goal of achieving better
results in terms of economic and social development and
shared prosperity, the promotion of peaceful relations
between countries and the fight against threats to peace
and security, especially the threat of terrorism.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
importance of a comprehensive and coherent approach
to achieving the Organization’s objectives for peace and
security, development and human rights while placing
human beings at the heart of its concerns.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s debate. I also
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
for the month of January.
As we usher in 2015, inclusive development is a
very timely theme for a Security Council open debate.
Conflicts around the world show that peace and security
are fragile without an inclusive process in the political,
economic and social realms. Indeed, discrimination
and marginalization often provide space for violent
extremism, which is increasingly transboundary in
nature.
While serving on the Security Council over the
past two years, the Republic of Korea supported the
prioritization of inclusivity for peace and prosperity.
The outcome was not always rewarding, however.
Sometimes, reiterated calls sounded like hollow
words in the face of harsh realities. Sovereignty and
territorial integrity were not always properly invoked
for their genuine raison d’être. Political considerations
sometimes stood in the way of finding reasonable
solutions.

15-0158469/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

In countries in conflict, more often than not,
national stakeholders’ priorities do not necessarily
overlap with those of the international community.
Therefore, an important prerequisite is to foster
national unity. If national stakeholders are fragmented
and even hostile to each other, international support
will also be fragmented and remain counterproductive.
That is where the role of national leadership becomes
indispensable.
Exercising leadership with a view to reconciliation
and social cohesion is often a task that requires selfsacrifice. Sharing limited resources with former
enemies requires courage and vision. That is a sine
qua non, however, for making progress and leaving
conflicts behind. The international community cannot
replace those who must play that role, but it can provide
assistance so that political, economic and social
inclusiveness are integrated into the entire process
of peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
In that regard, the horizon-scanning mechanism
can be utilized to help the Security Council and the
international community remain alert to early warning
signs requiring rapid responses.
At the same time, the importance of regional entities’
proactive engagement cannot be overemphasized. Their
voices can be better heard, mitigating concerns over
domestic affairs. The United Nations system and the
donor community may review a strategy to provide
more sustained and predictable support for more
inclusive societies. In that context, we believe that the
concept of inclusive societies should be included in the
post-2015 development agenda.
The Republic of Korea attaches importance to
socioeconomic inclusivity in assisting other countries’
capacity-building. We have been providing integrated
assistance to post-conflict countries in the areas of
security, development, women’s empowerment and
maternal and child health.
In conclusion, we would like to stress the importance
of close cooperation between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council. Inclusive
development for conflict prevention is the area where
both organs’ stakes overlap. We will continue to play a
constructive role in that process moving forward.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba welcomes Chile’s presidency of the Security
70/86

19/01/2015

Council as a friendly Latin American country and
would like to recognize the importance of this open
debate convened by your country, Sir. We also welcome
the presence among us of President Michelle Bachelet
to preside over the work of the Council. She is without
a doubt committed to the objectives and cause of the
United Nations.
International peace and security are not viable
without sustainable, equitable and inclusive development
that benefits all peoples. The purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and in
international law are violated when certain States resort
to the use and threat of use of force and serious actions
against the sovereignty of other nations, including the
application of coercive unilateral measures.
Member States agreed in the Millennium
Declaration (General Assembly resolution 55/2)
that freedom, equality, solidarity, tolerance, respect
for nature and shared responsibility were essential
values that should guide international relations in the
twenty-first century. Those values are negated by the
selfishness and brutality of the capitalist neoliberal
globalization that has been imposed on international
economic, commercial and financial relations.
The establishment of a new international order
that is truly just, democratic and equitable remains a
chimera. The Council must be democratized through
a radical reform, but that has yet to occur. We need a
United Nations that is more democratic and effective,
with bodies that implement their respective mandates,
having at its centre a revitalized and strengthened
General Assembly that fully exercises the powers that
fall to it under the Charter.
The world has the resources necessary to eradicate
poverty, malnutrition, illiteracy and many of the diseases
that still decimate entire populations in many countries.
What is required is the political will to implement the
necessary changes to the current international system,
which is steering humanity towards self-destruction.
Promoting and maintaining international peace and
security will entail addressing the causes of poverty
and inequality. We cannot eliminate the conflicts in
the world if we do not eradicate the root causes that
motivate and fuel them.
Human history corroborates the theory that the
eradication of hunger, disease and poverty require
forms of cooperation that show solidarity and fairness
and do not involve a resort to arms. The arms race eats
15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

up many of the resources that could be allocated to
economic growth and social well-being. World military
expenditure totalled $1.756 trillion in 2012, that is,
2.5 per cent of the global gross domestic product. It
is essential that concrete international measures be
taken to redirect the resources allocated to the military
towards activities that bring about development.
In 2014, global expenditure on armaments was 340
times higher than the biennial budget of the United
Nations and its specialized agencies. With the resources
allocated to armaments, we could have achieved many
of the modest goals set by the Millennium Development
Goals, which, unfortunately, will not be achieved.
For the cost of a nuclear weapon, medical attention
could be provided to tens of thousands of people.
Cuba supports the total elimination of weapons of
mass destruction, including nuclear weapons, which
threaten to exterminate humanity. Current stockpiles
of resources, which lead only to hardship and death,
could be better allocated to the full realization of the
right to development.
The Charter of the United Nations established the
Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly
as the principal organs with mandates in the area of
economic and social development. The work of these
bodies should be strengthened. This year the work of the
Assembly will be particularly important in the context
of the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda.
This agenda should be established on the basis of solid
precepts, with full respect for the principles enshrined
in the Charter, ensuring sustained economic growth
and sustainable development, with no exceptions. The
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities
should form the cornerstone of our efforts to achieve
sustainable, equitable and inclusive development.
Peace, security and the exercise of the selfdetermination of our peoples promote the conditions that
allow for the achievement of sustainable development,
with inclusion, equity and social justice. The greatest
contribution that the Security Council can make to
the strengthening of inclusive development is that of
exercising its obligation to serve as an impregnable
bulwark against foreign occupation, aggression and
wars of conquest, acting instead as a true beacon in
support of the sovereignty of States, large and small,
thereby ensuring full respect for international law and
the enjoyment of the right to peace or all.
The Latin America and Caribbean region is at the
vanguard of the promotion of peace and the peaceful

S/PV.7361

resolution of disputes, having formally declared
itself a zone of peace at the second summit of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
last year. That demonstrates the spirit of integration of
our region, which continues to seek to banish forever
the threat or use of force as a means of resolving
conflicts; social inequality; poverty; illiteracy; and
lack of free and universal access to basic services
such as health and education. It is a region in which
priority is given to solidarity and cooperation among
our peoples for prosperity and in which human rights
for all are promoted and protected, including the right
to development and to full freedom and dignity for its
citizens.
Cuba will continue to contribute, with its modest
resources, to the well-being of the people, especially
through supporting the neediest. Cuba remains
committed to supporting international cooperation so
as to achieve sustainable development with inclusion
and social justice. We will also forever be committed to
the defence of peace and international security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Ms. Grignon (Kenya): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for this opportunity to speak on behalf of the
Kenyan delegation. We wish first to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. My delegation expresses
profound appreciation to the Republic of Chile for
organizing this important open debate on inclusive
development for the maintenance of international peace
and security, in connection with the agenda item on the
maintenance of international peace and security.
We wish also to express our appreciation for the
concept note on the subject (S/2015/6, annex), the
statements of the Secretary-General and the Nobel
Laureate, and the statement made by Ambassador
De Aguiar Patriota, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission. These made a significant contribution to
this debate, and we thank them for that.
We recognize that ensuring international peace
and security remains a daunting challenge that is still
elusive despite the efforts made by the Council over
the almost 70 years of the existence of the United
Nations. In fact, we are witnessing emerging new and
complex security challenges such as radicalization,
violent extremism and foreign terrorist fighters.
These emerging challenges continue to undermine our

15-0158471/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

collective efforts to ensure international peace and
security. However, it is our hope that with efforts such
as today’s and a determined call to action, we shall
realize peace, security and development dividends.
In this regard, my delegation wishes to make the
following seven points, which we believe are central to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
First, there can be no lasting peace without
development. We see a close nexus between peace
and security and sustainable development. Good
governance and adherence to the rule of law also play
an important role in this nexus. Here, the conclusion of
the United Nations World Summit in September 2005,
that there is no peace without development; there is no
development without peace; there is no lasting peace
and sustainable development without respect for human
rights, is especially poignant today.
Second, inclusiveness is key to peace and security,
as it is to broad development. That is why this topic
of inclusive development for the maintenance of
international peace and security is so relevant and
appropriate. As we approach the expiry dates of the
Millennium Development Goals, in September, and as
we design the post-2015 development agenda, capped
with the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations,
we have a unique opportunity to write a new chapter
in our collective history. We can end poverty and
inequality and truly ensure inclusive development if we
want. Undoubtedly, this will significantly contribute
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
This is because disputes over resources and their
exploitation are among the key causes of conflict and
insecurity.
Third, equality within nations is central to
peacebuilding and development. Poverty and
underdevelopment remain major causes of conflict in
most parts of the world. That is amplified by inequality
and the failure to genuinely consider and apply the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities.
Therefore, peace, security and sustainable development
will be achieved only when inequalities in all their
forms and manifestations are eradicated, especially
among Member States.
Fourth, to establish sustainable peace in countries
emerging from conflict, there is a need to ensure that
there is no relapse into conflict. Therefore, the United
Nations, and especially the Security Council, need
to engage meaningfully throughout prevention and

72/86

19/01/2015

early warning, conflict resolution, peacebuilding and
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Underdevelopment, stagnation and poverty should
be eradicated. The international community should
assist post-conflict countries by focusing on both
the root causes and the symptoms and addressing the
fundamental socio-economic, cultural and political
issues. Post-conflict reconstruction and development
should focus on peacebuilding, national reconciliation,
inclusive political dialogue and the promotion of
national cohesion and unity.
Fifth, to address the challenges of terrorism and
violent extremism, there is an urgent need to build and
promote stable and peaceful societies by taking decisive
measures to end poverty, inequality and marginalization,
as poverty is both a cause and consequence of terrorism
and violent extremism. Poverty engenders inequality,
which in turn undermines efforts aimed at creating
peaceful and non-violent societies. To create societies
that are resilient to terrorism and violent extremism,
the post-2015 development agenda must address
widespread poverty, inequality, exclusion and weak
governance institutions.
Sixth, Africa continues to partner with the
United Nations, other continental and regional
intergovernmental
organizations,
multinational
organizations and other stakeholders to strengthen the
rule of law, institutions of governance, human rights
and economic development. While we stress that the
responsibility for conflict prevention and mitigation
lies with each State, transnational drivers of conflicts
must collectively be addressed by the international
community. We believe that, by strengthening our
institutions of governance, we will not only enhance
inclusive governance, but also promote economic and
social inclusion and development. To a great extent,
that will help fight all forms of exclusion and inequality
and forge unity and diversity at the local, national and
regional levels.
Seventh, in conclusion, I wish to reiterate that
my delegation firmly believes that peace and security
are important prerequisites for the attainment of
sustainable development. Kenya remains committed to
the realization of peace and security, not only in Africa
but globally, through the promotion of democratic
practices, good governance, the rule of law, the
protection of human rights and the peaceful resolution
of conflicts. Conflict prevention, early warning and
peacebuilding are important components in that regard.

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Kenya is greatly honoured — through its
Permanent Representative, Ambassador Macharia
Kamau, together with Ambassador David Donoghue,
Permanent Representative of Ireland — to co-facilitate
the intergovernmental negotiations on the post2015 development agenda. We want to assure you,
Mr. President, and all delegations of our full commitment
to work with other delegations to formulate a post-2015
development agenda that ensures the future we all want,
which is a just and equitable economic order free from
poverty, exclusion and human suffering.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in
Spanish): I congratulate Chile and President Bachelet
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and for having proposed for this debate
a matter of great importance. I also thank President
Bachelet for her presence here today, her leadership and
her commitment to the work of the Organization.
(spoke in English)
I also thank the Secretary-General, the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Ms. Leymah Gbowee
for their briefings.
During its latest presidency of the Council, in
February 2011, Brazil proposed the interdependence
between security and development as the subject of an
open debate (see S/PV.6479). The discussion proved
fruitful and was later synthesized in presidential
statement S/PRST/2011/4. We are glad that the Chilean
presidency of the Council as provided an opportunity
to take another look at this topic, especially the issue
of inclusive development for the maintenance of
peace and security. In recent years, the debate about
the interdependence between peace and security and
development gained momentum with the creation
of the peacebuilding architecture in 2005. Let us
not forget, however, that the Charter of the United
Nations incorporated this notion under Article 55, on
international economic and social cooperation.
Development
and
security
are
closely
interconnected, mutually reinforcing and central to the
achievement of lasting peace. We remain convinced
that purely military or security strategies are not
by themselves able to resolve most of the world’s
contemporary conflicts. The present debate is important
because the promotion of sustainable peace requires a
comprehensive approach to security.

S/PV.7361

In South America, we have been making strides
in combating poverty and achieving the social and
economic inclusion of millions of our citizens. As
an example of peaceful and inclusive development,
South America illustrates the benefits for societies of
democratic governance and economic strategies that
promote social justice. More broadly, Latin America
and the Caribbean is the only region in the world where
inequality consistently decreased during and since the
latest global economic crisis.
In analysing this trend, the Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean recognized the
positive role of the State as an inducer of development
and inclusion. According to the United Nations
Development Programme, development can be inclusive
and reduce poverty if all groups of people in a society
contribute to creating opportunities, share the benefits
of development and participate in decision-making.
Inclusive development should be participatory,
non-discriminatory and accountable. Most of all, it
should tackle inequality.
Policymakers should never neglect those who
suffer from social exclusion the most, such as migrants,
displaced people, women and children, ethnic and
religious minorities, the elderly, persons with disabilities
and lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals.
There is also a need for a comprehensive approach to
reducing the multiple forms of inequality, addressing
their social, economic and institutional drivers and
focusing on pockets of poverty and exclusion in many
countries, including developed ones.
We must be careful to avoid the misconception that
a lack of security exists only where there is a lack of
development. We should clearly reject any notion that
poverty itself can be a threat to peace. The historical
fact remains that a greater number of serious threats
to world peace originate in highly militarized and
comparatively prosperous societies. It is important that
we ask ourselves whether exclusion itself is a greater
source of instability than, for instance, militarism or
the unilateral use of force. The Council should also be
mindful of its responsibilities towards global security
and avoid tacitly following an agenda that focuses
almost exclusively on conflicts in the developing world.
Brazil believes that peace, development and
human rights cannot be disassociated. Since the end of
the Cold War, there has been a shared understanding
that peacekeeping and the promotion of long-term
socioeconomic policies should be combined in order

15-0158473/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

19/01/2015

to tackle the underlying causes of conflict. The
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which Brazil had the
honour to chair last year, is particularly well-positioned
to assist the Security Council on issues relating to the
promotion of inclusive socioeconomic development,
notably as a tool to prevent the relapse of countries
emerging from conflict.

so in the context of the post-2015 development agenda
now being formulated at the United Nations. I would
also like to express special thanks to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, Ambassador Antonio de Patriota, Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, and Ms. Leymah
Gbowee, the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize laureate, for their
briefings to the Council this morning.

The importance and the benefit of integrating
development into security strategies for sustainable
peace is clearly perceptible in the cases of Haiti and
Guinea-Bissau. Since the beginning of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, with the decisive
support of Chile and our Latin American and Caribbean
partners, among others, Brazil has defended mandates
that encompass reconstruction and peacebuilding in
tandem with peacekeeping actions.

The Republic of Paraguay takes a holistic view
of international peace and security and its relation
to inclusive development. Protecting people is the
foundation of security, an issue that must be guaranteed
by the rule of law. My Government believes that,
in order to ensure the full enjoyment of basic rights,
and with that international peace and security, States
must adopt public policies that ensure sustainable and
inclusive development for all, without discrimination.
The United Nations should also ensure that the post2015 development agenda is an ambitious plan and
that its principal bodies integrate their action into that
vision. Security should be a commitment on the part
of each and every State through a structure designed
to enhance democratic institutions in States, based
on the mandates of international instruments. In that
regard, democracy should continue to be a fundamental
pillar, because while without it there may be economic
growth, the same cannot be said for viable social or
economic development.

Another country where the linkage between
security and development is evident is Guinea-Bissau,
a fellow Lusophone nation that has suffered from
political instability and successfully organized general
elections last year. As chair of the PBC’s Guinea-Bissau
configuration, Brazil hopes to count on the support of
the international community in assisting Guinea-Bissau
in paving the way to sustainable development.
We would like to underscore the strategic
importance of education for sustainable development
and inclusive economic growth, as well as the
fundamental need to make progress on gender equality
and the empowerment of women as agents of peace.
Safeguarding cultural rights for all and promoting a
culture of peace and reconciliation are equally key.
For the past two decades, Brazil has made social and
economic inclusion one of its top priorities. Inclusive
development strengthens a country’s commitment to
peace and stability. We should not lose sight of the fact
that worldwide conditions for peace and development
should be enhanced through improved multilateral
cooperation based on international law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Paraguay.

Paraguay attaches great importance to the work of
regional organizations in that task. Democracy, the rule
of law and social inclusion are also being worked on in
the inter-American system. At the fourty-fourth general
session of the General Assembly of the Organization
of American States in June, the Asunción Declaration
reaffirmed our commitment to international instruments
that promote, protect and observe human rights,
particularly economic, social and cultural rights. The
Declaration affirms that, while we still have challenges
in terms of poverty and extreme poverty, education and
inclusive and high-quality health care, among other
factors, we must intensify our efforts to overcome those
conditions and avoid their consequences.

Mr. González (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the delegation of Paraguay, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Chile’s presidency
of the Security Council for this month, and to thank
you for inviting the entire membership to this open
debate on inclusive development for the maintenance
of international peace and security. This theme, which
is of itself important and relevant, becomes even more

Finally, the importance of the relationship between
inclusion and situations that pose a threat to international
peace and security is clear. We therefore believe we
should be more ambitious and forceful in promoting
gender equality, equal opportunity and universal
access to social protection services, with particular
emphasis on vulnerable and marginalized groups, so
that all the benefits of sustainable development reach

74/86

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

all sectors of our societies, while building institutions
and democratic governance. The Security Council
should therefore incorporate this approach decisively
in all its debates and decisions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like
to thank Chile for putting this important topic on the
Council’s agenda, and for organizing this debate so
appropriately on Martin Luther King, Jr., Day.
I align my statement with that made earlier today
on behalf of the European Union. In view of the time
constraints, I will read out a shortened version of my
statement, the full text of which will be available via
my Twitter account.
The Netherlands commends Ms. Leymah
Gbowee on her introduction this morning and on the
outstanding work she has done in Liberia, where
she focused on including women in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts. Including women in such
efforts is crucially important to attaining sustainable
peace and is a key priority of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands. To underscore that, on 18 February
we will host a conference in the Netherlands on
resolution 1325 (2000), and tomorrow, at 3 p.m., we
will host a side event on the subject here at the United
Nations, which my Minister will attend.
The prevention of conflict is a crucial aspect of the
Council’s mandate to address threats to international
peace and security, and for prevention we need early
warning. The “Human Rights Up Front” approach,
initiated by the United Nations, therefore deserves our
full support. In that context, I would like to highlight
one specific aspect: the prevention of mass atrocity
crimes. We commend the excellent new Framework of
Analysis for Atrocity Crimes, prepared by the Special
Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on the
Responsibility to Protect. It is also an extremely useful
tool for conflict prevention. The Security Council has
the important task of sending out this type of earlywarning signals, assessing whether they constitute
a risk to international peace and security and taking
political or other action if that is necessary. But more
structural prevention of conflicts remains our biggest
challenge, and that brings me to the connection between
development and the prevention of conflict.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands believes that
ensuring stable societies is the best way to guarantee the

S/PV.7361

prevention of internal conflict. That means that inclusion
and social cohesion should be guiding principles for
development strategies. For economic growth to benefit
the poor, it must be inclusive, and therefore together
we must make the post-2015 development agenda as
inclusive as possible. We believe it can contribute to
inclusive development by incorporating the following
concepts.
First, it should be universal, for all people in all
countries, including my own. Secondly, it should be
multidimensional and address the social, environmental,
economic and peace- and governance-related aspects
of development and inequality. Thirdly, it should be
a multi-actor agenda that includes all the relevant
stakeholders. And, fourthly, it should be based on our
common values, such as inclusiveness, human rights
and equality. If we can achieve that, it will be the
best basis for structurally addressing and preventing
conflicts.
We can also see specific responsibilities for United
Nations States members. They can actively contribute
to inclusive development for the maintenance of
international peace and security while working closely
with the United Nations and taking practical steps in
their national policies. For example, they could work
more intensively with the Department of Political
Affairs on mediation, conflict prevention and inclusive
political processes. My country has done so in Yemen,
for instance. They could also work more intensively with
the Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Reconstruction of
the United Nations Development Programme in support
of efforts in Tunisia and Iraq. Member States can also
take initiatives on a national basis. In the Netherlands
we have put significant effort into creating processes for
including all the relevant actors in countries affected by
conflict. We have tried to do so, for instance, in Syria
and Mali.
A final thought is that when preventing or
addressing conflicts, Member States should combine
diplomacy with defence and development. It should
be a comprehensive approach, which we call the 3-D
approach.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands is
a partner for peace, justice and development. We are
therefore committed to promoting inclusive stable
societies. We support the efforts of the United Nations
and work bilaterally to prevent conflicts and as a
partner for countries affected by conflicts. Without the

15-0158475/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

inclusion of all of the groups comprising a society, there
can be no real peace, justice or sustainable development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Montenegro.
Mr. Šćepanović (Montenegro): We thank you, Sir,
for having organized this important open debate and
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January. We also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Patriota
of Brazil; and Nobel Peace Laureate Leymah Gbowee
for their valuable briefings.
Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would like, however, to add some remarks in my
national capacity.
It is hard to remember a time when the United
Nations, its agencies and the broader international
community were facing more simultaneous crises.
Conflicts hit hardest those who are most vulnerable,
making it impossible to improve their lives. It is our
duty to help resolve conflicts. We must share the burden
and prove that we are capable of building a peaceful,
equitable and just future through joint concrete action
and a proactive approach, based on a framework of
justice and progress, tolerance and the dignity of all
human beings. However, maintaining international
peace and security is not only the task of the United
Nations and other international organizations; it is
a process of individual, collective and institutional
transformation. All Member States, civil society bodies
and individuals have a responsibility to take action
in the process of inclusive development based on the
universal values of respect for life, justice, solidarity,
human rights and equality between men and women.
It is therefore important to recall that
non-discrimination and the inclusion of all groups
in the workings of society are enormous assets that
contribute to our well-being and enhance the vital
perception of social justice, trust and systemic
legitimacy. An enabling environment for inclusive
institution-building essential for peaceful societies free
of conflict implies the active engagement of national
and local authorities, parliaments, communities, civil
society, academia and women’s groups. Important focus
must also be placed on transparency, accountability and
effective management and oversight, with a view to
strengthening the legitimacy and integrity of security
and judicial institutions.
76/86

19/01/2015

Through inclusive education and the implementation
of a variety of inclusive programmes and projects,
younger generations should be equipped with the
self-confidence and ambition to be constructive and
valued members of society and to succeed in this new
globalized economy, promoting peace, tolerance and
diversity. In combination, all of these aspects will
contribute to an inclusive approach and to our common
objective of safeguarding international peace and
security. And this is primarily the responsibility of all
Member States and regions.
We in Montenegro know from our experience
that the best and only truly sustainable way to resolve
differences and rectify tensions and conflict situations
is through peaceful means in a spirit of dialogue and
committed to diplomatic and political efforts and tools.
Countries need to demonstrate strong commitment to
the rule of law, respect for human rights and freedoms,
democracy and the non-use of force in settling disputes.
Regional and subregional organizations can play a
positive and valuable role in facilitating dialogue and
setting a conciliatory tone towards conflict resolution,
as we have seen in many instances in Africa.
However, if Member States fail to address these
challenges, as is often the case in the current, fragile
international peace and security context, it is the
Security Council that should address these issues. We
must recognize that we are far from having a truly
effective system. In order to ensure that the United
Nations maintains its rightful place as the central
mechanism of global governance, our Organization
must take a modern, reformed shape that recognizes
the new geopolitical realities and the world’s evolving,
multifaceted conditions and environments.
As many examples across the world familiar to
us all have shown, prevention and early intervention
can and do work, and they are cost-effective. That is
why I would like to underline, as on previous similar
occasions, the significance of the United Nations earlydetection and early-warning mechanisms, as well as
the establishment of mediation as a core function of
the United Nations. Our focus on preventive measures
should definitely be strengthened in order to prevent
crises from developing and escalating, and to mitigate
the possible repercussions of crisis.
The responsibility to protect and its further
operationalization must also remain a priority. In the
era of accountability, perpetrators of crimes against
humanity should not go unpunished. It is only by
15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

strengthening inclusive and democratic institutions,
good governance and the rule of law that the structural
causes of poverty, inequality and violence can be
tackled. We advocate for these issues to be given
a prominent place in the post-2015 development
agenda and for the protection and empowerment of all
individuals to be ensured.
Let me underscore that today’s threats must be
tackled through joint efforts and in an integrated manner
across the entire nexus of development, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, the rule of law and human rights. In this
way, we can have a balanced and sustainable society
with durable peace. Montenegro will continue to be
reliable partner of the United Nations, working for
international peace and security, proud of its values and
its achievements, and confident in the future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): First of all, I would like
to thank Chile, as President of the Security Council,
for having convened this important debate and
preparing an excellent, thought-provoking concept note
(S/2015/6, annex).
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union. I will make some
additional remarks in my national capacity.
In his recent remarks to the General Assembly, the
Secretary-General called 2014 a “difficult year”, a year
that “presented serious challenges to diplomacy and,
indeed, our common humanity, as conflicts raged and
extremism rose”. It has unquestionably been another
bad year for international peace and security, and we
can only hope that 2015 will be less disheartening.
However, that might prove to be only wishful thinking,
since there is little ground for optimism. According
to some studies, at the beginning of 2015 there are
around 65 countries involved in some form of armed
conflict. The number of militias, paramilitary and
guerrilla groups throughout the world exceeds 600.
The prospects that these numbers will decrease in the
course of the year are slim, to say the least.
It is self-evident that one of the major challenges
for the international community is restoring peace
and preventing future conflicts. This cannot be done
through the military peacemaking and peacekeeping
means only; we also need to address all the causes
leading to violent conflicts, direct and indirect alike.
Poverty, inequality and the marginalization and

S/PV.7361

exclusion of groups of people from economic, social
and political life on the basis of gender, ethnicity, age,
sexual orientation or religion can lead to a violent
conflict. Therefore, one of our guiding principles in
preventing or solving conflicts must be political, social
and economic inclusion. That is why we believe that
today’s debate focusing on the nexus between inclusive
development and peace and security is very timely.
Good governance, democracy and the rule law are
key to peace and development. We firmly believe that
development, security and human rights go hand in hand
and must be addressed in a holistic manner. Croatia has
therefore strongly supported a transformative shift in
development that would leave no one behind, as was
proposed in the Secretary-General’s report on the post2015 sustainable development agenda (A/69/700).
We consider the inclusion of human rights, social
equality and women’s empowerment as key building
blocks of sustained prosperity for everyone. Tackling
gender inequalities and removing obstacles that
prevent women and girls from exercising their rights
and empowering themselves must be at the heart
of our efforts to create sustainable, prosperous and
resilient societies. To contribute to that goal, during the
ministerial weeks of the sixty-eighth and sixty-ninth
sessions of the General Assembly, Croatia organized
two high-level events devoted to the political and
economic empowerment of women in post-conflict
situations.
By addressing the needs of various groups in
different communities, we can avert future conflicts that
may arise. In that sense, sustainable development goals,
the most important part of the United Nations agenda in
2015, are more than a blueprint for development and the
provision of a decent life for many millions; they are also
an investment in peace and a barrier against radicalism
of all sorts. A holistic approach is essential, and the
only way forward. But that is easier said than done. The
field is a multilayered and excessively complex one,
composed of social, religious, national, ethnic, gender
and many other issues. Even if a single stone remains
unturned, it could become a spark that could ignite
the flames of war. Democratic elections, for example,
if not conducted properly or based on questionable or
incomplete voting lists and plagued with irregularities,
could cause much more harm than good.
Our policies for early detection, prevention and
post-conflict development need to address all pivotal
issues simultaneously, including inequalities, poverty,

15-0158477/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

corruption, youth unemployment and weak institutions.
That means that prevention and post-conflict recovery
require collaborative efforts by a range of actors and that
there is a need for a parallel focus on political, security
and all development issues. National ownership and
responsibility and the building of national capacities
based on specific national needs must be at the heart of
any peacebuilding effort. In that context, we believe that
additional efforts should be made to strengthen relations
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as with the Economic and Social
Council, with a view to promoting an integrated
approach to peace and development and achieving
synergy between peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The year 2015 will be a pivotal one for the United
Nations. A new sustainable development agenda will
be adopted in September. The review processes on the
peacebuilding architecture, peacekeeping operations
and the progress made in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) are well under way. All those
processes should be bold and ambitious in their
recommendations and should establish strong linkages
between peace, security, development and human
rights. The means of implementation are as important
as our determination to carry it forward. Maintaining
peace and security through inclusive and sustainable
development is not just a catchphrase from the United
Nations vocabulary, but the only possible way.
Mr. President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): On behalf of the Republic
of Cyprus I, too, would like to commend and thank
Chile for convening this important debate on inclusive
development and its impact on the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Cyprus aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier today on behalf of the European Union. In
addition, I would like to make some remarks in my
national capacity.
In adopting resolution 2171 (2014), the Security
Council recognized the effectiveness of preventive
action in maintaining international peace and security.
The Republic of Cyprus believes that a comprehensive
approach to conflict prevention requires awareness
in tackling the root causes of conflict as well as the
implementation of policies for sustainable peace. In
order to build stable societies that live in peace and
security, inclusive development is essential. We all

78/86

19/01/2015

recognize that development and peace are closely
linked and mutually reinforcing. There cannot be peace
without development, and in the absence of peace, no
development can take place. That is why we believe
that peace is the key prerequisite in the new post-2015
development agenda, so that it can be transformative
and make a real change in the world for societies and
people.
The marginalization of communities or groups based
on racial, ethnic, social, gender, religious, cultural and/
or economic grounds undoubtedly contributes to the
destabilization of societies and underlies many conflicts
today. Social, ethnic and religious divisions have been
a critical factor leading to the conflicts in Syria, Iraq,
Central Africa and elsewhere. Marginalization gives
rise to extremism, which in turn exacerbates existing
conflict and risks leading to the radicalization of our
youth.
The recruitment efforts of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant provide an example of how
non-governmental actors can exploit cultural and
religious divisions to further conflicts. Inclusion and
tolerance can combat such radicalization and mitigate
the effect of existing conflict, in addition to preventing
conflict in future. For those reasons, we agree with
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s statement following
the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014): “Over the longer
term, the biggest threat to terrorists is not the power
of missiles. It is the politics of inclusion” (S/PV.7272,
p. 3). Exclusion, discrimination and deprivation are
causes of poverty and inequality that threaten social
cohesion. Meeting the imperatives of peace and
security means reaching out to the most vulnerable,
including women and girls, children and the elderly,
people with disabilities, migrants, refugees, internally
displaced persons and indigenous and minority groups.
An inclusive society should provide equal opportunity
for every citizen, regardless of his or her background.
Equal opportunity, tolerance and sound democratic
governance best ensure peaceful coexistence and
welfare. At the same time, strong and effective
institutions that are transparent, corruption-free,
accessible and accountable, and democratic forums for
participation are necessary ingredients for inclusive
and sustained economic growth and for peaceful and
stable societies.
The United Nations is a seminal factor in promoting
inclusive development. The Security Council in
particular has a unique opportunity to implement

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

inclusive policies because its mandated peacekeeping
and peacebuilding operations have a major role to play
in rebuilding and developing societies in the wake of
conflicts. Cyprus commends the Security Council’s
efforts to increase the participation of women in
peacekeeping operations, which is emblematic of
inclusive policies. Similarly, an inclusive society is one
in which women have equal participation at all levels,
as their crucial role in the prevention and resolution in
conflicts cannot be doubted.
In conclusion, peace and security, respect for
fundamental freedoms and combating discrimination
and all forms of violence are critical conditions for
development; but at the same time there are also
developmental outcomes. Addressing the sources of
conflict requires a multidimensional approach that
must take into account the interrelated dimensions of
development, human rights, peace and security and the
rule of law. We firmly believe that 2015 will provide
us with a unique opportunity to shape a more peaceful,
just and prosperous world that will leave no one behind.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Armenia welcomes
and thanks the Chilean presidency of the Security
Council for initiating the present debate. We concur
with your conclusion, Mr. President, that inclusive
development manifestly embraces the three pillars of
the United Nations system, namely, peace and security,
development and human rights. We also view the
significance of the issue very much in the context of
the function of prevention.
In that respect, the United Nations system and the
relevant regional and subregional organizations indeed
have an important role and a reasonable set of available
tools and mechanisms to address prevention. However,
it needs to be recalled time and again that the primary
responsibility for preventing conflicts lies with nation
States. To a considerable degree, the capacity of
national Governments to deliver on their responsibility
and to act in favour of the prevention of conflict lies
in their consistent promotion of policies of inclusion.
The two objectives intertwine. Therefore, we believe
that consistent analysis and review of the conduct of
inclusive policies by national Governments provides
tangible benchmarks for assessing stability and
detecting the warning signs that point to implications
of failure.

S/PV.7361

Over the years, the international community,
in particular the United Nations, as well as relevant
regional and subregional organizations, have developed
a diverse set of tools for peer review, information
gathering and analysis and the monitoring of situations.
However, without undermining the progress made in that
respect, we should admit to the lack of sufficient action
in addressing policy failures at an early stage — and
well before the international community faces a crisis
situation. We fully share the President’s argument about
situations of exclusion and discrimination as being the
root causes of many conflicts. We view monitoring,
detecting and resolutely acting on such situations as a
function of early warning and preventive diplomacy.
Striking a balance between detecting situations and
acting upon them remains an ongoing challenge at both
the national and international levels. The 1994 genocide
in Rwanda is an extreme and poignant case in point.
We recognize the conduct of inclusive policies for
development as a complex issue in the overall conduct
of national policies within boundaries, which relates
directly to their institutional capacities as much as
to the very nature of governance and the building of
national institutions. Therefore, inclusive policies are a
derivative of an inclusive Government.
We strongly believe that Governments and
national institutions that promote, follow and abide
by the principles and norms of the rule of law, good
governance, democracy, equality and human rights
are adequately equipped to sustain stable societies.
Sustained economic and social development, poverty
eradication, combating corruption and other policies of
equitable distribution of national wealth fundamentally
reinforce the sustainability of stable societies.
However, the effective pursuit of that set of objectives
is attainable and tangible first within a framework of
justice, political equality, democratic participation and
inclusion.
Strictly speaking, it cannot be assumed that
development follows democracy, because the objectives
are firmly interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
However, the generation of wealth without its equitable
distribution is idiosyncratic to societies with weak
democratic institutions. It is a primary source of
exclusion and injustice.
We believe that the post-2015 development
agenda and the formulation of the next generation of
sustainable development goals should duly reflect such

15-0158479/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

considerations, bearing in mind, among other things,
the security aspect of inclusive development.
Exclusion and discrimination, as the antithesis of
inclusive and participatory governance, underlie the
challenge to the legitimacy of sovereignty claims over
populations and territories. Such policies of exclusion
and discrimination have multiple forms of expression.
They are particularly acute and prone to exploding into
conflict situations where such policies are not merely
condoned, but consistently upheld and promoted at
the highest level of Government. Incitement to hatred,
hate speech, xenophobia and other forms of fuelling
discrimination are triggers to exclusion at all levels. We
know of situations where such policies aim primarily
at consolidating a dictatorial grip on power. There
is legitimacy in resistance and self-defence when
there is an existential threat to the physical security
of populations at risk. History knows of examples of
waiving the legitimacy claim of territorial integrity in
favour of self-determination when there is a breakdown
of political, moral or ethical commitment and capacity to
safeguard populations from outright extermination and
death. The claim of a conflict between those two norms
of international law must therefore be consistently and
carefully measured against every specific situation.
The ultimate and most dehumanizing forms of
exclusion and discrimination are genocide and other
atrocity crimes. The Secretary-General has accurately
defined the broad consensus among the international
community and the community of genocide scholars,
according to which genocide and other atrocity crimes
are not spontaneous and isolated events; rather, they
are processes with histories, precursors and triggering
factors, which, combined, enable their commission.
In that respect, we welcome and commend the recent
Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes — a tool for
prevention developed jointly by the Special Advisers on
the Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility
to Protect.
A careful study and analysis of the Framework and
the set of risk factors therein reveals a strong, visible
linkage between the consistent failures of inclusive
policies, on the one hand, and the degeneration of
situations to atrocity crimes, on the other. A weaknesses
of State structures, including the lack of an independent
and impartial judiciary, high levels of corruption, poor
governance and the absence of accountability, as well
as the lack of representative national civil society and a
diverse and independent national media, as well as acts

80/86

19/01/2015

of incitement and hate propaganda, are examples of
risk factors related directly to the failures of inclusive
development.
The Framework is therefore an indispensable tool
in the analysis and assessment of inclusive policies,
combined with the function of prevention. We encourage
the Security Council to pay heed to the Framework in
its analysis of specific situations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen Phuong Nga (Viet Nam): It is an
honour for me to speak at this meeting of the Security
Council on behalf of His Excellency Mr. Pham Binh
Minh, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister
of Viet Nam. Allow me first to congratulate Chile
on assuming the presidency of the Council for this
month. We have full confidence in your stewardship,
Mr. President. Please rest assured of Viet Nam’s support.
We share the view expressed by many speakers today
that inclusive development and international peace and
security are intimately interlinked. They are two of the
main pillars of the work of the United Nations, which
are appropriately addressed by separate United Nations
organs in accordance with their respective mandates.
The active inclusion of all groups and stakeholders
in a country’s political, social and economic life,
while ensuring that all legitimate interests, voices and
concerns are taken into account, will not only prevent
marginalization and possible radicalization but will
also promote stable and peaceful societies. That is
true in times of peace, and even more so in times of
challenges and crises and in any peacebuilding effort.
Peace cannot be sustained in the absence of
inclusive development. But peace is also a critical
enabler for development, and indispensable to attaining
sustainable development, as recognized in the Rio+20
outcome document (resolution 66/288, annex). The
maintenance of peace and security within nations, as
well as regionally and internationally, is a prerequisite
for development.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa took the Chair.
Viet Nam is a nation of 90 million people
from 54 different ethnic groups and very diverse
socioeconomic, historical and religious backgrounds,
who have lived harmoniously and peacefully as one.
Viet Nam understands and believes in the values of
inclusion, equality, non-discrimination, conciliation
15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

and tolerance. Our national strategies and policies are
based on those values, with special attention paid to
poor people, ethnic minorities, women and children
and people with disabilities, so that they can participate
in and share the benefits of development. Thanks to
those efforts, Viet Nam has been able to reduce poverty,
maintain the country’s stability and continue along its
development path.
In our region, South-East Asia, which was once a
battlefield, the 10 nations of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) strive to unlock the potentials
of each and all of us to narrow the development gap and
reduce inequalities within and among our countries to
pursue the goal of an inclusive, peaceful and prosperous
ASEAN community. ASEAN works with all partners
in the region and beyond in a common endeavour to
maintain regional peace, stability and security to allow
for our region’s robust economic performance and
social progress.
Lastly, inclusive development at the international
level and equality among nations are equally important
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
Addressing the root causes of conflicts and crises must
include promoting sustained economic growth, poverty
eradication, sustainable development and the rule of
law at the international level, including the peaceful
settlement of disputes. That requires strengthened
international cooperation and partnership and the
creation of a favourable international environment for
all nations to thrive, especially developing countries.
At the same time, none of those things will be
possible without international peace and security, the
maintenance of which is the primary responsibility of
the Security Council.
Viet Nam continues to work closely with
other Member States for inclusive and sustainable
development for the maintenance of international peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Greece.
Mr. Spinellis (Greece): At the outset, since this
is the first time I have an opportunity, I would like to
extend my warm congratulations to the newly elected
members of the Security Council — Angola, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Spain and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela — and to wish them every success.
Furthermore, allow me to express our deep appreciation
to Chile for taking the initiative to convene this

S/PV.7361

pertinent and timely debate. I would also wish to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ambassador Patriota
of Brazil and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Leymah
Gbowee for their comprehensive briefings.
Greece aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, as well as with the
statement delivered by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the Human Security Network. I would also
like to convey some additional points from a national
standpoint.
Recent events around the world are serve as a
pointed reminder of the imperative of addressing the
underlying and root causes of conflict by promoting
sustainable development, inclusion, equality, the rule of
law and respect for human rights and inclusive political
processes. It is undoubtedly well-established common
knowledge that security and development are closely
interrelated and mutually reinforcing in attaining
sustainable peace. Furthermore, building sustainable
peace is inescapably linked to inclusive development.
On several occasions, the Security Council has
underlined its readiness to strive for sustainable peace
in all situations under its consideration.
Sustainable peace requires that we ensure that
no person is denied universal human rights and basic
economic opportunities, while, at the same time, the
needs of the most disadvantaged and vulnerable are
respected. The economic and political integration
of marginalized populations is a determining factor
for peace and security. Fundamental freedoms must
be respected, protected and fulfilled, including the
freedoms of expression, association and the media,
while democratic governance and the rule of law should
prevail.
Furthermore, Greece, being a member of the
Human Security Network, believes that the human
security approach can make a significant contribution
to today’s discussions. When confronting the multiple
vulnerabilities that affect different countries and
communities, through its multidimensional and
comprehensive vision, human security addresses those
challenges through the elements of peace and security,
development and human rights — the three interlinked
pillars of the United Nations system.
Inclusive development diminishes the risk of
conflict and enables long-term stability and sustainable
peace while ensuring equal opportunity and equitable
access to basic services, which are indispensable for

15-0158481/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

social development and inclusive societies. The United
Nations is key in promoting inclusive development. The
Security Council in particular has a unique opportunity
to implement inclusive development policies through
its peacekeeping operations, which play a major role
in rebuilding and developing societies in the wake of
conflict.
Moreover, it should be noted that the securitydevelopment nexus is also relevant as we seek to
address the very pertinent threat of terrorism. In that
sense, we recognize that concrete progress in the areas
of security, justice, human rights and the rule of law are
critical both for tackling terrorism and for achieving
sustainable development.
Situated in the Eastern Mediterranean, a region
that has witnessed great political turmoil in recent
years, Greece is a strong advocate of inclusive and
sustainable development as an enabler of long-term
stability and sustainable peace. Therefore, we are
strongly committed to continuing to promote the
placement of peaceful societies at the centre of the post2015 development agenda.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cambodia.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): At the outset, I would like to
join previous speakers in congratulating the Republic
of Chile and you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month and,
more important, for organizing this important open
debate on inclusive development for the maintenance
of international peace and security. I would also like to
thank His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon;
His Excellency Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota,
Permanent Representative of Brazil and Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission; and Ms. Leymah Gbowee,
Nobel Peace Prize laureate and President of the
Gbowee Peace Foundation Africa, for their briefings
this morning.
In many ways, the world in which we are living
in is at a critical juncture, and the current picture is
rather bleak. The international community remains
seriously concerned about recent geopolitical security
developments in many parts of the world. While we
are accelerating our efforts to attain the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), the existence of internal
and external conflicts still cause disruption to our
overall development.
The respective attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria, Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram,
82/86

19/01/2015

the murders of school children in Pakistan, the brutal
attack by terrorists against the French magazine Charlie
Hebdo in Paris and the terrorist attacks in Nigeria
have posed further challenges for the international
community in maintaining its commitment. Therefore,
the United Nations must become more relevant to
address the increasing terrorism and extremism, which
threaten peace and security.
Cambodia would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate its condemnation, in the strongest terms, of the
recent terrorist attack against Charlie Hebdo. Cambodia
will engage with the international community to fight
all forms of terrorism.
Many conflicts have arisen from disparity,
including from socioeconomic and gender inequality
and religious and ideological differences, which require
us to further focus on finding a better and long-lasting
solution.
To secure equity and proportional distribution,
the regional and international integration of postconflict countries is important to ensure that they
do not fall back into conflict. Peace can be fragile.
It should therefore be sustained through long-term
development, which includes the rule of law, human
rights, democracy, national reconciliation, poverty
eradication, gender equality, sustainable economic
growth and development, justice and interreligious
interfaith.
At its core is the quest to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), which range from
alleviating extreme poverty to providing universal
primary education. However, Cambodia believes that
many developing countries did not attain their MDGs
primarily due to unfulfilled commitments, lack of
resources, insufficient dedication and food insecurity.
The situation was further aggravated by financial
uncertainty in the developed countries, which had an
effect on their commitment to official development
assistance. Therefore, bolder global efforts are needed,
as we are approaching the deadline to realize the MDGs.
Cambodia also attaches great importance to the
promotion of equality and fundamental rights. In that
regard, Cambodia welcomes the celebration of the
twentieth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference
on Women, which would give greater impetus to efforts
to advance gender equality and women’s empowerment
in the post-2015 development agenda, and is prepared
to join the high-level thematic debate on that topic,

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

which will be convened by the President of the General
Assembly in March 2015.
On regional efforts, I wish to endorse the statement
delivered by the representative of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) at the General
Assembly in December 2014, which laid out ASEAN’s
long-standing vision to integrate our people from
different backgrounds, ethnicities, languages, religions
and cultures towards a common future of peace and
prosperity while we strive to realize the goals of the
ASEAN Community in 2015. My delegation also
wishes to acknowledge the ASEAN commitment to
working towards the Millennium Development Goals
and post-2015 development agenda, as we believe that
peace must go hand in hand with development. In
the meantime, we are working to realize the ASEAN
Community’s post-2015 vision, which was agreed upon
at the 2014 ASEAN Summit.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nicaragua.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to welcome
the presence here this morning of Her Excellency
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, President of the Republic of
Chile. We congratulate her delegation on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. We know
that the leadership of the brotherly nation of Chile,
a member of the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States, augurs well for the success of the
Council’s work.
We also welcome the presentations made by
Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent
Representative of Brazil, and Ms. Leymah Gbowee,
Nobel Peace Prize laureate.
We welcome the new Council members Angola,
Spain, Malaysia, New Zealand and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
Nicaragua aligns itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of South Africa on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
This debate is taking place during a historic year
for the United Nations, in which we will negotiate the
post-2015 development agenda. That agenda should
set us on a consensus-based path towards ending once
and for all the scourges we face today, namely poverty,
hunger, disease and climate change. In short, we need
an agenda to save humankind from the many scourges

S/PV.7361

we face. In this debate, it is important that we take as a
starting point the functions, powers and responsibilities
of each of the United Nations bodies and their respective
mandates, in strict compliance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
When we speak of development in the Security
Council, we cannot set precedents, and we must preserve
and refrain from altering the major intergovernmental
agreements that have been reached by consensus,
including the outcome document of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 66/288, annex) and the
Sustainable Development Goals, which are the basis for
the upcoming post-2015 development agenda we must
approve.
Our work on security matters must move towards a
commitment to the promotion of human development,
which must be understood as sustainable development.
The complexity of peacekeeping operations entails a
need for a focus that is different from the current one,
in accordance with the needs of each State or region
where peacekeeping forces are being deployed, and
not attempts to implement a single policy for different
situations. The full approval and involvement of the
States concerned and respect for their sovereignty and
territorial integrity is crucial. We must also continue to
strengthen the Peacebuilding Commission and achieve
effective and efficient coordination between States,
particularly in the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the high-level political forum
on sustainable development.
Development, peace and security are interdependent
and mutually reinforcing. However, we must prioritize
inclusive and sustainable development as essential
requirements for ensuring security and stability. To
contribute to peace and security, our efforts must
focus on inclusive development that reinforces the
commitment of all to eradicating poverty and achieving
sustainable development in which environmental,
economic and social concerns are integrated in a
balanced manner.
For Nicaragua, the commitment to security includes
a commitment to the promotion of human development,
which must be understood as sustainable development.
Such development is human-centred and implemented
in an environment of good governance, with direct
citizen participation and social equity. Those are
elements necessary to achieving the Millennium

15-0158483/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

19/01/2015

Development Goals and, beyond them, the Sustainable
Development Goals.

without conditions of any kind, under strict respect for
non-interference in the internal affairs of States.

The interplay between security and development
must take into account the economic and social reality
prevailing in conflict and post-conflict situations. That
will help in the development of a strategy in which
development programmes are the first instruments that
we must consider and wield, before weapons for security.
The order of priorities should often be reversed. It is
sustainable development that will strengthen security
and stability and therefore peace in the world.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.

We have seen conflict situations in which the
approach based purely on security considerations,
undertaken in places where it is generally acknowledged
that the problem is socioeconomic, has not yielded the
desired results. On the other hand, it is enough to glance
at the resources allocated to peacekeeping operations
and those earmarked for development to realize that
the difference between the two is both gaping and
truly inexplicable. Therefore, an objective and realistic
approach is to learn from past experiences and enable
resources to be mobilized to confront and resolve the
root causes of the problem. In so doing, it is essential
that developed countries fulfil the commitments they
have undertaken. Security is certainly required, but it is
the security of decent work, food security, the security
that comes with adequate housing, security for working
families to live in dignity, the security of a life without
poverty, and the security and resources to combat the
trafficking in drugs and arms.
If attention is not paid to such necessities for our
peoples, or if it is not adequately paid, it will lead to
citizen insecurity, violence and situations that could
end up before the Security Council. We must take care
to not place conditions on the sustainable development
agenda by trying to impose concepts that undermine
our peoples’ sovereignty. Such concepts have not
been agreed at the intergovernmental level and thus
violate the basic social, economic and environmental
commitments that we need to address on a priority
basis.
In conclusion, we agree with the statement in the
concept note (S/2015/6, annex) circulated by Chile,
which states that numerous conflicts have their root
causes in situations of exclusion or discrimination,
including socioeconomic exclusion. Given those
aspects, the answer must obviously not be military
in character, but rather of assistance to development,

84/86

Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): I would like to
thank the Chilean presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this very important and timely meeting
on the topic of the maintenance of international peace
and security. I am also grateful to Ambassador Antonio
Patriota, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), and Nobel Peace Prize winner Ms. Leymah
Gbowee for their insightful briefings.
Peace and security have increasingly and invariably
become a development issue. Conflicts bring about
casualties whose consequences extend far beyond those
killed and wounded. The cost of armed conflict and
insecurity throughout the world is enormous, whether
in terms of human suffering, loss of social capital or
economically. Conflicts undermine the basic political,
social and financial institutions required to maintain
stability and promote inclusive development. It is
important that the Council continue to promote peace,
security and development as mutually reinforcing
pillars. For other countries suffering from conflict and
foreign occupation, drawing lessons from the work of
the PBC, we strongly believe that conflict resolution
and post-conflict peacebuilding are dependent on a
number of underlying principles.
First, there can be no peace without justice. No
peace settlement can be reached that is inconsistent
with international law, particularly where pre-emptory
norms are concerned, such as the prohibition of
aggression, genocide and racial discrimination and
the obligation to respect the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of States.
Secondly, the violation of the rights of civilians,
in particular in connection with ethnic cleansing, has
become a widespread problem in the context of armed
conflicts. The need to develop tools for egregious
violations of international law, including violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law,
the provision of effective and adequate reparation to
victims and the need for institutional action to prevent
recurrence of such violence are all necessary adjuncts
to true conflict resolution.
Thirdly, the fight against impunity for past crimes
should be at the core of the peace and reconciliation
agenda.

15-01584

19/01/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Fourthly, the protracted displacement of populations
as a result of aggression and foreign occupation is
another obstacle to inclusive development. The impact
of conflict on housing, land and property, as well as the
violation of the principle of non-discrimination with
regard to internally displaced persons and refugees,
including forced demographic changes, require a
more consistent approach in order to put an end to
illegal practices and policies and to ensure a safe and
dignified return of those displaced to their homes. It
is important that the international community facilitate
opportunities in order to ensure that the rights of
forcibly displaced people are guaranteed and protected.
Fifthly, in the case of foreign occupation, the
exportation of natural resources and other illegal
activities are pursued with the sole objective of
consolidating military gains, preventing the expelled
population to return to their homes and obstructing
ongoing efforts aimed at achieving peace. It is crucial
that the impact of natural resources on inter-State
conflicts, particularly the illegal exportation of such
resources by States in violation of international law,
also receive the Council’s due consideration within its
thematic work.
We firmly believe that an effective peacebuilding
process in the post-conflict context can take root and
succeed if a genuine peace, based on the generally
accepted norms and principles of international law, in
particular those pertaining to respect for the territorial
integrity and political independence of a State, are
established on the ground.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Benin.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to commend the choice of the
extremely interesting theme of this Security Council
debate, entitled “Maintenance of international peace
and security: Inclusive development for the maintenance
of peace and security”. This debate seems very timely,
as we are entering the last stage of the negotiations that
will lead to the adoption, in September 2015, of a post2015 development agenda.
Today, the correlation between peace, security
and development needs no further demonstration,
because the events taking place throughout the world
further demonstrate the intrinsic links between those
three dimensions. My country, which hosted the
Fourth International Conference on New or Restored

S/PV.7361

Democracies, dealt with this issue within that
framework. But the problem of exclusion as one of the
major root causes of the rupture of national consensus
on the social contract has not received the attention it
deserves.
The marginalization of important social groups,
such as youth and women, or of certain regions for
the benefit of urban areas or favouring those in power,
even certain ethnic or religious minorities, constitutes a
factor of delegitimization, not only of those who govern
but also of the State infrastructure that tolerates and
promotes the emergence of destablizing social divisions.
The decline in ethics and the fight for access to natural
resources promotes corruption and the diversion of
public funds to personal use and deprives the State of
the means to ensure vital public services. The worst of
it is that such ill-gotten gains are used to buy public
awareness in order to maintain a remuneration system
that undermines national institutions and makes
them even less capable of undertaking their statutory
functions. Such evils are without doubt catalysts for
potential conflicts, with devastating consequences.
Not prosecuting financial crimes serves to promote
a culture of impunity and lawlessness and favours the
existence of tax havens and the practice of secret banking
that makes it possible to off-shore illegally obtained
gains and to provide the perpetrators of economic
crimes a golden retirement abroad. Sometimes the
State’s structural weakness has reached such a level
that those persons suspected of financial crimes may
also enjoy the benefits from that lapse and, despite
everyone being aware of their crimes, they can enjoy
an opulent lifestyle and the benefits of their crimes
without any restrictions. The illicit amounts involved
leaving Africa are incommensurate with the resources
that come to the continent through legal means. Such
situations, because of the crises we have seen in recent
years, have on several continents led to revolts and civil
wars that have undermined all the efforts made in the
past and all the economic progress achieved over many
years.
The persistence of major socioeconomic inequality
between and within States can fuel radicalization
and, above all, promote asymmetrical conflicts.
Radicalization is always possible when a certain level
of tolerance for frustration is overstepped. Development
is an issue for all social strata living within a given
country, and all members of society need to be involved
and to enjoy the benefits that their country provides.

15-0158485/86

S/PV.7361

Maintenance of international peace and security

Development must be inclusive. Young people, women
and minorities, who are often marginalized in some
countries although they have immense potential to
contribute to development, must be taken into account.
Reforms promoting inclusive development and shared
prosperity can help prevent war and ensure lasting
peace.
In that regard, the international community must
be more focused on the structural dysfunctions within
States, which, although they are a domestic concern,
also have a real impact on international peace and
security. Those concerns were addressed in resolution
1625 (2005) negotiated by Benin during its most
recent membership in the Council. The African Union
Peer Review Mechanism also seeks to achieve that
end. There is no harm in the Security Council, the
principle body responsible for international peace and
security, persistently encouraging States Members of
the Organization to undertake the necessary reforms
to eliminate such dysfunctions, which pose a threat to
peace and security. Furthermore, this problem could
be the subject of information-exchange between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
under Article 65 of the Charter of the United Nations, as
explicitly noted in presidential statement S/PRST/2015/3,
adopted this morning. The Peacebuilding Commission
could also contribute to that end were it not for the
restrictions that have been imposed upon that body
through its enabling resolutions.

19/01/2015

In that regard, we cannot insist strongly enough
on the need for political leaders, whatever group they
belong to, to go beyond speeches and rhetoric to take
concrete account of the linkages among the ideas of
development, peace and security. The actions taken by
the United Nations on the ground in terms of security
and the promotion of sustainable development must
more than ever be coordinated with governmental
activities in the beneficiairy countries in order to
continue to make a significant and effective contribution
to stabilizing and improving the security situation,
protecting civilians and promoting social inclusion of
the victims of social exclusion.
Today, armed violence related to drug trafficking,
natural disasters caused by climate change, poverty
and the lack of social protection threaten human
security and hinder development. We must take all
those concerns into account not only in the post-2015
development agenda, but also in conflict-prevention
efforts. My delegation therefore wishes to express its
support for the presidential statement adopted by the
Security Council on the subject of today’s debate and
also the contents of the concept note addressed to
the Secretary-General by the Ambassador of Chile,
President of the Security Council (S/2015/6).
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names on the list of speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of the
agenda item.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

86/86

15-01584
