S/PV.4163

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 June 2000
English
Original: English and French

Official communiqué of the 4163rd meeting of the
Security Council
Held in private in the Security Council Chamber at Headquarters,
New York, on Wednesday, 21 June 2000, at 11.25 a.m.
At its 4163rd meeting, held in private on 21 June 2000 at 11.25 a.m., the
Security Council considered the situation in Sierra Leone.
In accordance with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, the Security Council met with the delegation of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Mediation and Security Council
Committee of Six on Sierra Leone. The delegation was comprised of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Mali (leader of the delegation), the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Ghana, Liberia, Nigeria and Togo, and the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Guinea to the United Nations, to whom invitations were
extended in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure; and the Executive Secretary of ECOWAS,
who was invited in accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
The members of the Security Council and of the Ministerial Committee had a
full discussion of the current situation in Sierra Leone. They agreed that their
common aim, in accordance with the objectives set out in the Lomé Agreement, was
to restore stability and normality throughout Sierra Leone, putting an end to
violence and encouraging reconciliation between all parties to the conflict.
Council members and the ECOWAS Committee condemned the continued
detention by the RUF of United Nations peacekeepers of the Indian contingent of
UNAMSIL, and the denial of freedom of movement to a large number of other
United Nations personnel in the east of the country. They demanded the immediate
and unconditional release of all United Nations personnel detained or surrounded,
recalled the mandate given by the Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS to
the President of Liberia to obtain the release of the remaining hostages and called on
all leaders in the region to ensure this is brought about speedily.
It was the common position of members of the Security Council and members
of the ECOWAS delegation that the terms of the Lomé Agreement have been flouted
by the violation of the ceasefire, the attacks on UNAMSIL and the taking of

00-49244 (E) 210600
`````````

S/PV.4163

hostages. With the help of appropriate inquiries, those identified as responsible
should be brought to justice.
Members of the Security Council and the ECOWAS delegation expressed their
concern about the humanitarian situation in Sierra Leone and called upon all parties
to ensure safe and unhindered access of humanitarian assistance to those in need in
Sierra Leone, in particular the refugees and displaced persons, women and children.
They called upon all States, international and other organizations to provide urgent
and substantial humanitarian assistance to the people of Sierra Leone.
Members of the Security Council commended the ECOWAS States for their
enormous sacrifice and contribution to the cause of peace and stability in Sierra
Leone and called on ECOWAS members to continue to support peacekeeping efforts
in Sierra Leone.
The members of the ECOWAS delegation look to the United Nations to
continue providing the Government of Sierra Leone with the necessary assistance to
restore law and order in the country and resuming security control throughout the
territory. Members of the Security Council informed the members of the ECOWAS
delegation of ongoing discussion within the Security Council on draft resolutions
concerning the strengthening of UNAMSIL, the control of diamond exports and
arms imports and on the provision of justice.

2
