136

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

including those submitted during the thirty-second and
thirty-third sessions of the General Assembly;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session an item entitled "International
Youth Year" and to grant it the highest priority, due
consideration being given to the final designation of
the most suitable period for the celebration of such
a Year.
43rd plenary meeting
3 November 1978

33/8.

Physical education and sports exchanges
among young people

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Promotion among
Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and
Understanding between Peoples, proclaimed in General
Assembly resolution 2037 (XX) of 7 December 1965,
Bearing in mind principle IV of the Declaration,
which enumerates some of the activities that should
be encouraged and facilitated among young people in
order to bring them together in educational, cultural
and sporting activities in the spirit of the Declaration,
Noting the efforts being made by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to
enhance the role of physical education and sports in
school curricula and their importance in promoting
universal understanding and friendship among peoples,
Convinced that physical education and sports exchanges can contribute to international efforts to promote peace, mutual understanding, co-operation and
the development of friendly relations among peoples,
Convinced also that participation in sports exchanges
with teams selected on the basis of apartheid violates
the fundamental human rights of the great majority of
the people of South Africa,
1. Recommends that Member States should adopt
the necessary measures to promote physical education
and sports exchange programmes, particularly among
young people and on the basis of equality of men
and women, in order to improve the quality of life,
inculcate fundamental human values and promote
selfless competition, solidarity and full respect for the
integrity and dignity of all human beings;

2. Calls upon all States to take appropriate action
to bring about the total cessation of sporting contacts
with any country practising apartheid and to refrain
from official sponsorship, assistance or encouragement
of such contacts;
3. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, regional organizations
and other interested organizations and programmes
within the United Nations system to intensify their
efforts to promote meetings between young people
through sports and physical education activities;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a report
on the activities undertaken by Member States, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, regional organizations and other interested organizations and programmes within the

United Nations system in the field of physical education and sports, particularly among young people.
43rd plenary meeting
3 November 1978
33/23.

Adverse consequences for the enjoyment
of human rights of political, military,
economic and other forms of assistance
given to colonial and raf'ist regimes in
southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3382 (XXX) and 3383
(XXX) of 10 November 1975 and 31 /33 of 30 November 1976,
Recalling also its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, and its resolution
3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Mindful of its resolution 3171 (XXVIII) of 17 December 1973 relating to permanent sovereignty over
natural resources of both developing countries and
territories under colonial and foreign domination or
subjected to the apartheid regime,
Bearing in mind resolutions 7 (XXXIII) of 4 March
1977 5 and 6 (XXXIV) of 22 February 1978 6 of the
Commission on Human Rights,
Having taken note of the report prepared and
brought up to date by the Special Rapporteur on the
adverse consequences for the enjoyment of human
rights of political, military, economic and other forms
of assistance given to colonial and racist regimes in
southern Africa, 7
Convinced that the above-mentioned report contains
additional evidence enabling the General Assembly to
conclude that the political, military, economic and
other forms of assistance given to the racist and
colonialist regimes in South Africa and Southern Rhodesia by certain States is the major factor in the perpetuation of the abominable policies of these regimes
inasmuch as they adversely affect the human rights
and fundamental freedoms of the oppressed peoples
of southern Africa,
Taking note of resolution 2 (XXXI) of 13 September 1978 8 of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,
Noting further that the maintenance by certain
States of political, economic, military and other relations with the racist regime of South Africa is in
flagrant and deliberate violation of the purposes and
principles of the Charter and the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations,
Convinced that the continued military and nuclear
co-operation of certain States and organizations with
the racist regime of South Africa constitutes a serious
5 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/5927), chap. XXI,
sect. A.
n See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXV, sect. A.
7 E/CN.4/Sub.2/383/Rev.l.
s See E/CN.4/1296, chap. xvn. sect. A.
