S/2021/5

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 January 2021
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on his mission of good offices
in Cyprus

I. Introduction
1.
The Security Council, in its resolution 2537 (2020), requested me to submit a
report by 10 January 2021 on my good offices, in particular on progress towards
reaching a consensus starting point for meaningful results-oriented negotiations
leading to a settlement. In that resolution, the Council also encouraged the leaders of
the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities to provide written updates to my
mission of good offices on the actions that they have taken in support of the relevant
parts of the resolution since its adoption, in particular with regard to paragraphs 5, 6
and 8, with a view to reaching a sustainable and comprehensive settlement, and
requested me to include the contents of those updates in my report. The updates
submitted by the two leaders are contained in annexes I and II to the present report.
2.
The present report is focused on developments from 19 June to 18 December
2020, providing an update on the activities carried out by my mission of good offices
under the leadership of my Deputy Special Adviser on Cyprus, Elizabeth Spehar. It
also includes an update on the consultations conducted by senior United Nations
official Jane Holl Lute on my behalf.

II. Background and context
3.
Since my previous report on my mission of good offices ( S/2020/685), public
confidence in the possibility of securing a settlement dropped from an already low
level. Media attention largely remained focused on continuing disputes both on the
island and in the Eastern Mediterranean region, the process of electing a new Turkish
Cypriot leader and the progression and effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
in Cyprus and related restrictions. Few instances of constructive or harmonized
messages from the two leaders that could resonate with both communities, or in
support of the peace process, were registered. On the contrary, internal rifts and
controversies in the south, as well as increased polarization in connection with the
leadership elections and political processes in the north, have created additional
challenges and both communities have become more inward-looking. The absence of
negotiations since the inconclusive closing of the Conference on Cy prus in 2017
continues to stoke political tensions on the island.
4.
The political and socioeconomic situation on the island continued to be
negatively affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting restrictions

20-17808 (E)

120121

*2017808*

S/2021/5

introduced by the authorities on both sides. While the number of cases decreased at
the beginning of the summer, a slow increase was recorded following the reopening
of ports of entry in the north and the south, with cases often concentrated in specific
areas and linked to travellers from abroad rather than local transmission. This changed
when a steady spike in cases was recorded, in particular in the north in late summer
and in the south in November, leading to the reintroduction of significant, targeted
restrictive measures, including local lockdowns in specific areas. Crossings between
the two sides of the island remained strictly constrained, with some crossing points
closed completely and others severely limited on the basis of testing requirements or
other prohibitions. Despite exceptions made for certain categories of individuals
residing in the north or the south, the measures generally posed significant practical
challenges to movement across the divide and to the continuation of bicommunal
contacts and trust-building activities. Towards the end of the reporting period,
uncoordinated decisions between the sides to impose additional restrictive measures
at the crossing points contributed to an increase in political tensions. My most recent
report on the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) (S/2021/4)
contains more details.
5.
During the reporting period, the authorities in both communities undertook
various efforts to mitigate the effects of COVID-19, including on their respective
economies. Ports of entry were reopened on 9 June in the south and on 1 July in the
north in attempts to revive the tourism sector, one of the main sources of revenue
generation on both sides. Tourism revenue in both communities nonetheless recorded
a significant decrease, and the adverse economic effects of the pandemic continue to
be far-reaching.
6.
The institutional responses of the two sides to the virus continued to be largely
uncoordinated. While some level of mutual assistance between the two communities
was observed, several offers of assistance from one side to the other were either not
accepted or considered not acceptable to the other party. A modest level of exchange
of information and cooperation on specific issues and individual cases was
maintained, however, through the bicommunal Technical Committee on Health,
facilitated by my mission of good offices.
7.
The United Nations continued to strictly follow internal measures to mitigate
the risks associated with the pandemic with respect to the duration of quarantine and
testing requirements, following protocols that were more stringent t han local
obligations.
8.
In remarks to the press on 16 September, following the start of the seventy -fifth
session of the General Assembly, as well as in separate virtual meetings with both
leaders, I underscored my commitment to revitalize the political process for a
settlement and recalled that there was a consensus to proceed with diplomatic
initiatives on the Cyprus peace talks after the leadership elections in the north in
October. I also stressed the importance of developing confidence -building measures
and avoiding any unilateral actions that could undermine the future success of
negotiations. As agreed previously in my meeting with the Greek Cypriot leader,
Nicos Anastasiades, and the then Turkish Cypriot leader, Mustafa Akıncı, in Berlin in
November 2019, and noted in my statement following the encounter, I committed to
exploring the possibilities with the leaders and the guarantor powers of convening an
informal five-plus-one meeting 1 and to extending my efforts to seek a consensus
starting point for phased, meaningful and results-oriented negotiations.

__________________
1

2/24

An informal meeting of the Greek Cypriot leader, the Turkish Cypriot leader, the guarantor
powers and the United Nations.
20-17808

S/2021/5

9.
In the Turkish Cypriot community, campaigning for the leadership elections,
which in March were postponed from April to October owing to the COVID -19
outbreak, intensified during the reporting period. Speeches and debates were centred
largely on the challenging economic situation, including the socioeconomic impact
of COVID-19, and the diverse positions of the candidates on the Cyprus peace talks.
As the campaigning progressed, the future orientation of the north itself increasingly
took centre stage. Voting took place on 11 and 18 October and resulted in the election
of Ersin Tatar as the new Turkish Cypriot leader.
10. At the conclusion of the Turkish Cypriot leadership elections, Mr. Anastasi ades
reached out to Mr. Tatar and they agreed to hold a first informal meeting under the
auspices of my Deputy Special Adviser on 3 November 2020. The encounter was an
opportunity for the two leaders to hold a preliminary informal discussion. After the
meeting, the United Nations issued a statement noting that the two leaders had
expressed their determination to positively respond to my stated commitment to
explore the possibility of convening an informal five-plus-one meeting, in a
conducive climate, at an appropriate stage. The two leaders also gave separate
remarks to the press that day, with Mr. Anastasiades stating that he had conveyed his
determination to participate in an informal five-plus-one meeting “on the basis of
relevant Security Council resolutions and a bizonal, bicommunal federation”.
Mr. Tatar noted that he believed strongly that the time had come to explore new
approaches, such as utilizing the concept of “sovereign equality”, and that the
informal five-plus-one meeting would be an important opportunity for the Turkish
Cypriot side to “table new ideas”.
11. Tensions in the Eastern Mediterranean over hydrocarbons exploration and
maritime zone claims, including the related delimitation of maritime boundaries,
escalated during the reporting period, severely straining relations between the parties,
with potentially dire consequences for the region and beyond. In my engagement with
the parties, including the guarantor powers Greece and Turkey, I urged them to take
steps to reduce tensions and to engage in dialogue in order to resolve their differences
in a peaceful manner.
12. Developments related to Varosha, described in my previous report on UNFICYP
(S/2020/682), continued over the past months, resulting in fractious exchanges and
increased distrust between the sides. On 6 October, following a joint press conference
held by the President of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoǧan, and Mr. Tatar, in which they
announced that the coastline of Varosha would be made accessible to the Turkish
Cypriot public, I stressed the need to avoid any unilateral actions that could trigger
tensions on the island and undermine the return to dialogue or the future success of
talks. I also called upon all parties to engage in dialogue in order to resolve their
differences and reiterated my readiness to bring the parties together. On 8 October, a
section of the beach was opened for access by foot through the fenced -off part of the
city, sparking multiple protests from the Greek Cypriot community, in particular in
the Deryneia/Derinya crossing point area. The Republic of Cyprus expressed strong
concern over the developments and brought the matter to the attention of the Security
Council. On 9 October, the Council discussed Varosha in closed consultations and
issued a presidential statement in which it reaffirmed the status of Varosha as set out
in previous Council resolutions, including resolutions 550 (1984) and 789 (1992),
reiterated that no actions should be carried out that were not in accordance with those
resolutions, expressed its deep concern regarding the announcement to open the
coastline of Varosha and called for the reversal of this course of action and for the
avoidance of any actions that could raise tensions on the island.
13. Mr. Erdoğan visited Varosha on 15 November, together with Mr. Tatar, as part
of the commemoration of the thirty-seventh anniversary of the unilateral declaration
of independence. Both Mr. Erdoğan and Mr. Tatar made statements in which they
20-17808

3/24

S/2021/5

encouraged the former inhabitants of the town to apply for their properties through
the Immovable Property Commission, with Mr. Tatar noting that, in his view, this
would address human rights concerns. Crowds in the north welcomed the visit and
the commemoration, even as some groups of Turkish Cypriots expressed their
disagreement. In the south, the visit and statements prompted denunciations from
Mr. Anastasiades and statements that the events had taken place to “torpedo the
prospect for the creation of the appropriate climate” for the relaunch of the peace
process. Statements of condemnation were also released by the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the
European Commission, Josep Borrell, as well as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Greece. As also outlined in my most recent report on UNFICYP, protests were held
on both sides of the island in reaction to the events, and statements denouncin g both
the visit and its implications were issued by civil society organizations in both
communities.
14. During the reporting period, leaders and representatives of Greek Cypriot and
Turkish Cypriot political parties continued to meet virtually and resum ed their inperson contacts on 12 November, meeting under the auspices of the Embassy of
Slovakia. In a joint statement issued by the Embassy following the event, they
“reaffirmed their support for the commitment of both leaders to accept the initiative
of United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres for an informal five-party
conference”. In the “current difficult circumstances”, the participants stressed, it was
important to continue “to promote confidence-building measures at various levels and
political dialogue, tools that bring the two communities closer together ”.
15. Despite the restrictions on movement related to COVID -19 and the lack of an
active peace process, there have been some activities either initiated or continued in
the past months. The multicommunal grass-roots initiative, Unite Cyprus Now, for
example, continued its dialogue groups online and has also initiated training for
young activists. In addition, the first trilingual podcast station in Cyprus, Island Talks,
was launched with a vision for “a democratic and multicultural Cyprus led by reason
and respect”. As at 1 December, the channel was listened to in 34 countries, hosted
six shows (three in English, two in Turkish and one in Greek) and is preparing to host
more.
16. Marking its tenth anniversary, the Religious Track of the Cyprus Peace Process,
under the auspices of the Embassy of Sweden, continued its role of upholding the
commitment of the religious leaders to peacebuilding and reconciliation, responding
to cases of vandalism and provocation at places of worship and issuing public
statements counteracting displays of hate with calls for religious freedom, coexistence
and peace. A principal concern of the religious leaders remained the present and future
status of their places of worship and the continued lack of proper maintenance and
protection for those places, in accordance with the principles of the right to freedom
of religion or belief. In addition, to mark the 16 Days of Activism against Gender based Violence campaign and the twentieth anniversary of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), the Religious Track focused on women’s rights and equality,
including through a webinar on the theme “Violence against women and girls,
freedom of religion or belief and gender equality ”, held on 23 November in
cooperation with the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

III. Status of the process: consultations
17. With respect to the consultations being conducted on my behalf, Ms. Lute
continued her engagement with the parties to the Conference on Cyprus as part of the

4/24

20-17808

S/2021/5

efforts to assess the conditions to prepare for an informal five -plus-one meeting, with
the hope that the meeting will pave the way for a resumption of negotiations to
achieve a lasting settlement to the Cyprus problem within a foreseeable horizon.
18. Ms. Lute paid her eighth visit to Cyprus from 30 November to 2 December,
holding separate meetings with the two leaders on 1 December. She also engaged in
discussions over the phone during the reporting period, holding separate calls with
the leaders of the two communities and their respective advisers or representatives.
Furthermore, Ms. Lute engaged with representatives of the guarantor powers, Greece,
Turkey and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as well as
with the European Union in its capacity as an observer to the Conference on Cyprus.

IV. Status of the process: activities of my mission of good offices
19. During the reporting period, I personally engaged with a range of interlocutors
on the situation on and around the island. In particular, I held discussions with the
two leaders, the guarantor powers and other interested parties to explore receptiveness
to an informal five-plus-one meeting and on the developing situation in Varosha. The
COVID-19 pandemic curbed outreach activities on the island and hampered the
ability of the mission to convene bicommunal meetings and discussions throughout
the reporting period, which was marked by a growing distance between the two
communities. Despite the constraints, engagement and outreach remained possible,
in particular via online platforms, and my Deputy Special Adviser and mission of
good offices held regular contacts with a variety of interlocutors in both communities,
including the leaders, political parties, civil society organizations, business
community representatives and members of the diplomatic community, such as World
Bank counterparts, focusing, inter alia, on developments on and around the island,
prospects for renewed negotiations and the socioeconomic fallout of the pandemic.
There was also regular engagement with European Union interlocutors, on and off the
island, to ensure coordination, coherence and cooperation in support of the peace
process. In discussions with European Commission officials, the effective
cooperation with the United Nations during the previous period of peace talks was
highlighted, as well as the need for renewed attention and ongoin g support from the
European Union to both communities on the island.
20. The decrease in intercommunal contacts, compounded by the COVID -19
restrictions, posed significant challenges to the efforts to build a culture of peace on
the island and create conditions more favourable to dialogue and mutual trust. My
mission of good offices, in close cooperation and coordination with UNFICYP, was
active in promoting activities and contacts among Cypriots across the divide to
facilitate bicommunal exchanges and activities in areas such as environmental
peacebuilding and gender. My mission of good offices participated in the selection of
the 24 young people from across the island who took part in the UNFICYP Youth
Champions for Environment and Peace initiative and participated in a “buffer zone
clean-up” campaign held on World Cleanup Day on 19 September (see also S/2021/4).
21. My mission of good offices also cooperated with UNFICYP on a series of events
in the context of the twentieth anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). In particular, it helped to facilitate the participation of a Cypriot woman
activist in a virtual event organized with me, in which she addressed the issue of the
participation of women in the Cyprus peace process. Furthermore, a communiqué was
delivered to me on behalf of two bicommunal civil society organizations, Hands
Across the Divide and the Gender Advisory Team, addressing opportunities and
recommendations to strengthen the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda within the context of Cyprus. These included ensuring that provisions

20-17808

5/24

S/2021/5

for gender equality are taken into consideration at all stages when developin g a peace
agreement, addressing gender-specific recommendations that have been proposed
during the course of the peace process, and increasing linkages between the Track 1
peace process and women’s civil society organizations.
22. The revitalization of the work of the technical committees and the increase in
their activities in the aftermath of the outbreak of COVID-19 in Cyprus, as outlined
in my previous report, slowed down in July. The summer break in Cyprus, followed
by a second wave of COVID-19 infections and corresponding restrictions in late
summer and autumn, as well as the lengthy electoral campaign in the north, decreased
the tempo of technical committee activities and the number of meetings and projects
implemented. While arrangements had been made available through my mission of
good offices to allow for safe in-person meetings of the technical committees, in line
with established preventive protocols, including through a donation earlier in the year
of personal protective equipment, technical committees continued almost exclusively
to hold meetings virtually. Several committees, including those on crossings, culture,
gender equality, humanitarian affairs and broadcasting, did not meet at all or met only
once at the level of the team leaders, while others, such as the Technical Committee
on Cultural Heritage, were more active, albeit not to the same degree recorded in my
previous report. Certain committees, however, including the Technical Committee on
Crime and Criminal Matters and its Joint Contact Room (also known as the Joint
Communications Room), carried out noteworthy activities, including those described
in my most recent report on UNFICYP.
23. On 10 September, the Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage resumed its
online weekly meetings and focused on the completion of projects that had started
prior to the lockdown, such as stabilization work on the Agios Georgios and Agios
Iacovos churches, as well as repairs to the Nicosia walls within the buffer zone. With
funding mainly from the European Union, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) continued to support the Committee with the preservation of
selected cultural heritage sites on both sides of the island. A series of videos of the
various cultural heritage sites was created and shared on social media in order to mark
the completion of 18 projects, and a completion ceremony for the Nicosia walls
project was organized on 11 November as a way to increase public awareness of the
work of the Committee.
24. During the reporting period, the Technical Committee on Education met once
virtually. Owing to the challenges posed by the ongoing COVID -19 restrictions, inperson meetings of students and in-person training for teachers were put on hold. At
the same time, online solutions for peace education curriculums and training sessions
for teachers were developed for the voluntary peace education programme “Imagine”,
which takes place under the auspices of the Committee and is implemented by the
Association for Historical Dialogue and Research and the Home for Cooperation with
the support of the Federal Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Germany. In collaboration
with the Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters, the Committee also
continued to work on the project to combat cyberbullying in schools and on social
media.
25. The Technical Committee on the Environment is at an advanced stage in the
development of its website, which will feature an island-wide environmental
directory, aimed at identifying and connecting experts across the div ide to implement
future collaborative projects.
26. The Technical Committee on Health held three virtual meetings and its members
also remained in regular communication, sharing information and working out details
for mutual assistance, when and as agreed. Communication was centred around the
exchange of information on suspected COVID-19 cases from repatriation flights into
6/24

20-17808

S/2021/5

Cyprus, the need for contact tracing and ensuring the observance of other necessary
COVID-19 protocols, the facilitation of the crossing of Turkish Cypriot patients to
the south for medical attention and treatment and the sharing of epidemiological data.
During their meeting on 21 July, Committee members confirmed that they would
remain in communication and alert each other as needed, given the possibility of a
second wave of the virus on the island following the opening of ports of entry in both
communities. The Committee met again on 18 November and discussed progress on
the identification and distribution of medically important mosquit o vectors in Cyprus
and possible next steps. On 23 November, the Committee met to discuss new
restrictions at crossing points. While several offers of assistance for medical
equipment, supplies, testing or hospitalization were made by both sides to the oth er,
they were either not accepted or deemed unnecessary, limiting much of the assistance
provided between the two sides to specific cases.
27. The technical committees continued to submit project proposals to the European
Union-funded facility, a mechanism created in cooperation with the European
Commission, my mission of good offices and UNDP to assist the committees in
building capacity and enhancing the impact and visibility of their work. During the
reporting period, my mission of good offices, along with UNDP, the European
Commission and the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot coordinators for the
committees, reviewed and approved a series of projects involving the Technical
Committees on Culture, Crime and Criminal Matters, Education, the Environment
and Health, with UNDP playing an active support role in the implementation of the
projects. Funding, however, remains underutilized and there is a need for both sides
to strategize towards better use of the facility to revitalize and increase the activities
and initiatives undertaken by the technical committees.
28. Despite several attempts to schedule virtual meetings, the Technical Committee
on Gender Equality did not convene during the reporting period. During this time, the
membership of the Committee changed on both sides.
29. In its resolution 2453 (2019), the Security Council called upon the United
Nations to take forward my proposal “to conduct a gender-sensitive socioeconomic
impact assessment and to share its outcome with both communities”. Following the
well-received launch of the outcome of the assessment on 17 February 2020, as
described in my previous report, a dissemination strategy of the findings was
developed. In addition, my good offices mission, with support from UNDP, provided
impetus to a local initiative to deepen financial literacy and fin ancial management
skills for women in both communities. A series of webinars on the subject has been
held over several weeks by Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot experts, targeting
women of all age groups and backgrounds in both communities. This activity was
aimed at empowering women through financial awareness and education and creating
opportunities for dialogue between women on the island from both communities who
face similar challenges.
30. In contrast to the developments described in my previous report, the current
reporting period saw very limited progress in the implementation of confidence building measures. While several technical committees continued their activities
geared towards building confidence between the two communities, as described
above, there was no progress at the level of the two leaders on a number of long standing, potential confidence-building measures tabled by both sides and no
agreement on new ones. Following the leadership contest in the north, the United
Nations encouraged both sides to renew their efforts to agree on measures that would
bring the communities closer together. Such efforts would be particularly timely,
given that public health concerns owing to the COVID-19 pandemic and related
movement restrictions continue to severely hamper intercommunal contact,
engagement and cooperation across the island.
20-17808

7/24

S/2021/5

V. Observations
31. At the onset of the pandemic, I called for a global ceasefire because the world
faces a common enemy: COVID-19. In my speech to the General Assembly, I
emphasized that now is the time for a collective new push for peace and
reconciliation. I appealed for a stepped-up international effort then and repeat this
appeal to the two Cypriot communities today. As the pandemic has continued its
devastating, global march, long-standing fractures both within and between the two
communities have widened and opportunities to wage a united fight to contain the
spread of the virus and mitigate its impact have not been seized. In the spirit of my
global ceasefire appeal, I continue to urge the parties to work together to meet the
threat of COVID-19, specifically to engage in dialogue in order to peacefully resolve
their differences and to avoid any unilateral actions that could trigger tensions or
undermine the return to negotiations.
32. As outlined in the present report, despite my calls and the call of the Security
Council for the sides to cooperate effectively, in particular in these challenging times,
there continued to be limited coordination on the COVID-19 response through the
technical committees and a lack of bicommunal or joint approaches to managing the
impact overall. These bodies remained underutilized during a time when cooperation
could have improved the daily lives of Cypriots on both sides of the d ivide, given the
adverse public health and economic effects island-wide. In order to adequately
support the committees, more systematic discussions need to be held between the
offices of the two leaders or their direct representatives to provide the necess ary
political support and overall guidance required to free them from obstructions in their
work. I call upon both leaders to engage the technical committees more robustly and
to better address the effects of COVID-19 for the benefit of the two communities. In
addition, the recommendations of the stocktaking exercise shared with both sides by
my mission of good offices, as described in my previous report, should be taken
forward.
33. Persistent movement restrictions at the crossing points, should they cont inue,
could have a significant negative effect on levels of interaction and trust between the
communities and on the peace process more broadly. As described during the previous
reporting period and in more detail in my report on UNFICYP, decisions related to
crossing points continued to be made without consultation with the other community.
While mindful of the need to put public safety first, I call upon the leaders of both
communities to work on harmonizing the protocols governing crossings and to reopen
the remaining crossing points by mutual accord as soon as feasible.
34. The postponement of the Turkish Cypriot leadership elections from April to
October 2020 and the drawn-out campaigning significantly extended a period of
political uncertainty. It also highlighted the stark division between political
stakeholders in the Turkish Cypriot community on the future of the peace process.
These differences had grown steadily following the closure of the Conference on
Cyprus in July 2017. The political landscape has remained dynamic island-wide, with
considerable unpredictability against the backdrop of regional tensions and continued
steps being taken in Varosha.
35. The position of the United Nations on Varosha remains unchanged and is guided
by relevant Security Council resolutions. I reiterate my call and that of the Council
for the avoidance of any unilateral actions that could raise tensions on the island and
undermine the return to dialogue and the future success of talks. It is critically
important that all parties engage in dialogue in order to resolve their differences and
resume a viable and comprehensive negotiation process. I remain committed to

8/24

20-17808

S/2021/5

supporting the two leaders in revitalizing their dialogue and demonstrating their
commitment to an enduring, comprehensive and just settlement.
36. Over the past year, I have followed the rising tensions in the Eastern
Mediterranean region, including tensions over hydrocarbons exploration and
maritime boundary delimitation, closely and with deep concern. The e xpressions of
solidarity between Greece and Turkey, as well as the Republic of Cyprus, following
the earthquake on 30 October were a welcome gesture, but the sentiment did not last
in what appears to be an increasingly negative climate, the effects of whic h are being
felt well beyond Cyprus and the Eastern Mediterranean region. I call for serious
efforts to be made by all parties to defuse tensions and urge them to avoid escalation
and continue to engage in dialogue to explore possibilities for resolving th eir disputes
and investing in regional cooperation. Furthermore, I continue to stress that natural
resources located in and around Cyprus should benefit both communities and
constitute a strong incentive to reach a mutually acceptable settlement in Cyprus
without any further delay.
37. A comprehensive settlement in Cyprus constitutes the best chance for resolving
matters of contention between the two communities on the island. A settlement has
the potential to unlock collaborative and mutually beneficial so lutions for Cyprus as
well as the broader region. Concrete steps towards peace on the island could also help
to alleviate tensions and improve relations between Greece and Turkey, both
guarantor powers in the Cyprus context. The parties, including the guar antor powers,
should re-engage in dialogue with a sense of urgency in order to bring the Cyprus
peace process back on track, within a clear time horizon, and to reorient regional
dialogue more broadly.
38. Following the consultations conducted by Ms. Lute over the past several
months, both the sides and the guarantor powers have expressed a willingness to
attend an informal five-plus-one meeting under my auspices. The purpose of the
meeting will be to determine whether common ground exists for the parties t o
negotiate a sustainable, lasting solution to the Cyprus problem within a foreseeable
horizon. I intend to invite the sides and the guarantor powers to the informal meeting
as soon as practicable in 2021. As I have stated many times, this time must be
different, and the informal five-plus-one meeting will help to clarify the true extent
of the commonality of vision and outline steps necessary to chart a way forward.
39. Confidence-building measures for Cyprus continue to be important and I
encourage the sides to put forward proposals and ideas, or to review past proposals,
so that discussions and progress can be pursued. As the sides explore opportunities
for building confidence and cooperation, I urge them to pursue meaningful progress
in order to deliver tangible benefits to their communities and improve the daily lives
of Cypriots island-wide. The United Nations remains fully committed to facilitating
and supporting work on mutually agreeable confidence-building measures.
40. I commend those groups and individuals who have, despite the challenges
related to the pandemic, reached across the divide to work with members of the other
community. Echoing the support of the Security Council for greater civic engagement
and trust-building, I encourage the leaders to more explicitly promote contact and
cooperation between the two communities. Direct support for grass -roots initiatives
should be provided by the two leaders, to demonstrate genuine commitment to
reconciliation and a comprehensive settlement in Cyprus.
41. Having reached the historic milestone of the twentieth anniversary of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), it is fitting to underscore, once again, that a focus on
gender responsiveness and women in peacemaking remains as important in Cyprus as
it is globally. Determined steps are needed to reactivate the work of the Technical
Committee on Gender Equality and to empower it to urgently develop an action plan
20-17808

9/24

S/2021/5

supporting the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in the peace talks,
as requested by the Council. My mission of good offices is ready to work with the
sides and provide United Nations expertise, comparative examples and analysis, as
needed, to support them in further harnessing the participation of women in the peace
process and working towards an inclusive, gender-sensitive settlement. Further to
this, I reiterate my call to the two leaders to consider the outcome of the gendersensitive socioeconomic impact assessment and its recommendations in order to work
towards a transformative outcome that can achieve greater economic opportunities
for women and men alike.
42. I welcome the renewed expression of support from the European Union
leadership to a resumption of negotiations under United Nations auspices, and its
commitment to a comprehensive settlement in Cyprus within the United Nations
framework and in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions. The
European Council conclusion of 1 October 2020, stating that the European Union
stands ready to play an active role in supporting United Nations-facilitated talks,
including by appointing, upon resumption of negotiations, a repr esentative to my
good offices mission in Cyprus, is well noted.
43. At the time of writing of the present report, scepticism regarding the prospects
for a return to the peace talks has risen in both communities, with analysts regularly
pointing out the divergent positions declared publicly by Mr. Anastasiades and
Mr. Tatar, including on the central issue of the model for a settlement to be pursued.
44. Let me be clear – time is working against a mutually acceptable political
settlement in Cyprus. The status quo, continuing for so many decades, is not static.
Changes are happening on the ground that may become irreversible, should the two
communities not recommit themselves to resolving their differences peacefully,
proactively and with determination. The primary responsibility for the future of the
process remains with the parties, especially the two leaders, and I continue to stand
ready to support them as they chart the way forward.
45. I would like to express my gratitude to Ms. Spehar for her service as my Deputy
Special Adviser on Cyprus. I also extend my thanks to all the men and women serving
in my good offices mission in Cyprus for their dedication and commitment to
discharging the responsibilities entrusted to them. I also express my appreciation to
Ms. Lute for conducting consultations on my behalf.

10/24

20-17808

S/2021/5

Annex I
Written update by the Greek Cypriot leader to the good offices
mission of the Secretary-General, pursuant to and in accordance
with Security Council resolution 2537 (2020)
This submission is made in response to the encouragement in UN Security Council
Resolution 2537, to “the leaders of the two communities to provide written updates
to the Good Offices Mission of the Secretary General on the actions they have taken
in support of the relevant parts of this resolution since its adoption, in particular with
regard to paragraphs 5 and 6 and 8, with a view to reaching a sustainable and
comprehensive settlement”.
The present update includes all developments relevant to the effort to resume the
peace process in the framework of the Good Offices Mission of the UNSG,
irrespective of their inter-state or inter-communal character. References to
communities are without prejudice to the Republic of Cyprus as a Member State of
the United Nations and references to UNFICYP are made without prejudice to the
Republic of Cyprus as the host country of the Force.
I.

Efforts to resume the peace process

Notwithstanding the global challenges we have all been facing in 2020, reaching a
settlement that entails the evolution of the Republic of Cyprus into a bi -zonal,
bi-communal federation with political equality, as set out in the relevant United
Nations Security Council Resolutions, continues to be an absolute priority for the
Greek Cypriot side.
I am fully aware of the repercussions of the prolongation of the de facto division and
the faits accomplis it entails, which entrench the status quo and undermine prospect
of reunification. Bearing this in mind, I have strongly and unequivocally supported
the resumption of the negotiations from where they were left off in Crans Montana as
soon as possible.
In spite of the inconclusiveness of the Conference in July 2017, it is only fair to
acknowledge that in Crans Montana we came closer to a settlement than ever before,
notably due to the personal engagement of the UN Secretary General and his approach
to the process, which is encapsulated in the 6-points framework; intended to form the
basis for comprehensive negotiations of all elements interdependently, with a view to
a strategic agreement. I believe that this approach remains vitally relevant in our
continuous efforts to resume negotiations.
In the face of systematic undermining of these efforts by Turkey, eithe r by
employment of delaying tactics in regard to the appointment of a Special Envoy by
the UN Secretary General; or during the consultations for Terms of Reference for the
resumption of negotiations; or even by the threat of employment of other means,
including by use of force; our determination to pursue a viable solution, within the
established UN parameters, would not be deterred and our willingness to immediately
engage would remain unwavering. To this direction was my proposal in 2018 for a
decentralized system of powers, within the existing framework, in an attempt to
address concerns expressed by the Turkish Cypriot side.
It was thus made possible, again with the personal involvement of the UN Secretary
General, to confirm in a joint meeting with the leaders of the two communities in
November 2019 in Berlin, our readiness to support his efforts to resume negotiations,
based on a common understanding on the three basic elements of the Terms of
Reference that should frame the process.

20-17808

11/24

S/2021/5

To this end, in several occasions I reiterated our willingness to engage actively and
swiftly in the exploratory initiative of the UN Secretary General with a view to
convene an informal five-plus-United Nations meeting the soonest possible. It is our
firm belief that such a meeting could indeed pave the way for a new Conference on
Cyprus, resuming negotiations from where they were left off in Crans Montana, with
all elements discussed interdependently, as a package.
Yet political developments in the Turkish Cypriot community was used as a pretext
to avoid engagement. Instead, Turkey would move on with their plans in Varosha,
along with a hardening of their rhetoric and an escalation of tension on and around
Cyprus that would poison the atmosphere and create political polarization.
Eventually, after October 18th, the new Turkish Cypriot leader would fully align with
Ankara, by supporting their plans in Varosha and advocating a new position for a
“two-states solution”.
The crescendo of provocative acts came amidst the COVID-19 pandemic, in defiance
inter alia, of the call by the UN Secretary General for a global ceasefire to allow
reallocation of resources to address this new global threat. Turkey would nevertheless
continue to act in an aggressive manner by turning to military threats, illegal drilling
activities within the Exclusive Economic Zone of the Republic of Cyprus, and the
attempted change of status-quo in the fenced area of Famagusta; in contravention to
Security Council Resolutions.
And they would not shy from challenging the UN Security Council Resolutions when
not in line with their own view. In a strikingly direct written statement by the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of Turkey (16/11/20) in response to a EU H igh Representative
statement on Varosha, they would argue that “UN Security Council Resolutions are
not above the will of the people”.
Although these actions have been condemned in various occasions by EU and the
international community, as not compliant with the notion of good neighbourly
relations and international law (in particular, the UN Convention on the Law of the
Sea, concerning maritime zones) and infringing upon the sovereign rights of third
States, Ankara would not change their tone.
Indeed, they have made clear their intention to continue in implementing their plans,
threatening with the use of force, regardless of any reaction. Rather pertinent is the
fact that Ankara has got its fingerprints on every conflict in the region, in an apparent
effort to create instability that would provide fertile ground for their revisionist policy
and their fitting selective approach towards international legal order.
We do have to be clear as well on this issue: The Peace Process in Cyprus should not
be allowed to slide away from negotiations within the established UN parameters to
strong-arm tactics. Therefore, for substantive negotiations to resume with realistic
prospects for success, it is imperative to create an environment conducive to
constructive negotiations in good faith; in the same spirit and conditions that
characterized all previous negotiating rounds.
We fully support and actively encourage the UN Secretary General’s effort to convene
without any pre-conditions an informal fine-plus-United Nations meeting that would
put the process back on track and pave the way to substantive negotiations in a new
Conference on Cyprus, securing also the right conditions for these to be successful.
And we have confirmed in our communication with the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoy our readiness to engage constructively to this end with a sense of
urgency. I understand that the new Turkish Cypriot leader has expressed readiness as
well, although Turkey does seem at this point in time to be keener on creating further
distress rather than sit and talk.

12/24

20-17808

S/2021/5

Again, fully-fledged negotiations should be conducted on an equal-footing and nor
under conditions of intimidation and threats, in accordance with international law and
the relevant UN Security-Council Resolutions. In this respect, it would be impossible
by anyone to expect that these conditions are fulfilled if any of the sides advocate
solutions outside the UN established parameters or if Turkey and the Turkish Cypriot
side proceed with their plans for the full opening of the fenced area of Varosha, either
under Turkish military control or Turkish Cypriot administration, or continue with the
violation of our sovereign rights in our Exclusive Economic Zone.
We are obliged thus, to call upon the UN Secretary General, in the context of his Good
Offices mission on Cyprus, and the Security Council, as the international body
entrusted with the primary responsibility for international peace and security, and as
the guardian of international law and of the principles and purposes of the UN Charter,
to adopt an assertive stance so as for Turkey to terminate its unlawful activities,
refrain from any provocative acts and unsolicited interference in every aspect of the
peace process. Instead, the latter should concentrate its efforts towards reaching a
comprehensive settlement on the Cyprus Problem.
As we have repeatedly stated, we are ready to move in this direction with unwavering
commitment and resolve, fully supporting the idea of an informal 5+1 meeting,
without any pre-conditions. With the aim to put the process back on track, within an
environment conducive to honest and in good faith negotiations. We do hope that our
genuine determination for resuming the negotiating process will be finally matched
in practice by the Turkish Cypriot side and Turkey.
For us, our path forward is clear: Both the current unacceptable status quo – with the
ongoing illegal occupation of 37% of the territory of the Republic of Cyprus following
the Turkish military invasion and the violent displacement of 40% of our people - and
any ideas that deviate from the established UN parameters, are neither viable nor
sustainable.
Our vision and top priority remains none other than to reunify our island on the agreed
basis of a bi-zonal and bi-communal federation as provided by UN Security Council
resolutions, in order to establish a truly independent and sovereign state, free from
foreign dependencies, guarantees, the right of military intervention or the presence of
foreign troops.
II.

Factors impeding the resumption of the peace process

For quite a long time now, we have been witnessing an escalation of aggression and
violations on behalf of Turkey and the Turkish occupation regime in and around
Cyprus, that jeopardize any attempt to create an environme nt conducive to a
meaningful resumption of the peace process.
Turkey’s illegal activities in the territorial sea, the continental shelf and the EEZ of
Cyprus have included seismic surveys, as well as drillings at a systematic pace. Using
interchangeably 3 vessels, accompanied by warships, Turkey has for months been
illegally operating in the maritime zones of Cyprus. Besides violating international
law (i.e. UNCLOS), Turkey’s offensive is also aiming at regional stability, as deemed
fit to its revisionist political agenda. Ankara would not reconsider its course, neither
at the face of COVID-19 outbreak nor calls by the UN Secretary-General to allow
ease in conflict areas, so that resources would be reallocated to address the challenges
posed by the pandemic.
Furthermore, violations of military status quo observed along the ceasefire line since
2018 (namely in Strovilia, Ledra Palace, the Spitfire Coffee Shop and Home for
Cooperation area, Pyla, Ledras street, Wayne’s Keep cemetery, Dhenia and Avlona)
are ongoing, during the current reporting period, and have been further solidified,
while new serious violations have been confirmed. Despite its rhetoric, Turkey is
20-17808

13/24

S/2021/5

actually investing in the status quo, solidifying and advancing. Indeed, in the buffer
zone in the area of the city of Nicosia, they have attempted to extent their control over
the so called “Polygon field”, “Erechthiou street” and Wayne’s Keep cemetery.
Moreover, the decision of Turkey to open for “use by the public” of the beachfront of
the fenced area of Varosha constituted an unprecedented provocation and was
followed by a series of further violations on the ground within the fenced area in
blatant disregard of UN Security Council Resolutions in particular Resolutions 550
(1984) and 789 (1992) and of the most recent calls of the UN Security Council as
contained in the Press Release of 9 October 2019 and the Presidential Statement of
9 October 2020 by which the SC called on Turkey to reverse its recent course of
action.
The most recent “episode” in relation to Varosha was on November 15th. In order to
personally “celebrate” the anniversary of the illegal declaration of independence of
the secessionist entity and to ensure that everyone is clear on who really runs the show
in the occupied part of the island, the Turkish President paid a visit to Cyprus,
accompanied by a large number of members of his cabinet and his government
partner, leader of the Nationalist Party in Turkey.
You have all seen that Mr Erdogan, accompanied by the Turkish Cypriot leader,
visited the beach front of the fenced area of Varosha, and had a “picnic”, as he had
pre-announced, while Turkish frigates and F16 planes were surveilling the entire time.
The Turkish President put on an utterly provocative show, making clear that the
fenced area of Varosha will open under the “administration” of the illegal entity, with
the obvious aim of promoting the economic and touristic exploitation of the area.
Mr. Erdogan could not be more vocal, playing with the feelings of the Greek Cypriot
refugees who had to face the tragic reality of a completely destroyed, looted t own,
which used to be the jewel of the Mediterranean and which legally belongs to them.
Irrespective of what the EU and indeed the Security Council of the UN has stated, he
repeatedly stated that he intends to open the fenced area of Varosha, in a manner
contrary to what the relevant Security Council Resolutions prescribe, i.e. the transfer
of the administration of the area to the UN so as for the lawful owners and legal
inhabitants to return to their homes, in anticipation of an overall settlement of the
Cyprus problem.
In the wider context, he was equally clear that Turkey is aiming at imposing the
permanent division of Cyprus, through a two-state solution of the problem, in absolute
contradiction to the agreed basis of a bizonal bicommunal federation tha t is provided
for in the relevant UN Security Council Resolutions and a solution in line with the
principles of the Union and the acquis that the EU is striving at.
Let me reiterate that for a peace process to have realistic prospects of fruitful
conclusion, a conducive environment is necessary and that no good-faith negotiations
can be conducted under conditions of threats, violations and intimidation. To this
direction, we need the support of the UN and the international community to impress
upon Turkey the need to refrain from their provocative acts and concentrate its efforts
to the resumption of the efforts for a settlement in Cyprus.
From our part, we have taken initiatives and presented proposals in good faith well in
advance. Let me once again put on record that regarding the natural resources of
Cyprus, beyond the existing convergences covering all relevant aspects, including the
continued adherence of Cyprus to the UNCLOS and the allocation of revenues, a
National Sovereign Fund has been established (based on the Norwegian model), in
order to manage any future revenues accruing from hydrocarbon exploration. This,
inter alia, ensures that any use of the revenues either for the repaying of public debt

14/24

20-17808

S/2021/5

or their utilization by the Government as a guarantee for securing loans is strictly
prohibited.
I have also conveyed the readiness of the government of the Republic of Cyprus to
examine establishing an escrow account for hydrocarbons revenues to benefit Turkish
Cypriots based on their population ratio; provided a meaningful peace process is
resumed and that a delimitation agreement is concluded between Cyprus and Turkey
as already proposed by the Republic of Cyprus and welcomed by the EU.
Regarding Varosha, my proposal to establish a Technical Committee on the
Reconstruction and Resettlement of the fenced area of Varosha still stands. According
to this, international and Cypriot experts, both Greek and Turkish Cypriot, would be
allowed into the area in order to conduct technical studies related to its res toration,
with UN facilitation and EU funding, while the area becomes demilitarized. This
proposal would enable the return of Varosha under UN auspices, to its lawful
inhabitants, in line with UN Security Council resolutions and the High -Level
Agreements, as a matter of priority and without awaiting the comprehensive
settlement of the Cyprus problem. At the same time, considering the political, legal
and symbolic importance of Varosha, it could serve as a tangible Confidence Building
Measure.
III. Crossing-points
Undoubtedly, the COVID-19 outbreak posed a grave and unprecedented challenge for
the whole world. In our effort to respond, extraordinary yet necessary measures to
protect public health and safety were adopted around the globe; and Cyprus could
have been no exception.
In this context, the government of the Republic of Cyprus on 28 February 2020
adopted precautionary and temporary measures, in line with relevant information and
guidance from the World Health Organization and reports by the European Ce ntre for
Disease Prevention and Control, including, inter alia, the temporary suspension of
the functioning of four crossing points along the ceasefire line, in order to exercise
more effective health-related procedures at the five remaining in operation.
These measures were considered as the best possible balance between protection of
public health and maintaining of crossings, most importantly for urgent cases of
humanitarian nature. The response of the occupation regime was to close all crossing
points, restricting movement for all, including UNFICYP personnel and ambulances
in cases of emergency. Even under such circumstances, the government of the
Republic of Cyprus ensured that medical protection equipment and necessary
medicines be provided to the Turkish Cypriot community.
Following a communication between the leaders of the two communities on May 21st
and the announcement of the gradual lifting of restrictions at crossing points, starting
on June 8th for certain categories (i.e. workers, students and patients with serious
condition) and depending on the evolving epidemiological situation, the Technical
Committee on Health was invited to provide the platform for exchange of relevant
information and views.
On June 8th restrictions from our side were lifted in all crossing -points for the aforementioned categories (although patients had never been denied access), with the
exception of Ledra’s Street, where existing infrastructure is deemed inadequate,
taking into account its position at the center of Nicosia and the fact that i t is still
possible to cross through Ledra Palace, a few hundred meters to the west.
Regrettably, lifting of restrictions from the other side was left for later stage.
Eventually, partial lifting took place on June 22nd, followed by a series of further
changes of mind, as to the requirements for crossing, and differentiations among the
20-17808

15/24

S/2021/5

crossing points (notably, the two crossing points in Deryneia and Lefka remained
closed for weeks without any explanation). Even worse, in a display of absolute denial
of the humanitarian dimension of the May 21st understanding, Limnitis crossing point remained systematically targeted.
Nevertheless, our efforts under the circumstances could not but aim at the protection
of public health, making sure that the use of crossing points would prioritize the cases
of humanitarian nature, while facilitating people’s unhindered crossing, at the extent
possible. To this end, we will act responsibly and bearing in mind the delicate balance
that need to be achieved.
IV.

Effective mechanism for direct military contacts

The necessity for the establishment of a mechanism for direct military contacts,
between the opposing forces in Cyprus, facilitated by UNFICYP, was alarmingly
illustrated by the increasing and worrisome violations of the mili tary status quo, by
the Turkish occupation forces, since the beginning of 2019. Indeed, escalation of
tension and violations have since taking place in the whole stretch of the buffer zone
and beyond, culminating in further advances and ultimately, at the “opening” of the
fenced area of Varosha.
Furthermore, the Turkish occupation forces have further interfered with UNFICYP
tasks, with further obstructions adversely affecting its ability to implement its
mandate; latest been the restrictions in access to the fenced area of Varosha.
In a broader context, as I have already stressed before, it is imperative to also bear in
mind the continuous provocative illegal activities of Turkey, in the maritime zones of
Cyprus, as explained in previous paragraphs, which only highlight the overall
destabilizing role of Turkey in the eastern Mediterranean region, serving its
revisionist agenda.
Against this backdrop, and following the call of the UN Security Council in its
Resolution 2483 (July 2019), the government of the Republic of Cyprus has presented
a proposal to the UN Secretary General in a letter of the Minister of Foreign Affairs
dated 20 December 2019. In the letter we express readiness to discuss the
establishment of a mechanism for direct contacts at military lev el between the
opposing forces, i.e. the National Guard and the Turkish occupation forces,
comprising their Commanders, as well as the Force Commander of UNFICYP as
facilitator, in accordance with the mandate of UNFICYP as prescribed by the UN
Security Council resolution 186, of 4 March 1964.
In view of the above, I wish to assure that we stand ready to engage with UNFICYP
to this end, at the earliest opportunity, as I have also confirmed in my letter to the UN
Secretary General, dated 5 June 2020. In the meantime, we expect the firm and
decisive stance on behalf of UNFICYP that would effectively deter further
provocations by the Turkish occupation army.
V.

Technical Committees

In spite of the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic in all aspects of social
activity, the Technical Committees tried to maintain the positive trend of increased
engagement they had recorded in the previous reporting period. To this end, we have
encouraged them to use all tools available in order to continue their work, bearing in
mind their supplementary role to the substantial negotiations in the context of peace
process and their valuable contribution in creating a much needed political
environment conducive to constructive and in good faith negotiations.
The Technical Committees did their best to carry on their work and contribute in the
framework of their mandate to mitigate the adverse effects of the status quo and the
de facto division of Cyprus in the daily lives of all Cypriots, amplified by the
16/24

20-17808

S/2021/5

challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. To this direction, their work was
streamlined through the Technical Committee on Health on a daily basis, which has
been dealing with all related issues, in an effort for coherency and effectiveness.
Indeed, following a joint meeting with the leaders in early February, the Technical
Committee on Health maintained throughout the given period daily contacts in order
to exchange information between the two communities and provide assistance
whenever necessary. In this context, the Committee provided the space for experts to
exchange important scientific information and exchange views on the handling of the
pandemic, sharing best practices and lessons learned.
While also coordinating with other Technical Committees, to maintain coherence and
consistency, their response to daily requests and challenges has been commendable,
facilitating the supply of medicines and material support whenever needed and
making sure that the treatment of patients undergoing treatment for life -threatening
illness or medical conditions who could not otherwise receive the necessary
healthcare would continue.
Not surprisingly perhaps, the Committee confirmed under such difficult
circumstances their commitment by frequently following-up at the progress recorded
concerning the project on the identification and distribution of mosquito vectors to
address the risk for disease transmission, through public awareness and exchange of
views and information on necessary measures to protect public health.
Not unrelated to public health, Environment is equally important. The respective
Technical Committee got on during the given period with the development of their
online platform, with the aim to bring closer experts on the field from both
communities in order to exchange experience and information, while at the same time
identify necessary key environmental projects for future implementation.
The Technical Committee on Education has been working on its own project
concerning the production of supplementary education material (30 l esson plans),
prepared having students of primary and secondary education in mind. The plans
evolve around “the right of children to participate”, discussed via various thematic
areas that are retrieved but not restricted to peacebuilding, intercultural di alogue,
human rights and anti-racist education. Under the auspices of the Technical
Committee, the “Imagine” project is been implemented for a 4th consecutive year,
adapted to the new circumstances of the pandemic.
In collaboration and synergy with the Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal
Matters, they have also been implementing the Prevalence, Correlates and prevention
of conventional bullying in schools and cyberbullying project, consisted of research
to collect systematic data on stereotypes, prejudice and other factors of bullying,
identify both risk and protective factors and use of this information in teachers ’
training.
Under the auspices of the Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters, the
Joint Contacts Room has been working day by day, without interruption, facilitating
exchange of information regarding crimes, based on the principle that no crime should
remain unpunished, whenever that may happen.
Other Technical Committees have been trying to cope with the COVID -19 challenges,
like the Technical Committee on Culture, which organized a Coronavirus inspired
poetry recital from home, with the objective to bring people and artists closer together,
in difficult times, by sharing thoughts and experiences of the restrictions and self isolation due to the pandemic. On another front, Technical Committee on
Telecommunications maintained their communication with the objective of solving
telecommunications issues in real-time, to the extent possible. At the same time,

20-17808

17/24

S/2021/5

Technical Committee on Entrepreneurship continued their efforts to facilitate
“contactless transactions”, when only option.
Despite the difficult circumstances, the Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage
maintained their impressive work and future planning and managed to push thr ough
more than 60 new projects, out of which 18 have already been concluded and
delivered in 2020. It is also recalled that in the context of empowering the work of
the Technical Committees, the Republic of Cyprus has donated 500 hundred thousand
euros to the Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage in order to support renovation
and restoration works across the island, while further 500 hundred thousand euros
will be donated this coming year.
It is true that at present the priority remains to establish con ditions that would allow
gradual return to a COVID-19 status quo ante. To this direction, we will continue to
encourage and support the Technical Committees to enable them provide significant
and substantial contribution to the efforts within the framework of the peace process.
Unfortunately though, worrisome developments after October 18th have not remained
unnoticed. Resignations from the Turkish Cypriot side left a few of the Technical
Committees in limbo, while certain decisions taken created tension a t the Technical
Committees level. Recent examples were the use of sites restored by the Technical
Committee on Cultural Heritage for unrelated purposes and problems at certain
crossing points, with Limnitis again in focus. It is our firm belief that Techni cal
Committees should be allowed to continue their positive trend, and not be used in a
way that would jeopardize all that has been achieved so far.

18/24

20-17808

S/2021/5

Annex II
Actions taken by the Turkish Cypriot side in support of the
relevant parts of Security Council resolution 2537 (2020) adopted
on 28 July 2020 with a view to reaching a sustainable and
comprehensive settlement
I.
Actions Taken in Support of Reaching a Sustainable and Comprehensive
Settlement:
Mr. Ersin Tatar was elected President of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cypr us in
the presidential elections that were held on 18 October 2020. He had run on a platform
of a settlement of the Cyprus question on the basis of the sovereign equality of the
two peoples of the island and the establishment of a cooperative relationship between
the two sides that would be based on two sovereign States. He was given a clear
mandate as a result of the democratically-held elections by the Turkish Cypriot people
to pursue such a solution, which would be just, realistic and sustainable, throug h
negotiations with the Greek Cypriot side, with the facilitation of the United Nations.
Based on lessons drawn from the previous processes, the Turkish Cypriot side is
aiming at turning a new page in the history of the negotiating process in Cyprus that
will not repeat the failures of the past. It should be recalled that throughout this
process, the Turkish Cypriot side had shown all the good will and constructive
approach, demonstrated, among others, by its acceptance of the UN Plan for the
Comprehensive Settlement of the Cyprus Problem in April 2004, and, in the last
instance, the flexibility it displayed at the Five+UN Conference held in Crans Montana, Switzerland, in June-July 2017.
The Turkish Cypriot side’s new approach is in line with the repeated suggestions in
the relevant reports of the former Secretary-General, H.E. Ban Ki-moon, to “think
outside the box”; and the suggestion in the report of the current Secretary -General,
H.E. Antonio Guterres, dated 28 September 2017 (S/2017/814), which, among other
things, “…encouraged the parties to reflect on the way forward ”.
At the informal meeting President Ersin Tatar had with Greek Cypriot leader
Mr. Nicos Anastasiades on 3 November 2020 at the residence of Ms. Elizabeth
Spehar, the Deputy Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Cyprus, Mr. Tatar
outlined the Turkish Cypriot side’s new policy, asking Mr. Anastasiades to approach
it with an open mind. Referring to the isolation and restrictions impos ed on the
Turkish Cypriot people by the Greek Cypriot side, he asked for the removal of these
anachronistic measures so as to avoid further deterioration of the trust and confidence
between the two peoples, essential for the preparation of the ground for m eaningful
negotiations.
On the 9th of November 2020, the Special Representative of President Tatar,
Mr. M. Ergün Olgun, had a phone conversation with Ms. Jane Holl Lute, the UN
Senior Official, during which they discussed the present state of play with re gard to
the Cyprus issue and the way forward. During the conversation, Mr. Olgun explained
to Ms. Lute the Turkish Cypriot vision for the future. In this context, the Turkish
Cypriot side looks forward to the convening of an informal five -plus-United Nations
meeting on Cyprus, a proposal made by the Turkish side, “at an appropriate stage”,
as expressed by the Secretary-General in his letter dated 26 October 2020 addressed
to the two leaders. We welcome the visit of Ms. Lute to Cyprus to prepare the ground
for a possible convening of such a meeting without any preconditions.

20-17808

19/24

S/2021/5

On the 12thof November 2020 President Tatar met Ms. Elizabeth Spehar and
explained to her the Turkish Cypriot vision for a sustainable settlement, as well as its
policy regarding the closed/fenced area of Maraş/Varosha.
Regarding the way forward, President Tatar explained that negotiations cannot start
from where they were left off in Crans-Montana, either in procedure or in substance.
He pointed out that federation as a formula for a settlement has been exhausted after
long arduous negotiations and that this is clearly not the fault of the Turkish Cypriot
side. He underlined that bi-communal and bi-zonal federalism has become
synonymous with the status quo, which the Security Council, in its repeated
resolutions, as well as all interested parties, have found “unacceptable”. He explained
that any solution has to be “freely reached and mutually acceptable” and that a
solution cannot be imposed. As for the “UN parameters”, also referred to as the “body
of work”, he stressed that these are subject to the principle of “nothing is agreed until
everything is agreed” and, therefore, cannot any more serve as the basis of a forward looking approach.
It goes without saying that a sustainable political settlement in Cyprus requires the
levelling of the status and international legitimacy of the respective polity of each of
the two peoples so that political equilibrium is established and no side has any legal
or political advantage over the other. It is an accepted fact that neither side may claim
authority or jurisdiction over the other. This is exactly what the Turkish Cypriot side
is trying to do in order to facilitate a comprehensive and sustainable resolution of the
Cyprus issue. It should be borne in mind that the Turkish Cypriot side was a signatory
to the 1960 international Agreements, reflecting their sovereign equality and equal
international status. The Turkish Cypriot side is thus entitled to the rights and status
the Greek Cypriot side is entitled to, and is currently exercising. This is the basic
requirement for sustainable stability, security and peace in our island and in the
region.
After decades of unsuccessful negotiations, the time has long come to reflect on and
draw lessons from the underlying reasons that led to the failure, and consequently
demonstrated the unfeasibility of, the bi-communal and bi-zonal federal settlement
model for Cyprus. Without doubt the key reasons for this failure have been the
unwillingness of the Greek Cypriot side to share power and prosperity with the
Turkish Cypriot side; the absence of overarching common interests or
interdependence to facilitate and bond a political partnership; the absence of a
mutually hurting stalemate to equally induce the two sides to change the unacceptable
status quo, with the Greek Cypriot side benefiting from the occupation of the seat of
government since 1963; the effects of the deep crises of confidence between the two
sides; and the absence of meaningful bottom up cooperation, which is being totally
blocked by the Greek Cypriot side under the excuse that this will lead to the
recognition of the TRNC (recognition necessitates a conscious political decision),
among others.
The Greek Cypriot side has unfortunately been using the negotiation process for a
federal settlement as a smokescreen to perpetuate the status quo, which continues to
provide them with immense advantages as the “Government of Cyprus” while
keeping the Turkish Cypriot side in isolation and under restrictions.
The Turkish Cypriot position is thus aimed at freeing the protracted and stagnated
Cyprus issue from the “box” in which it has been trapped for decades, by offering
“out of the box” thinking and principles on which a sustainable comprehensive
settlement can be built. We call on all concerned to approach it in the same spirit in
the interest of a just, realistic and sustainable settlement.

20/24

20-17808

S/2021/5

II. Actions Taken in Support of Confidence Building as well as Promoting
Intercommunal Contacts and Reconciliation:
Confidence Building Issues And Measures:
The Turkish Cypriot side wholeheartedly supports substantive confidence building
measures aimed at laying the foundation for a relationship ba sed on mutual respect,
cooperation and peaceful co-existence. It also supports and stands ready to empower
the Technical Committees designed “to enhance inter-communal contacts and
improve the daily lives of all Cypriots…and improve their performance ”. At a time
when the Covid-19 pandemic is having a devastating effect on humanity throughout
the World, including Cyprus, it is believed that this is a greater necessity than ever
before.
1.

Isolation and Restrictions

The most important factor preventing the establishment of confidence between the
Turkish Cypriots and the Greek Cypriots is the inhuman isolation and restrictions that
have been imposed on the Turkish Cypriot people since 1963. These restrictions
encompass everything ranging from direct flights, direct trade, representation at
international forums and even cultural and sporting events. Building confidence
obviously requires, first and foremost, the elimination of such anachronistic measures
on the Turkish Cypriot people, which continued during the reporting period.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out in his report of 7 January 2020 ( S/2020/23)
the Turkish Cypriot side is fully convinced that greater economic and social parity
between the two sides and broader/deeper economic, cultural and other forms of
cooperation can significantly contribute to the realization of a win -win resolution. To
be sustainable, this needs to be based on the sovereign equality and equal international
status of the two sides. Again, as the Secretary-General has pointed out, the full
implementation of European Council regulation (EC) No. 866/2004 (the Green Line
Regulation), which is only one way of addressing the unjust isolation of the Turkish
Cypriot side, would help significantly increase the volume of trade. In the words of
the Secretary-General, increased cross-island trade, together with deeper economic,
social, cultural, sporting and other ties and contacts, would promote trust between the
two communities.
2.

Maraş (Varosha)

For many years, both Turkish Cypriot and UN proposals to open up the fenced area
of Maraş (Varosha) to its former residents within a confidence building package as an
instrument of building confidence between the Turkish Cypriots and the Greek
Cypriots have been rejected by the Greek Cypriot side.
Since there are no current users in the fenced area of Maraş the Turkish Cypriot side
has decided to implement a plan that aims at removing the military status of the area
so as to enable the European Court of Human Rights-sanctioned Immovable Property
Commission (IPC) to deliver restitution decisions in relation to the applicants who
request this remedy. The Turkish Cypriot side sees this as a humanitarian act which
will provide economic benefits to both Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots. The
Turkish Cypriot side also believes that, through this initiative, Maraş will become an
important area where Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots, as well as other foreign
nationals, can work together to develop a culture of cooperation contributing to the
building of trust and confidence.
As such, the opening of the fenced area of Maraş will respect the rights of the
inhabitants in line with the relevant UN Security Council resolutions.

20-17808

21/24

S/2021/5

3.

Hydrocarbons

Resource discovery and extraction can unfortunately turn from a blessing to a curse
when they fuel competition and conflict between legitimate stakeholders. Sadly, on
top of its perennial power-sharing problems, the “intractable” Cyprus question is now
ensnared by the “resource curse”, as a result of Greek Cypriot unilateralism.
Due to the Greek Cypriot side’s claim to be the sole owner of the island to the
detriment of the Turkish Cypriot side, the hydrocarbon deposits discovered in the
eastern Mediterranean region have become an element further jeopardizing the
security and stability not only of Cyprus, but also the entire region.
The Turkish Cypriot side believes that, if treated correctly, hydrocarbons could be an
element contributing to the atmosphere of peace, cooperation, security and welfare
between the Turkish Cypriot and the Greek Cypriot sides, as well as the entire region.
To this effect, as the co-owners of the island of Cyprus and its natural resources, the
Turkish Cypriot side has proposed to establish a joint ad hoc committee for the joint
management and exploitation of hydrocarbons, respectively in 2011, 2012, and 2019.
These proposals, which still stand, have so far been turned down by the Greek Cypriot
side, leaving no choice for the Turkish Cypriot side but to act, in cooperation with
Turkey, to protect their rights and interests, and pursue their own off -shore program
in cooperation with Turkey. In 2011, the Turkish Cypriot side granted exploration and
exploitation licences to Turkish Petroleum in 8 off-shore blocks around the island,
some of which overlap with the Greek Cypriot blocks.
Of the 13 EEZ licencing zones declared by the Greek Cypriot side, blocks 1, 4, 5, 6
and 7 partly overlap with the Turkish continental shelf, adding yet another disturbing
dimension to the dispute.
The Turkish Cypriot side will continue their own hydrocarbon exploration and
exploitation activities until the Greek Cypriot side recognizes their co -ownership
rights and agrees to find a mutually acceptable formula for the way forward.
4.

Technical Committees:

The Turkish Cypriot side is determined to further boost the activities of the Technical
Committees in order to enhance inter-communal contacts and improve the daily lives
of Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots. However, Technica l Committees need the
support of the political elites and the relevant authorities on both sides to yield the
results we expect from them. Substantive bottom up cooperation and coordination is
as important as the political process to reach a win-win cooperative relationship
between the two peoples of the island.
Sadly, Lokmacı/Ledra Street crossing point remains closed as a result of a unilateral
decision by the Greek Cypriot authorities. The unjustified restrictions imposed by the
Greek Cypriot authorities on the crossing of third country nationals across the Green
Line are also in place. The current practice of the Greek Cypriot side is such that,
while people are allowed to enter the island from South Cyprus after fulfilling the
necessary health checks and other requirements, the crossing of most foreign
nationals, including EU citizens, to North Cyprus is prohibited contrary to the Green
Line Regulation. The measures imposed by the Greek Cypriot administration appear
to be random and unjustified, and certainly not proportional for the purposes of
protection of public health.
During the difficult period of the Covid-19 pandemic, the Technical Committee on
Health continued to meet through video conferencing to discuss various topics of
common concern for both sides. These topics ranged from Covid-19, the mosquito
project and the duration of the PCR tests required at the border crossings. The
Technical Committee on Health also held an online training on “Mosquito
22/24

20-17808

S/2021/5

Surveillance and Control,” on 28-29 July 2020, to learn about the common mosquito
genus, breeding sites, disease risks, and more.
The Turkish Cypriot side fully supports and looks forward to further enhancing
effective cooperation and coordination on health issues.
The Environmental Technical Committee has held regular online meetings to develop
a website platform that would create opportunities for environmental organizations
and individuals to exchange information, knowledge and experience. The website
project has been brought to the final stage in terms of both setup and content. At the
same time, the Environmental Technical Committee has completed the preparations
to conduct one of the field trips during the Covid-19 pandemic process and an online
webinar with the aim of sharing the obtained information with experts and
non-governmental organizations.
Like health, environmental issues are global and necessitate effective cooperation and
coordination.
The Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters and the Joint
Communications Room continued to work and exchanged information and
intelligence on crimes related to non-political issues that concern both the Turkish
Cypriot and the Greek Cypriot sides. During the reporting period, the Turkish Cypriot
side has facilitated extradition of foreign criminals three times, respectively, on
7 November, 21 November and 26 November 2020.
The Technical Committee on Culture, also adapting itself to the pandemic conditions,
held online meetings as well as an online event. Under the title of “Poetry in times of
the Coronavirus”, the Technical Committee on Culture gave 5 Turkish Cypriot and
5 Greek Cypriot poets a platform to recite their poems online which were inspired by
their isolation and being restricted during the Covid-19 pandemic.
The Technical Committee on Education also continued to hold online meetings. The
Committee has proceeded with preparations for the continuation of the “Imagine”
program and the Pilot Project on Educational Materials. The Technical Committee on
Education and Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters also decided to
cooperate on a joint project of “Prevalence, Correlates, and Prevention of
Conventional Bullying in Schools and Cyberbullying.”
During the reporting period, the Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage (TCCH)
has continued its intensive activities. The TCCH has resumed all the construction
works that were initially suspended on both sides of the island due to Covid-19
measures. The TCCH and its experts have continued to hold regular weekly meetings,
both through video conferencing and face-to-face meetings of representatives. So far
the TCCH has finished the conservation of the collapsed parts of the Nicosia Walls
and completed the vegetation removal of a section of the Walls. Furthermore,
conservation work on 3 fountains as well as 9 archaeological and religious heritage
sites have been completed. Improvement works on 2 Turkish Cypriot and 1 Greek
Cypriot cemetery have also been completed. The TCCH has also started preparatory
work on the restoration/repair design of several new cultural heritage sites ranging
from mosques, churches, fountains and aqueducts.
The Technical Committee on Telecommunications and Frequency Broadcasting has
continued to discuss the issues related to broadcasting frequencies and interference
problems affecting both sides.
The remaining Technical Committees maintained their contacts and exchanged views
relevant to their mandate.
The Turkish Cypriot side attaches great significance to the establishment of an
effective mechanism for direct military contacts between the military authorities of
20-17808

23/24

S/2021/5

the two sides, referred to in UN Security Council resolution 2506(2020). This would
no doubt contribute to confidence building and security, and at the same time enhance
cooperation and coordination between the two sides. The Turkish Cypriot side also
believes that such a mechanism should not be confined to military contacts alone but
should be extended to cover other mutually agreed areas.

24/24

20-17808
