S/PV.8906

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8906th meeting

Tuesday, 16 November 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Raguttahalli/Ms. Bhat
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Ousman
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Peace and security through preventive diplomacy: a common objective to all the
principal organs of the United Nations
Letter dated 19 October 2021 from the Permanent Representative of Mexico to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2021/888)

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by
a compilation of annexes (S/2021/952) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

21-34053 (E)
*2134053*

S/PV.8906

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Sir, for highlighting the importance of
preventive diplomacy.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

Prevention does not always receive the attention
it deserves. Perhaps that is because it is difficult to
measure the results of preventing conflict, preventing
war or preventing the suffering of thousands of people
in advance. We have war reporters, but there are no
peace reporters.

The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Peace and security through preventive
diplomacy: a common objective to all the
principal organs of the United Nations
Letter dated 19 October 2021 from the
Permanent Representative of Mexico
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2021/888)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Albania,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Brazil,
Belgium, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Ecuador, Egypt,
Finland, Germany, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Japan, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Malta, Morocco,
Nepal, the Netherlands, Pakistan, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Slovakia, South Africa, Switzerland,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, Ukraine and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Abdulla Shahid, President of the General
Assembly; His Excellency Mr. Vixen Kelapile,
President of the Economic and Social Council; and
Judge Joan Donoghue, President of the International
Court of Justice.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/888, which contains a letter dated
19 October 2021 from the Permanent Representative
of Mexico to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and give him
the floor.
2/32

16/11/2021

But prevention is absolutely vital to lasting peace.
Prevention is the ultimate goal of the work of the
Council and its resolutions to help countries build
peace and stability, and to resolve their disputes before
they escalate into armed conflicts. The role of the
International Court of Justice is essential in that regard.
Prevention is the very reason for the existence of the
United Nations. The Organization was born from the
ashes of the Second World War with the intention, set
out in our Charter, not to return to subject humankind
to the inhumanity of war.
(spoke in English)
For 76 years, the United Nations system has
given the world a home for dialogue and tools and
mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of disputes.
From the judicial dimension of prevention provided
by the International Court of Justice; to the Economic
and Social Council, which works to address conflict
by advancing sustainable development; to the twin
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the
Security Council in 2016 (resolution 2282 (2016) and
General Assembly resolution 70/262), which reminded
us once again that prevention must be at the heart of
our collective goals of building and sustaining peace;
to the women and men of the Organization who are
working every day to forge, build and maintain peace
in some of the most difficult and dangerous places on
Earth — prevention is essential.
That is why I placed my agenda of prevention at the
centre of my mandates for my first and second terms as
Secretary-General. I called for a surge in diplomacy for
peace to ensure that political solutions remain the first
and primary option to settle disputes. That includes
reviews of all of the tools that comprise the United
Nations peace architecture and a better integration of
prevention and risk-assessment across United Nations
decision-making. It includes more innovation and more
foresight, including a much more robust system of
regional monthly risk reviews, senior decision-making
21-34053

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

and stronger support to Member States in managing
and addressing crisis risks. And it includes connecting
the dots among all of the drivers of conflict, including
poverty, inequalities and climate change.
That is because history has shown that conflicts do
not emerge out of thin air, nor are they inevitable. Too
often, they are the result of gaps that are ignored or not
properly addressed: gaps in access to basic necessities
like food, water, social services and medicine; gaps in
security or governance systems, where aggrieved groups
can coalesce and find a pathway to power by force; gaps
in trust in Governments, in institutions and laws, and
in one another; gaps in tolerance and social cohesion
rooted in discrimination, prejudice and grievances old
and new; or gaps in equality between rich and poor,
among and within countries, and between men and
women. All of these gaps are potential flashpoints for
violence and even conflict.
Prevention is ultimately the business of stopping
wars and conflicts before they happen, and of defusing
through dialogue the tensions that spark division and
war that put millions of lives in danger every day. But
prevention is also the business of making sure that
no mother has to skip a meal to feed her children; of
bringing hope for a better future through education,
health care and the possibility of an income; of fostering
tolerance, trust, equality and respect for human
rights — all the ingredients of a peaceful society; of
closing the development gaps that lead to conflict and
bringing the promise of the Sustainable Development
Goals to life for all people, equally; and of reversing
the vicious cycle of conflict and division and, instead,
setting in motion a virtuous cycle of development
and peace. And diplomacy has a vital role to play in
carrying this virtuous cycle forward.
My report Our Common Agenda proposes a new
agenda for peace that takes a comprehensive, holistic
view of global security — one that not only includes
efforts to consolidate peace, build resilience in fragile
contexts and avert conflict relapse, but that also
recognizes the importance of sustainable development
to preventing violence and conflicts from happening in
the first place. For the women and men of the United
Nations, preventive diplomacy and development go
hand-in-hand. There is no separation.
We know that preventive diplomacy works. I
have consistently used my good offices — sometimes
publicly, sometimes behind the scenes — to seek to

S/PV. 8906

defuse conflicts and advance peace. From border
disputes to constitutional and electoral crises and
fragile peace talks, we can point to example after
example where our regional offices, special envoys,
special political missions and peacekeeping operations
are working around the clock and around the world.
A central part of our prevention strategy is working
with regional and subregional organizations, from the
African Union to subregional organizations throughout
Africa, to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
to the European Union and beyond. These organizations
are vital voices of peace and play a key role in promoting
confidence-building and dialogue as we work to prevent
and resolve conflicts.
Our work together with our partners to help prepare
for and ensure peaceful elections is another critical
part of our preventive efforts, including past elections
in Madagascar, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Central African Republic, Malawi, Zambia and Sao
Tome and Principe. In Somalia, we have joined forces
with the African Union and the European Union to
work with parties to prevent the escalation of tensions
in the midst of a fraught election. In Libya, we are
working closely with the transitional authorities to
ensure that the ceasefire holds and that the country
seizes this moment for peace in the lead-up to next
month’s elections.
Beyond elections, our Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia is bringing
the region’s Governments together to jointly develop
common approaches to share water resources and
counter terrorism. In Mali, together with the Economic
Community of West African States and partners, we are
supporting the political transition to ensure a peaceful
and timely return to constitutional order, sometimes
against all odds.
In the Great Lakes region, my Special Envoy
is focused on building mutual confidence and trust
between countries and leaders, The Special Coordinator
for development in the Sahel is working shoulder-toshoulder with all entities to build peace and support
people in that subregion. The Peacebuilding Commission
is supporting the peace process in Papua New Guinea
and peace programming in South Sudan. And in the
context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), our
resident coordinators and country teams are supporting
the response to the pandemic, while also serving people’s

21-340533/32

S/PV.8906

Maintenance of international peace and security

needs in the midst of humanitarian emergencies, from
Haiti to Yemen to Myanmar.
While we are proud of our work, we also know that
we must do far more to join up our humanitarian, peace
and development efforts. My report Our Common
Agenda calls for a new social contract within all societies,
anchored in human rights and focused on accelerating
progress towards the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. This means urgent investments in
universal health coverage, social protection, education
and, of course, COVID-19 vaccines for all. It means
working to end inequalities that deny entire groups of
people access to civil and economic life and the levers
of decision-making. It means, finally, ensuring that we
balance the scales of power and participation equally for
women. And it means transforming our commitment to
human rights from words to practice in every context.
That is also an essential element in preventing crises.
But it also means strengthening all the tools of
preventive diplomacy for the future, as proposed in the
Agenda for Peace. This means stronger early-warning
systems and strategic foresight tools, including
better data and analytics, so we can develop a shared
understanding of threats to detect and avoid looming
crises. It means stronger mediation capacities, the
front lines of our diplomatic efforts to build peace in
communities around the world. It means expanding the
pool of women leaders to serve as envoys or mediation
specialists, just as we have increased the number of
women peacekeepers and women leading our field
missions. And it means more joint work across the
United Nations family, including the Peacebuilding
Commission, to bring together system-wide expertise
through regular reports and dialogue.
(spoke in French)
Prevention is not a political tool but a realistic path
to peace. If preventive diplomacy and development are
to contribute to the peace to which we all aspire, we need
the full support of the Council, and indeed of all Member
States. We have seen too many missed opportunities
in prevention because of the mistrust among Member
States about their respective motivations. This is
understandable. We live in a world where the balance
of power has always been unbalanced; a world where
double standards reign and where principles are applied
selectively and unfairly; a world where prosperity and
development are unevenly distributed; a world where
entire groups have been left behind by poverty and
4/32

16/11/2021

discrimination. Lasting peace requires constant work
with leaders, communities and all partners to build the
stability that only inclusive development can bring.
This is my message to the Security Council:
stand by our side to build peace through dialogue and
collaboration. That is the only viable solution to build
our common future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the President of the
General Assembly.
Mr. Shahid: It is indeed a great honour to speak
today at the Security Council open debate on peace
and security through preventive diplomacy — my first
time as the President of the General Assembly at its
seventy-sixth session. I thank you, Mr. President, for
the invitation and for your initiative as President of the
Security Council to organize this meeting.
For 76 years, the United Nations has represented the
pinnacle of what concerted diplomacy can achieve in
preventing global conflict. In that time, we have learned
much about what is required to preserve international
peace. We understand better how socioeconomic
factors exacerbate conflict, and more keenly appreciate
diplomacy’s role in preventing it. We understand
that peace requires a holistic effort that goes beyond
traditional paradigms, one that considers the security,
human rights and development priorities of the entire
membership; one that empowers all voices in the global
security discourse, including women and youth.
It is in acknowledgement of that that the membership
has been increasingly calling for a more representative
Security Council, one that is better equipped to deal
with the novel and complex challenges of the twentyfirst century; one that works in tandem with other
United Nations organs to deliver comprehensive
solutions to current and emerging security issues.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has exacerbated
socioeconomic challenges. It has starkly highlighted the
interconnectedness of today’s challenges. Our health,
our economic prosperity, our planet’s well-being and
our safety and security are all interlinked.
Indeed, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development has long recognized that peace and
sustainable development complement one other.
Communities that struggle to meet their most basic
21-34053

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

needs, or that lack economic and social mobility,
are prone to unrest and strife. Climate crises and
disasters threaten displacement and force communities
into competition over scarce resources. Ineffective
institutions rob people of hope and undermine their
faith in Governments and justice systems. And the
absence of democratic participation, political freedoms
and equality deprives entire populations of their human
rights. That limits their ability to turn to peaceful
recourse in redressing their grievances. We see those
truths borne out in many conflict-ridden places across
the world. The global community simply must do more.
In addition to humanitarian relief, we must support
preventive measures to build resilience and strengthen
sustainable development to give people an opportunity
to live in dignity and prosperity. Truly, human
rights, justice and sustainable development are our
greatest tools in both building and maintaining peace
and security.
Preventive diplomacy today is being conducted
by a broader array of actors, using a wider range of
tools, than ever before. Those include the development
of early-warning systems and targeted funding
mechanisms for rapid response, the establishment of
dedicated prevention structures and the ongoing use of
special envoys.
The critical importance of peacekeeping operations
in the Organization’s overall peace and security toolkit
has been recognized for decades. However, sustaining
peace and peacebuilding today is no longer limited
to traditional military peacekeeping but also includes
strengthening capacities, institutions and democratic
integrity. That dramatically reduces the likelihood of
conflict and is one of the most effective strategies to
secure durable peace.
The Peacebuilding Commission, which is an
intergovernmental advisory body of the Security
Council and the General Assembly, ensures sustained
international attention to countries emerging
from conflict, including to the reconstruction and
institution-building efforts necessary for recovery from
conflict. I welcome the call in Our Common Agenda
to invest in prevention and strengthened peacebuilding
efforts through adequate and predictable financing.
And I call upon all United Nations bodies to coordinate
to embed peacebuilding and peacekeeping operations
more deeply in the global security architecture.

S/PV. 8906

Global security will always be within the proper
remit of the Security Council. However, work done by
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council to build resilient and prosperous communities
facilitates the work of the Security Council.
In November 1999, the Security Council adopted
presidential
statement
S/PRST/1999/34,
which
recognized the importance of building a culture of
prevention and the need for all United Nations organs
to pursue preventive strategies. In fact, in his 2011
report entitled Preventive Diplomacy: Delivering
Results, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon underscored
the importance of preventive diplomacy throughout the
conflict spectrum. The report noted that, through its
norm-setting capacity and deliberative functions, the
General Assembly has a central role in contributing to
a conducive environment for conflict prevention.
The Secretary-General’s report Our Common
Agenda also stresses the importance of systemwide cooperation and the need for greater focus on
prevention. The agenda’s commitment to boosting
partnerships envisions stronger engagement within
the United Nations system and calls for reforms of
the Organization’s three principal organs — making
the Security Council more representative, revitalizing
the work of the General Assembly and strengthening
Economic and Social Council.
Revitalizing the General Assembly is one the key
elements of my “Presidency of Hope”. To that end, I
not only want to make it more inclusive of the views
and priorities of the membership, but also want to
strengthen cooperation between the main United
Nations organs to streamline our responses to global
challenges, including security challenges.
I call upon the membership to work together to
implement General Assembly resolution 75/325, on the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly,
which encourages regular interaction and continued
coordination among the Presidents of the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council. Regular coordination meetings
among the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council, as mandated in
the resolution, help bridge differences and improve the
efficiency of our work.
On my part, as President of the General Assembly,
I am keen to engage with my peers to synergize our
efforts to recover better, improve global governance

21-340535/32

S/PV.8906

Maintenance of international peace and security

16/11/2021

and strengthen the international security regime. Under
my “Presidency of Hope”, I will continue to engage
with Member States as well as with the principal
organs of the United Nations to ensure progress in our
common endeavours.

and coordination. Article 65 of the Charter clearly
provides that

I hope that same spirit of cooperation will guide our
discussions today. I look forward to a wide-ranging and
productive debate. I expect that the outcomes will put us
in a better position to deliver to our global constituents.

The Economic and Social Council’s own rules of
procedure also provide that special sessions can be
requested by the Security Council or, alternatively,
an item can be proposed on the Economic and Social
Council’s agenda. Despite that, we can find only two
examples of explicit requests to the Economic and
Social Council for assistance by the Security Council
referring to Article 65: the first in 1950, regarding the
situation in Korea, and the second in 1973, with respect
to Zambia. The most recent request by the Security
Council to the Economic and Social Council in 1998,
inviting it to contribute to the elaboration of a longterm programme of support for Haiti, did not reference
Article 65.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Shahid for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kelapile.
Mr. Kelapile: It is a great pleasure for me to address
the Security Council in my capacity as President of
the Economic and Social Council at this very timely
open debate. I wish to thank the Mexican presidency of
the Council for convening this debate and for inviting
me. The event is, in fact, a very welcome step in the
improvement of cooperation and collaboration among
the United Nations Charter-based principal organs.
The Charter of the United Nations recognizes
development as the indispensable foundation of
collective security. While there is no dispute that the
Security Council has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
conflict prevention is also at the core of the work of the
United Nations and must therefore actively involve all
principal organs.
At its founding, the Economic and Social Council
was entrusted with the responsibility to promote
the economic and social advancement of all peoples
and the promotion and protection of human rights.
Protecting our citizens from want, disease and
environmental degradation means protecting their
security and preventing conflict. The Economic and
Social Council’s oversight and coordination of the
United Nations development system, including in
conflict settings, as well as its work on humanitarian
action and coordination, are also highly relevant to the
maintenance of peace and security.
To date, however, interactions between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council have remained sporadic and ad hoc. We must
acknowledge that today’s complex challenges require
more institutionalized collaboration. We already
have the legal basis for inter-Council collaboration
6/32

“[t]he Economic and Social Council may furnish
information to the Security Council and shall assist
the Security Council upon its request”.

With over 75 years of development experience
and a vast body of knowledge — both of which are
increasingly pertinent to the work of the Security
Council — the Economic and Social Council, together
with its subsidiary bodies, has much to offer. It was
the seminal work of the Commission on the Status
of Women on gender-mainstreaming that created the
momentum for the consideration of the women and
peace and security agenda in the Security Council. The
Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the Commission on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and the United
Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research
Institute have also done work at the intersection of
conflict and the rule of law.
Moreover, the Economic and Social Council’s
Commission for Social Development addresses
social exclusion and inequality and focuses on those
communities often left behind. Its Permanent Forum
on Indigenous Issues and its Youth Forum also provide
a platform for engaging communities that have
traditionally been voiceless. Information from the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
which monitors the implementation of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
could constitute an early warning system.
The voluntary national reviews of the High-level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development, convened
under the auspices of the Economic and Social Council,
also offer valuable insights and lessons learned for the
21-34053

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development in conflict-affected countries. At the
High-level Political Forum in July 2022, of the 46
countries that will present their voluntary national
reviews on implementation of the 2030 Agenda,
approximately 12 have been affected by conflict within
the past two decades.
I am from a region of the world where surmounting
the challenges to peace and development has been
most elusive. In the Sahel, we continue to witness
untold suffering due to the failure to appreciate the
complex interplay of human survival in a very fragile
and culturally diverse environment. Extreme poverty
in South Sudan is rooted in over 50 years of conflict.
Haiti’s vast humanitarian needs, structural inequality,
governance deficits and vulnerability to climate change
require that we work ever more closely together, as the
United Nations principal organs, to address the longterm development needs of that country. Currently,
those three cases are on the agendas of both Councils and
could benefit from joint and complementary approaches.
Having said all that, allow me to share some
practical options for strengthening inter-Council
coordination that will be more visible, transparent,
complementary and effective. Those could constitute
elements for an institutional framework that could
promote comprehensive, integrated solutions that span
actions across the peace and security, humanitarian and
development pillars of the Organization.
First, the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council could build on their previous
collaboration in the early 2000s. The Chair of the
Security Council Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa regularly
participated in the work of the Economic and Social
Council Ad Hoc Advisory Groups on African
Countries Emerging from Conflict. There was even a
joint mission to Guinea-Bissau in 2004. The work of the
Security Council Ad Hoc Working Group on Africa,
which includes, in its terms of reference, strengthening
cooperation with the Economic and Social Council,
could benefit from the participation of a member of the
Economic and Social Council Bureau. While the Ad
Hoc Advisory Groups on African Countries no longer
exist, the Council’s consideration of South Sudan and
the Sahel remain relevant for joint discussion.
Secondly, we can also draw on the experience of
the existing regular interactions among the General

S/PV. 8906

Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) that have been in
place for a number of years. There are monthly meetings
between the Presidents of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, and the two Presidents
also convene joint briefings at the beginning of the
calendar year. There are also annual joint meetings
between the Economic and Social Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Given that rich and valuable experience, I would
also like to propose regular meetings among the
heads of the principal organs under the Charter and
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission. Work
programmes could be shared, which could help plan a
more systematic approach to engaging the heads of the
principal organs where relevant.
Another option could be regular joint meetings of
a composite committee of the bureaus of the Economic
and Social Council, the PBC and, of course, a troika
of Security Council Presidents of the prior, current
and following month. Those meetings could serve to
mobilize political will and international solidarity
and could be the medium through which to discuss
integrated strategies and targeted policy interventions
that support conflict prevention. Those meetings could
be prepared by existing informal coordinators that have
been put in place by the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Security Council and the General Assembly. The
informal coordinators for the PBC and the Economic
and Social Council will be selected very soon. Those
informal coordinators can identify areas where
collaboration would be most useful and mainstream a
more holistic and coherent approach to our work.
Thirdly and finally, we could envision that joint
meetings on common themes could also extend to
the entire membership of the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. Joining forces on crises of a global
nature, such as pandemics and the climate crisis, will
demonstrate to the global public that Member States
can put aside their differences for the greater good. It
would also mobilize a more coherent, coordinated and
accountable United Nations system-wide response.
In conclusion, let me emphasize that we need
innovative solutions to the multidimensional crises
across the pillars of the Organization. As we move
forward, and onward, to the 100th anniversary of the
United Nations, let us work together more closely and

21-340537/32

S/PV.8906

Maintenance of international peace and security

engender the ambition to give life and meaning to a
larger vision of collective security, rooted in sustainable
development and conflict prevention.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
continues to threaten our world and has already
reversed many gains made towards the attainment of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The
pandemic has hit the poorest and the most vulnerable
in our societies hardest. With its multifaceted impacts
on health, the economy, food security and education,
it has exposed, and further exacerbated, pre-existing
inequalities within and among countries, which, if
not dealt with in a collaborative way, will be palpable
sources of future tensions and conflict.
In that regard, I commend you, Mr. President, for
also convening the high-level open debate on exclusion,
inequality and conflict on 9 November (see S/PV.8900).
We in the Economic and Social Council agree that it is
imperative to address the root causes of conflict, which
often lie in poverty and unequal access to opportunities
for a better life.
Moving forward, the Economic and Social Council
is fully mobilized to ensure a swift recovery from the
COVID-19 pandemic, including by promoting equitable
access to affordable vaccines for everyone. That issue
has been at the centre of our work since March 2020
and will continue to be so until the crisis dissipates.
It is one among several areas where the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council can work
together, in coordination with the General Assembly, in
a complementary manner in accordance the respective
mandates of the principal organs.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Kelapile for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Donoghue.
Judge Donoghue: A few weeks ago, I had the
honour of travelling to Headquarters in New York to
deliver the traditional addresses of the President of the
International Court of Justice to the Security Council,
the General Assembly and the Sixth Committee and
to take part in valuable meetings with United Nations
officials and representatives of Member States. Today’s
signature event provides the perfect opportunity to
follow up on some of the points raised while I was
in New York as part of the ongoing dialogue among
the principal organs that seeks to identify avenues to
promote our shared objectives of peace and security.
8/32

16/11/2021

I am therefore grateful to Your Excellency,
Mr. President, for convening this signature event,
which I am pleased to join via video-teleconference
from the seat of the Court at The Hague. In that regard,
as indicated when the meeting was scheduled, I will
need to excuse myself today at noon, New York time.
In your concept note (S/2021/888, annex),
Mr. President, you drew attention to the Declaration of
the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the
Rule of Law at the National and International Levels
(General Assembly resolution 67/1), unanimously
adopted in 2012, which recognizes the respective
contributions of different United Nations organs to the
prevention of conflicts. Today I will touch upon three
points addressed in the Declaration that highlight the
indispensable interplay between the Court and other
principal organs in that field.
First, the International Court of Justice welcomes
efforts by the other principal organs to promote the
resort by Member States to the settlement of their
disputes before the Court. In the 2012 Declaration, the
General Assembly called upon States that have not yet
done so to consider accepting the jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice. The Court welcomes
related initiatives of United Nations organs and
Member States, including most recently the declaration
on promoting the jurisdiction of the International
Court of Justice, launched earlier this month by a core
group of States. Of course, depositing a declaration
recognizing the Court’s jurisdiction as compulsory is
only one of several ways in which a State may express
its consent to that jurisdiction. The encouragement to
embrace the Court’s jurisdiction can therefore usefully
be expanded beyond the deposit of those so-called
Optional Clause declarations.
The principal organs of the United Nations
represented at this event can be, and have been, involved
in other ways in the process that leads to contentious
cases being submitted to the Court. For instance, under
Article 36, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Security Council may recommend, in
relation to legal disputes that endanger international
peace and security, that the States involved refer the
dispute to the International Court of Justice. The
Security Council did that with respect to the very
first case heard by the Court — the Corfu Channel
case. More recently, the Secretary-General played a
crucial role in the decades-long process that led to the
21-34053

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

submission to the Court of a dispute between Guyana
and Venezuela.
Turning to a second point mentioned in the 2012
Declaration, the Assembly recalled the ability of the
relevant organs of the United Nations to request advisory
opinions from the International Court of Justice.
During events that take place each fall in
International Law Week, including those that were
held this year, Member State representatives often
make general calls for increased resort by United
Nations organs to the advisory opinion mechanism.
The question whether to seek any particular advisory
opinion from the Court is a matter entirely in the hands
of the relevant organ or specialized agency and its
members and must be carefully weighed on the basis
of a range of different factors and considerations. The
Court itself stands ready to receive any requests for
advisory opinions that relevant United Nations organs
and specialized agencies may make.
Moving to a third issue addressed in the 2012
Declaration, the General Assembly reaffirmed the
obligation of all States to comply with the decisions
of the International Court of Justice in cases to which
they are parties. Once the Court delivers its final
judgment in relation to a given dispute, the case is
removed from its docket. The Court is not a monitoring
body. Its role in relation to a given dispute ends at that
point. However, depending on the particulars of the
case, other international organs may be able to play a
role in bringing about the full implementation of the
Court’s decisions.

S/PV. 8906

to the fundamental role played by Secretary-General
Kofi Annan in bringing about the implementation of
the Court’s 2012 judgment in the case concerning the
Land and Maritime Boundary between Cameroon
and Nigeria.
While the circumstances and requirements of
each case vary, that example demonstrates that other
United Nations organs have opportunities, within their
respective purviews, to contribute to the implementation
of judgments of the International Court of Justice and
to the promotion of peace, security and justice. I invite
the participants at this event to consider the ways in
which the contributions of the Court and those of the
other principal organs could be mutually reinforcing.
The Court welcomes opportunities for engagement
with the other principal organs of the United Nations.
In my briefing, I hope to have briefly addressed some
of the areas in which the role of the Court and those
of other organs can complement each other with a
view to the prevention of conflicts, in accordance
with the United Nations Charter and the Statute of the
International Court of Justice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Judge Donoghue for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Mexico.

As Council members know, Article 94, paragraph
2, of the United Nations Charter sets out a specific
role for the Security Council in the implementation of
the Court’s decisions. The very limited practice under
that provision suggests that States have found it more
valuable to pursue other avenues to achieve the full
implementation of judgments of the International Court
of Justice in their favour.

For the United Nations to be able to carry out
genuine preventive diplomacy, coordination among
its principal organs must be strengthened. That is the
very reason that Mexico convened this debate. We
express our gratitude and appreciation for the presence
of the Secretary-General and the Presidents of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the International Court of Justice, as well as the 34
countries that are inscribed on the list of speakers for
this open debate. Their participation is a sign of their
commitment and reaffirms the will to work towards
more coordinated and effective multilateral diplomacy.

In many cases, the two States, acting individually
or in concert, give effect to a judgment without the
involvement of third parties. In some circumstances,
however, outside actors within the United Nations
framework and beyond can assist the two States in
moving forward from a situation of conflict to a situation
where a dispute has been resolved. The principal organs
of the United Nations can play a positive role in that
regard. I would like to draw attention, for example,

Unfortunately, the wide range of tools at the
disposal of the United Nations to promote conflict
prevention does not reflect the outcomes that we have
seen in recent years. We only have to look at the range
of issues that the Security Council will address this
month alone — Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Myanmar and
Syria, to name but a few — to recognize that the United
Nations, as a single body, has not been able to prevent
these conflicts from arising, escalating and threatening

21-340539/32

S/PV.8906

Maintenance of international peace and security

international peace and security, putting the lives of
thousands of people at risk. It is therefore timely to
reflect on what we can do to prevent more situations
from coming before the Council and to ensure that the
Council does not limit itself to administering conflicts.
Nor can we ignore the stigma that it represents
for many countries to have their national situations
addressed in the Security Council. This is one of the
best incentives for other principal organs, working
within their mandates, to act early and in a timely
manner to prevent the emergence of conflict. Violence
is always the product of processes of frustration and
pain, fuelled by deprivation and need and exacerbated
by intolerance, excessive ambition and hatred. This
whole chain of vicious circles can be tackled from the
different trenches of the United Nations, provided there
is a swift and coordinated reaction.
Conflict also represents the victory of force over
reason and law. This is why we should not underestimate
the tools offered by the United Nations Charter for the
peaceful settlement of disputes. The same applies to
the accountability of those responsible for committing
international crimes. This is why we insist that the veto
cannot and should not be used to prevent Council action
in cases of mass atrocities. Every time this happens, the
United Nations fails twice: by failing to prevent and by
failing to react.
I reiterate: sustainable peace is the responsibility of
all the principal organs of the United nations, working
within their respective mandates and competences.
And today’s challenges require a United Nations that
shows a common front and call for accountability with
a single voice. Today’s exercise therefore opens a space
for dialogue in order to ensure that the Organization
responds with unity and improves its effectiveness.
This preventive approach puts the individual at the
centre of the Organization, and this must include all
agencies, funds, programmes and specialized bodies,
as well as the teams deployed in the field. Preventive
diplomacy, mediation, the peaceful settlement of
disputes and strengthening the rule of law are key
to peacebuilding and complement the action of
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
mandated by the Council itself.
The current coronavirus disease pandemic has
shown that we need synergies with a long-term vision
for the United Nations to respond to current and future
challenges. Despite the serious threat to international
10/32

16/11/2021

security that the pandemic has posed from the outset,
we should not forget that it was the General Assembly
that first reacted substantively, followed months later
by the Security Council.
The report of the Secretary-General entitled
Our Common Agenda and yesterday’s adoption by
the General Assembly of the resolution that arose
from it (General Assembly resolution 76/6) provide
a framework for action to adapt, strengthen and
accelerate multilateral cooperation. This inevitably
requires the involvement of regional organizations and
the full participation of civil society.
I conclude by making four concrete proposals
that can be explored to give continuity to the collegial
process we have initiated today.
First, we believe that the communication and
collaboration between the Secretary-General’s envoys
and special representatives for situations on the
Council’s agenda with the other principal organs of the
United Nations can be strengthened. This interaction
can provide a more comprehensive and holistic approach
that makes their work more effective.
Secondly, we reiterate our proposal to allow the
Secretary-General to request advisory opinions from
the International Court of Justice where these may
benefit his conflict-prevention work.
Thirdly, we believe that coordination among
the principal organs should be incorporated in their
subsidiary bodies, especially the Human Rights
Council, whose work is fundamental to preventive
diplomacy and to sustainable peace and development.
Fourthly and finally, we propose regularizing this
type of meeting in order to prevent dialogue between
the main bodies from taking place in isolation or on
a case-by-case basis, with a view to opening a new
stage of coordination and collaboration. To this end, we
could explore the creation of a working group or other
mechanism to develop a real agenda for communication
among the principal organs of the United Nations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): First
and foremost, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the General Assembly, the
President of the Economic and Social Council and the
21-34053

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

President of the International Court of Justice, for their
useful briefings.
I would not wish to fail to thank Mexico for having
chosen the topic of today’s meeting. This is an excellent
opportunity for the Security Council and the other
principal organs of the United Nations to take stock
of their contribution and their cooperation to promote
international peace and security, in particular through
preventive diplomacy, and to find ways of achieving
complementarity in their efforts and of perfecting their
coordination for better action in preventing, managing
and finding solutions to conflicts.
Preventive diplomacy is based on the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter, in particular
the principle of the maintenance of international
peace and security. Article 1 stipulates that the United
Nations must
“take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace”.
If the Charter confers the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
to the Security Council, the Charter also attributes
to the General Assembly several prerogatives in this
area, including those of discussing all matters linked
to international peace and security and drawing the
attention of the Security Council to situations that
might endanger international peace and security.
Article 8 of the Charter confers upon regional
organizations the prerogative of peacefully settling
local disputes before submitting them to the Security
Council. The Charter requests the Economic and Social
Council to provide information to the Security Council
and to assist it if it so requests. It also entrusts the
Secretary-General with an important responsibility,
namely, to alert the Security Council to any issue that
might threaten international peace and security. We
attach great importance to the role of the principal
organs of the United Nations, each in their specific
area of remit, in maintaining international peace and
security through effective collective measures.
The causes of crises and conflicts vary — from
poverty and unemployment to marginalization and
exclusion. Economic indicators are declining, with weak
State institutions and governance, as well as corruption,
terrorism, violent extremism, organized transnational
crimes, human rights abuses, climate change and the
spread of pandemics. Challenges arising from those

S/PV. 8906

situations are diverse and multifaceted. They require a
broader view of the concept of international peace and
security, instead of a focus on preventing differences.
We must look at all actions to prevent certain situations
from occurring, spreading and transforming into
conflict. That must be done through the collaborative
efforts of the principal organs of the United Nations.
We welcome today’s debate, but we would like to
underscore the importance of preventive diplomacy,
which includes action to contain conflicts and prevent
them from spreading. We also stress the importance
of holding regular meetings with a view to generating
practical recommendations on this matter. Preventive
diplomacy remains one of the best ways of maintaining
international peace and security. It is not only the best
option from a political and moral standpoint but is also
the least costly option for the United Nations and the
international community.
Given the complexities in the international situation
today, we believe that preventive diplomacy must
also include regional organizations, which constantly
demonstrate their effectiveness and their central role
of crisis management in their respective regions thanks
to their knowledge of the specificities of the situation
on the ground. We therefore reiterate that enhancing
cooperation, partnerships and integration with regional
organizations is critical in order to enable them to
intervene first and as soon as possible in order for
them to use their tools to promote a peaceful settlement
and uphold international peace and security. That is a
crucial component of effective preventive diplomacy.
We are convinced that wars and conflicts are not
inevitable. Instead, we must work to prevent their
occurrence or exacerbation. Instead of rushing to attend
to emergencies, we could take early preventive action
so that emerging threats do not spiral out of control.
Despite progress in this area, preventive diplomacy
still faces challenges, particularly the absence of
political resolve among some parties to conflict, as
well as the difficulty of imposing solutions. Every day,
many lives are lost, and people are suffering from the
ravages of wars and conflicts. That includes women
and children. That is the price we pay for our inability
to prevent. We are therefore firmly convinced that the
use of preventive diplomacy is not an option, but rather
an urgent need.
We hope that today’s meeting will be a decisive
turning point towards better coordinating the efforts

21-3405311/32

S/PV.8906

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the various United Nations organs in furtherance
of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, as well as
the Secretary-General, the President of the General
Assembly, Ambassador Kelapile from the Economic and
Social Council and Judge Donoghue for their briefings.
In 2016, the Security Council and the General
Assembly adopted a pair of ground-breaking resolutions
on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (resolution 2282
(2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262). Those
resolutions explicitly acknowledged — for the first
time — that conflict prevention was the responsibility
of the entire United Nations system. Building on
our collective recognition that development, peace
and security and human rights are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing, the resolutions envisioned a more
integrated and coherent United Nations approach to
preventing conflict.
As we heard today and as the 2020 United Nations
peacebuilding architecture review also reminded us,
making that a reality is still a work in progress. We
warmly welcome the Secretary-General’s prioritization
of peace in Our Common Agenda. I would like to make
three points on this issue.
First, a system-wide approach to sustaining peace
is critical. By the time an issue reaches the Security
Council, it may be too late for many on the front
line — the receiving end of conflict. Peace needs to
be a core consideration of the wider United Nations
architecture. The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is
obviously key, but we can do more to realize the PBC’s
full potential and, as we heard today, to enhance the
role of other United Nations bodies and organs.

16/11/2021

of conflict prevention, but, as we have said before,
development done poorly is not the master key to
unlocking all problems. For development to be
sustainable, it needs to simultaneously address issues
that we know drive conflict, including social, economic
and political exclusion.
Thirdly, as your concept note (S/2021/888/annex)
states, Mr. President, an international order based on
the rule of law is indispensable for a more peaceful,
prosperous and just world. That includes the Security
Council holding Governments to account when they
disregard international treaties, especially when
that involves serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law. For the United
Kingdom, that also means promoting open societies,
good governance and the rule of law at the national
level. Combatting corruption and ensuring that people
have access to justice and security can be important
steps in preventing conflict.
In conclusion, overcoming the silos of the United
Nations system is critical for United Nations conflict
prevention. The United Kingdom is committed to
realizing the promise of the 2016 twin resolutions. We
are grateful to you, Mr. President, for this timely debate.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Allow me at the outset,
Sir, to express our appreciation to your delegation for
organizing today’s open debate on the respective roles
and functions of the United Nations principal organs in
the context of preventive diplomacy. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General, the President of the
General Assembly, the President of the Economic and
Social Council and the President of International Court
of Justice for their briefings.

The human rights architecture is particularly
important in that regard. Those who hide behind
arguments about mandates and competencies in
order to maintain that human rights have no bearing
on peace and security would do well to revisit the
Charter of the United Nations. Moreover, as we see,
human rights violations are often an early indicator of
conflict, and human rights diplomacy is a key part of
preventive diplomacy.

The principal organs of the United Nations
have specific roles and functions and should act in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations, as defined in the Charter. There have
been recent attempts to assume work in the Council
which would be better undertaken in the specialized
agencies and organs created for the purpose. We do
not favour this trend, both as a matter of propriety and
of pragmatism. From the functional point of view as
well, burdening the Council with increasing numbers of
issues distracts us from relevant issues of international
peace and security, and is therefore best avoided.

Secondly, peace needs to be more firmly embedded
in the work of United Nations bodies concerned with
development. Development may be the best form

The objective of the United Nations, as reflected
in Chapter I of the Charter, will be better served, when
each of its principal organs works in harmony, focusing

12/32

21-34053

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

on its mandate. The Charter should remain our guiding
light, and we need to make concerted efforts towards
the reform and strengthening of the United Nations
organs to address global challenges, particularly issues
associated with peace and security. In this regard, let
me offer the following five observations.
While the United Nations was founded on the basis
of the sovereign equality of nations, nowhere else was
that principle more belied than in its principal organ,
the Security Council. More than seven and a half
decades since its inception, the structural inequality
persists. While the world is changing, the institutional
architecture primarily responsible for international
peace and security remains frozen. A composition
that is rooted in 1945 detracts from the Organization’s
abilities to fully harness the capabilities of its Member
States as of today. We need to show our collective
commitment to reformed multilateralism. As our Prime
Minister said in his address during the general debate
of the General Assembly last year, “reform in the
responses, in the processes, and in the very character of
the United Nations is the need of the hour” (A/75/PV.12,
annex I).
The peaceful settlement of disputes is key for the
maintenance of international peace and security and
the promotion of the rule of law. Adequate attention
needs to be paid to the provisions of Chapter VI, rather
than Chapter VII becoming the ready recourse.
Issues related to the economic and social domain
fall under the realm of the sovereignty of Member
States, which assume the responsibility of protection
and welfare of their population. India believes that the
advancement of the rule of law at the national level
is an essential tool for the protection of democracy,
economic growth, sustainable development, ensuring
gender justice, the eradication of poverty and hunger,
and the protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms. We believe that the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council are the right
forums where Member States can discuss and work
collaboratively on these issues.
Increasing acts of terrorism and the expansion of
terrorist groups, particularly in Asia and Africa, remain
a serious challenge to the maintenance of international
peace and security. All organs of the United Nations,
including the Security Council, need to have a zerotolerance approach towards terrorism and act against
non-State actors and their sponsors. Any narrative that

S/PV. 8906

justifies the actions of terrorism in any manner would
embolden terrorists and those sponsoring them.
The complex and interlinked nature of various
aspects of building and sustaining peace are now better
understood than before. The perspective is increasingly
expanding across the spectrum, from prevention to
resolution, from reconciliation to recovery, and from
reconstruction and the prevention of a relapse of
conflict. There is a greater recognition of the importance
of a comprehensive sustainable development, inclusive
economic growth and political processes in preventing
conflict, as well as undertaking effective peacebuilding
efforts. What is lacking is the political commitment for
commensurate action and substantive support for the
efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission. We need
to address this shortcoming purposefully and in the
right spirit.
In concluding, as our leaders said in the declaration
on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations, “[t]here is no other global
organization with the legitimacy, convening power and
normative impact of the United Nations” (resolution
75/1, para. 1). We have a moral obligation to strengthen
its principal organs for the effective functioning of the
United Nations, corresponding to contemporary global
realities and challenges. Factoring in the aforementioned
five observations in the work of the relevant organs of
the United Nations will help us to fulfil the objectives
for which our forefathers set up the United Nations.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Secretary-General Guterres, General
Assembly President Shahid, Economic and Social
Council President Kelapile and International Court of
Justice President Donoghue for their briefings.
Seventy-six years ago, our forefathers made a
solemn commitment in the Charter of the United
Nations to take effective and collective measures for
the prevention and removal of threats to peace. Over the
years, the United Nations and its Member States, with
that principle as their guide for action, have actively
pursued preventive diplomacy. There are both success
stories and important lessons learned.
The world today is undergoing complex and
profound changes. We need to further enhance our
understanding of preventive diplomacy and exert
greater efforts in that context.

21-3405313/32

S/PV.8906

Maintenance of international peace and security

First, preventive diplomacy is all about prevention. In
the early stages of a crisis, taking timely and appropriate
action can have a multiplier effect, allowing us to do
more with less. The key is to formulate a preventive
diplomacy strategy that is systematic, scientific and
effective, making full use of such means as good
offices and mediation, strengthening the early warning
mechanism and supporting the Secretary-General in
playing his unique role. The early warning mechanism
allows for the early detection of major problems so that
immediate action can be taken to address them, but
it is also necessary to ensure that it does not lead to
overreactions and inappropriate involvement.
Secondly, the root causes must be addressed. An
emergency response can only avert or postpone crises
temporarily. It is only by eliminating the root causes of a
conflict that we can achieve lasting peace and stability.
We should help countries in conflict to improve
their governance system, enhance their governing
capacity, persist in a people-centred approach, focus
on development and explore development paths that
are in line with their national conditions. We should
take concrete measures and actions to support the
relevant countries in combatting poverty and hunger
and increasing investment in education, health care,
infrastructure and other public services. These are
important means for strengthening national identity
and promoting social solidarity. Major economies
should pursue responsible economic and trade policies
so as not to cause volatility in economic sectors and
the global financial markets. That is important for
developing countries in terms of maintaining economic
growth and social stability.
Thirdly, the ownership of the parties concerned
must be respected. In preventive diplomacy, it is
imperative to adhere to the principles and practices
of the Charter and to adhere to the basic norms of
international relations, such as sovereign equality
and non-interference in internal affairs. A successful
preventive diplomacy programme is necessarily
anchored in a specific situation and owned by the
parties concerned. There is no single template or
approach that is uniformly applicable. Preventive
diplomacy cannot and must not become a pretext for
interference in domestic affairs. History has shown time
and again that arbitrary interference in other countries’
internal affairs, the imposition of governance models
on developing countries, or even pitting one faction
14/32

16/11/2021

against another often leads to internal conflicts in
those countries.
Fourthly, we should enhance coordination to
create synergies. We reaffirm our commitment to
multilateralism and the central role of the United
Nations, as well as to strengthening coordination
within the United Nations system. The General
Assembly is the most representative organ of the
United Nations and provides an important platform for
Member States to engage in dialogue and cooperation
to build consensus. The Economic and Social Council
has comparative advantages in promoting economic
development and advancing peace and stability. The
International Court of Justice is the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations, dedicated to promoting
the international rule of law and the peaceful settlement
of disputes. The Secretariat has an important role to
play in strengthening coordination within the United
Nations system. Those organs should carry out their
work in accordance with their respective mandates,
while maintaining communication and cooperation.
China supports the Peacebuilding Commission in
line with its mandate to strengthen interaction with
the Security Council and play a greater role in conflict
prevention. The Security Council should further
strengthen its cooperation with the African Union and
other regional organizations, while allowing them to
leverage their unique advantages in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts in their respective regions.
China welcomes the recent report presented by the
Secretary-General entitled Our Common Agenda. The
report proposes that greater attention and investment
be made in preventive diplomacy, that a new agenda for
peace be formulated and that security risks be managed
through effective and efficient measures. In particular,
the report notes the need for targeted development
assistance as a way to help address the root causes
of conflicts. China looks forward to engaging with
the United Nations membership to carry out in-depth
discussions, step up cooperation, gain clarity on followup ideas and strive to further transform into reality the
vision proposed in the report, so as to jointly build a
better world of peace and security.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank our briefers for being with us today. Their presence
and interventions serve as important reminders of how
we can work together to collectively deliver for the
people of the world.
21-34053

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8906

As President Biden noted in his proclamation on
United Nations Day last month, the United Nations
remains the cornerstone of the international order,
contributing to unmatched strides towards peace
and prosperity shared around the world. That is what
Member States should collectively strive to accomplish.

continue to push for the Peacebuilding Commission to
brief the Human Rights Council, as it would serve as an
opportunity to advise the Human Rights Council on the
important work of the Commission. That is exactly what
the Secretary-General called for when he asked for more
networked, inclusive and effective multilateralism.

When the United Nations was founded, the world
united and embarked upon a shared mission: creating a
rules-based international order grounded in democratic
principles to advance respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, promote the peaceful settlement
of disputes and strengthen adherence to international
law. The United Nations is not a perfect body, but the
progress we have made in the past eight decades is
overall a remarkable achievement.

At its best, the United Nations can advance peace,
security and prosperity for people around the globe.
It can lead the world forward through the choppy
waters of the twenty-first century. We saw that during
the coronavirus disease pandemic, where the United
Nations once again demonstrated the essential role that
it plays in times of global crisis. It is up to us collectively
to ensure that the United Nations is up to the task of
making this century the most peaceful and prosperous
one in human history.

We took another unified step forward three
years ago when the General Assembly endorsed, by
consensus, the Secretary-General’s United Nations
reform agenda on peace and security, development
and management reform. As part of those reforms, the
Secretary-General proposed new ways to strengthen
the United Nations capacity to prevent conflict. The
United Nations has a unique advantage when engaging
in preventive diplomacy, given its extensive presence
in conflict-affected settings worldwide. United Nations
field mechanisms — such as the Resident Coordinator
system, peace and development advisers, special
political missions and peacekeeping operations — are
on the front lines of preventive diplomacy, and we must
empower them and reinforce their efforts.
A modern approach to our work requires a modern
approach to conflict prevention and peacebuilding. The
United States is now implementing the United States
strategy to prevent conflict and promote stability, which
details lessons learned and best practices for addressing
the root causes of conflict and preventing future ones.
Many of those lessons are relevant to the United
Nations, including the primacy of political solutions
to conflict, the value of local buy-in, legitimacy and
accountability, the need for monitoring and evaluation
and the importance of integrating all diplomatic
assistance and security activities under a coherent plan.
Fundamentally, we have found that conflicts are often
fuelled by the abuse of human rights, which is one
reason that it is so important that Member States uphold
their international obligations and commitments.
Many have spoken today about greater coordination
within the United Nations system. In that vein, we will

Tremendous work lies ahead of us. We must remain
committed to the vision laid out by the SecretaryGeneral, and endorsed by all Member States, to
empower the United Nations to prevent violence and to
bring parties together in support of political solutions to
conflict. But I know we can meet this moment so long as
we stay true to the original vision and values enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations: freedom, equality,
opportunity and human, dignity for all.
Mr. Ousman (Niger) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on organizing this open debate, whose theme is
generating great interest. I also take this opportunity
to congratulate and thank all the briefers for their
excellent presentations.
The purpose behind the establishment of the
United Nations was to maintain international peace and
security and save future generations from the scourge
of war. Given that prevention is better than cure,
preventive diplomacy efforts must figure prominently
in the Organization’s architecture for seeking and
strengthening peace. With the enormous challenges
facing humankind today — some of them new — conflict
prevention is not an option, but an imperative.
Peace and security, for which the Niger has
always shown a strong commitment, are fundamental
elements of our foreign policy, which is why the Niger
is committed to respect for the Charter of the United
Nations and for multilateralism. With regard to the
provisions of the Charter, the goal of the United Nations
is to maintain international peace and security, with
the Security Council charged with that responsibility.

21-3405315/32

S/PV.8906

Maintenance of international peace and security

Therefore, coherence, coordination and the interaction
of all the principal organs of the Organization must
continue and be strengthened to achieve the common
objective sought.
One of the main functions of some of those organs
is the peaceful settlement of disputes as enshrined in
the Charter, which, if implemented effectively, would
prevent many wars with incalculable consequences.
Preventive diplomacy can include intervention by the
Security Council, the Secretary-General and other actors
to discourage the use of violence in critical situations.
But intervention cannot replace political dialogue and
mediation — for, without genuine dialogue, conflict
prevention and lasting peace are difficult to achieve.
In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity
enshrined in Chapter VIII of the Charter, the United
Nations must also work in partnership with regional
organizations to put an end to ongoing conflicts and
prevent new crises from breaking out or worsening. In
that regard, the Niger welcomes the Secretary-General’s
commitment to the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union on peace and security.
We also welcome the strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union through the 2017
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security and the
memorandum of understanding on the partnership on
peacebuilding between the two organizations.
The creation of United Nations regional offices,
including the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel, also remains an advantageous approach.
Not only does it bring the Organization closer to the
people, but it also enables it to better contribute to
conflict prevention and peacebuilding by focusing on
specific challenges affecting security in the region,
including organized crime, terrorism, the effects of
climate change, migration issues and poverty, inter alia.
My delegation calls for the strengthening of the
capacity of the Secretariat to support the preventive
diplomacy functions of the relevant legislative bodies
through the allocation of a substantial budget for that
purpose. Effective preventive diplomacy could avoid the
need to engage in multiple post-conflict peacekeeping
and peacebuilding activities and humanitarian and
reconstruction measures, which are far more costly. The
Peacebuilding Commission remains the best example of
cooperation among the principal organs of the United
16/32

16/11/2021

Nations and, as such, deserves to be strengthened and
its advisory areas expanded.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that
anticipating crises must be at the centre of the work
of the United Nations. Hence the importance of the
Secretary-General bringing urgent and sensitive
situations that are likely to degenerate into conflicts
to the attention of the Security Council as soon as
possible, in accordance with Article 99 of the Charter
of the United Nations.
The Security Council must further strengthen its
cooperation with all the principal organs of the United
Nations in order to successfully prevent conflict and
save lives.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): Let me begin by thanking
the Mexican presidency for convening today’s important
debate. I would also like to welcome the participation of
the Secretary-General as well as the Presidents of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the International Court of Justice. I thank them for
their comprehensive remarks.
While peace, cooperation and development
continue as the prevailing trend, we are far from
overcoming persistent challenges to the maintenance
of international peace and security, such as border
and territorial disputes, armed conflicts, frictions,
tension, arms races and geostrategic competition. At
the same time, non-traditional challenges, such as the
coronavirus disease pandemic, the negative effects
of climate change, natural disasters, poverty and
inequities, inter alia, are having more and more impact.
There remain around 20 million refugees, 48 million
displaced persons due to conflicts and 235 million
people in need of humanitarian assistance. Those
challenges can be averted or mitigated. In that context,
an ounce of prevention can be worth much more than a
pound of cure.
The Charter of the United Nations, as the
cornerstone of the Organization’s foundation, has made
clear the purposes of the United Nations in maintaining
international peace and security, namely:
“to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace, and
for the suppression of acts of aggression or other
breaches of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful
means, and in conformity with the principles
of justice and international law, adjustment or
21-34053

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

settlement of international disputes or situations
which might lead to a breach of the peace”.
All Member States and United Nations organs
and bodies must therefore step up efforts to enhance
effective conflict prevention through the appropriate
measures, especially the upholding of international
law, full respect for the purposes and principles of
the Charter, including the principle of the settlement
of disputes by peaceful means, promoting a culture of
peace, confidence-building and maintaining friendly
relations among States.
The Security Council is tasked with the maintenance
and restoration of international peace and security
and, furthermore, the implementation of measures to
prevent the aggravation of a situation. But early conflict
prevention also requires inclusive and comprehensive
solutions to address the root causes of conflicts that
may require the engagement of other organs and actors,
in accordance with their respective mandates. The
principal organs within the United Nations system
could contribute to that goal by consistently promoting
dialogue and joint coordination in a complementary
manner within their mandates. Those activities should
be planned and implemented in both the short and
long term, with the interests of the people always at
the forefront.
At the same time, given the scale of that
endeavour — which relates to the fundamental tasks
and roles of the principal organs — preventive efforts
must be carried out through full consultation with
and among Member States and in accordance with the
Charter, including the principles of respect for national
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The Secretary-General plays an important role and
has many time-proven tools at his disposal, especially
mediation and good offices, which enjoy broad support.
Regional and subregional organizations can also play
an important role in conflict prevention and dispute
settlement, as they know regional particularities
best. Cooperation between the Security Council and
regional organizations and among those organizations
should be further promoted through dialogue and
cooperation frameworks.
In conclusion, the United Nations, with the
Charter at its core and through its principal organs,
has undeniably proven to be indispensable in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
including in conflict prevention. Viet Nam is committed

S/PV. 8906

to actively engaging in working with other States at
the international and regional levels to ensure greater
effectiveness and coordination towards that goal.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation of SecretaryGeneral António Guterres; the President of the General
Assembly, Mr. Abdulla Shahid; the President of the
Economic and Social Council, Mr. Collen Vixen
Kelapile; and the President of the International Court
of Justice, Judge Joan Donoghue, in today’s meeting.
We are grateful to Mexico for drawing attention to
preventive diplomacy and convening this unique event
with the participation of the heads of the principal
United Nations organs.
I would like to endorse the statement to be delivered
shortly by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of
the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The challenge of conflict prevention is 76 years old.
That goal was enshrined as our main objective in the
Charter of the United Nations in 1945. We remember
how, upon assuming his role five years ago, SecretaryGeneral Guterres began his work with a call for peace
and for the efforts to achieve it to permeate all areas
of our Organization’s activities, from the cessation of
hostilities to negotiating political solution to conflicts.
Over all those years, the United Nations, its Security
Council and other principal organs, the Secretariat and
regional and subregional organizations have carried out
significant work to identify the root causes of and ways
to prevent conflicts. Despite all of that, we keep coming
back to the topic of preventive diplomacy, reaffirming it
time and again as an overarching priority of the United
Nations. Unfortunately, crises are constantly recurring,
and new hotbeds of conflict erupt. There are no swift
or radical blanket solutions for solving such problems.
Curbing conflicts successfully depends on the
systematic application of early-warning instruments,
tapping into the potential of preventive diplomacy and
using mediation and good offices.
However, for all of those efforts to be successful, in
our opinion, a number of conditions must be met. We
are convinced that there should be no place in our work
for double standards dictated by political situations or
the preferences of certain States. Why are painstaking
efforts undertaken with regard to some countries to
establish a political process and allow time for quiet
diplomacy, while in other countries the international

21-3405317/32

S/PV.8906

Maintenance of international peace and security

community and the Security Council immediately start
firing all guns, apply sanctions, including unilateral
illegal measures, put pressure on national Governments
and instigate opposition to confront them despite the
fact that it has long been obvious that interference in
domestic political processes, regardless of the position
of the host parties, is far from being in the interest of
long-term stabilization. Only the people themselves can
determine the fate of their countries. Armed or other
outside interference in internal conflicts only risks
triggering a spiral of confrontation.
However, we should also not forget that every
situation has its own origins and, accordingly, sensitive,
impartial approaches and tailor-made solutions should
be found. Basically, there can be no one-size-fits-all
formulas or set criteria. We firmly believe that early
warning cannot be based on an arbitrary combination
of conflict indicators, even if they are as important
as the human rights indicators or those relating to the
Sustainable Development Goals.
Global trends show the increasing role of mediators
in conflict prevention and resolution. Their work
requires great skill and, importantly, patience. The
good offices missions of the Secretary-General and his
special envoys continue to prove their relevance. They
must be ready to work impartially and independently,
as well as to take innovative decisions that are not
based on their previous roles or achievements.
The responsibility for the effectiveness of the
United Nations crisis-prevention toolkit lies, to a
large extent, with the Organization’s peacekeeping
operations. We have repeatedly said that we do not
share the understanding of peacekeeping solely as the
protection of civilians and the provision of humanitarian
assistance. Without a political process, it is not possible
to achieve peace or to significantly stabilize a situation,
even with thousands of Blue Helmets deployed and
$1-billion mission budgets.
The Peacebuilding Commission, whose coordination
and mobilization activities we fully support, carries out
important work in assisting post-conflict countries.
However, the issue of sustainable funding for
peacebuilding efforts remains unresolved. We should
also take a fresh look at the preventive capacities of
regional and subregional organizations.
The role of the Secretariat is clearly significant.
Headquarters and field presences have amassed a huge
potential of knowledge and expertise in monitoring
18/32

16/11/2021

and analysing situations in the regions and forecasting
their development according to crisis scenarios. After
all, when stressing a universal institution, with a
unique legitimacy, playing a significant role in conflict
prevention conflicts, we are talking about members of
the Secretariat.
We would like to note that, unfortunately, instead
of focusing on pursuing political solutions and using
existing tools, we have recently been paying more
attention to topics such as coordinating the efforts
of various United Nations bodies, identifying some
kind of linkage among the different aspects of the
Organization’s work and discussing significant issues
of our time in all forums at once. It would seem that the
Security Council is now well placed, if not to perform
the functions of all United Nations bodies at once, then
at least to provide its views on virtually all generic
issues. The same trend can be seen in other United
Nations bodies.
For our part, we remain convinced that we should
do justice to the founders of the United Nations and
stop reinventing the wheel. In particular, the Security
Council should not be distracted from its main task of
maintaining international peace and security. We need
to step up our efforts in ensuring that all United Nations
bodies work effectively, adhering to the principle
of division of labour. All the building blocks of
international cooperation will then be in place to form a
solid foundation for conflict prevention and resolution.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on having convened this timely open
debate. I recognize the participation of the SecretaryGeneral and the Presidents of the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the International
Court of Justice. I thank them for their insights on this
important topic.
If the United Nations is to deliver on the promise
enshrined in the Preamble to the Charter of the United
Nations to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war, preventive diplomacy cannot be a One-UnitedNations organ affair. The existence of differentiated
mandates, cross-cutting resolutions, including the
normative frameworks pertaining to women and
youth and peace and security, and other resolutions
that cut across the three founding pillars of the United
Nations system, is an indicator of the necessity of that
envisioned coordination.
21-34053

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

While the prevention of conflicts remains the
primary responsibility of States, it is also a shared
responsibility. When done right, it entails States
engaging with neighbouring countries, subregional and
regional arrangements, including regional economic
communities and mechanisms, and the international
community, including within the context of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
In addition, a preventive diplomatic strategy
requires the Security Council to work in coherence
with the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council, as underlined, respectively, in Articles
11 and 65 of the Charter. Consequently, for the Security
Council to effectively fulfil its mandate, in coordination
with the other United Nations principal organs, it must
consider and address the economic, political and social
dimensions of conflict. It is also critical that it stand for
an approach to international justice that is underpinned
by fairness and political and economic equality, both in
opportunities and in outcomes for all.
As evidenced by our interventions in the Security
Council, Kenya looks at preventive diplomacy through
a political, economic and social lens. In that regard,
I will highlight three points that we consider key
preventive tools.
The first point is peacebuilding as a preventive tool.
As outlined in United Nations resolutions pertaining
to the peacebuilding architecture, peacebuilding is an
inherently political process that is critical to preventing
the outbreak, escalation, recurrence and continuation
of conflict. The advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) to the Council and its bridging
mandate must therefore remain key in strengthening
the United Nations response to the multidimensional
global threats to peace and security. Kenya continues
to champion that role of the PBC, in alignment
with the national ownership and priorities of the
affected countries.
The second point is inclusive development as a
preventive tool. Underdevelopment and insecurity are
intricately linked, particularly in developing countries.
The peace and development nexus is a reality that is
recognized by the Secretary-General’s three-track
reform and his recently issued Our Common Agenda.
In its capacity as the Chair of the Security Council
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa, Kenya held a meeting on
27 August, in partnership with the Office of the

S/PV. 8906

Special Adviser on Africa, focused on the report of the
Secretary-General on the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa (S/2021/562).
The goal was to identify opportunities for the Security
Council to constructively, comprehensively, and
contextually operationalize this linkage in partnership
with the African Union, the Office of the Special
Adviser on Africa and the PBC in hotspots where
conflict and development linkage is most pressing.
We believe in the need for the Security Council to
rally behind a preventive diplomacy that goes beyond
rhetoric and ambition — a preventive diplomacy that
entails strengthened coordinated efforts geared towards
delivery on the Sustainable Development Goals,
including the eradication of poverty, and support for
countries going through transitions to build resilient
governance and economic infrastructure.
We also firmly hold that the ultimate defence
against climate change and its attendant security
implications is development. This demands that we
bring the climate-security nexus closer to development,
investment and financing. A coordinated developmentclimate-peace-impact approach will go a long way
towards contributing to localized risk assessment and
contextual adaptive measures accompanied by requisite
financing for climate action.
My third and last point is the effective management
of diversity by States as an essential preventive tool. The
key message from the high-level debate on diversity,
State-building and the search for peace, organized by
Kenya during its October presidency of the Security
Council (see S/PV.8877), was that poor management
of diversity is leading to grave threats to international
peace and security and that the Security Council needs
to pay attention to this dynamic.
The coordinated efforts of the United Nations
system as a whole can contribute to supporting States to
orient themselves in a governance system that can fairly
balance the interests of citizens of diverse cultural,
social, ethnic, racial, religious or other extractions
to ensure a stable continuity that mitigates against
group-on-group conflicts that often threaten to descend
into organized violence. It is our firm belief that a
coordinated United Nations system can better deliver
on the creation of conditions of stability and well-being,
which are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations
among States, as envisaged by Article 55 of the United
Nations Charter.

21-3405319/32

S/PV.8906

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Mexican presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today’s debate, as well as the other four
distinguished briefers for their briefings.
Preventive diplomacy is everyone’s business at the
United Nations. The framers of the Charter gave the
Security Council a clear mandate in this area. We know
that investing in the early stages of conflict is the best
way to save lives. In the Council, we focus primarily on
situations of open conflict, but significant efforts have
been made in recent years to do more upstream work
and target the root causes of crises.
I would like to welcome the Secretary-General’s
push for peace diplomacy. I am thinking of the
strengthening of mediation capacities. I am also thinking
of the monitoring and early-warning system entrusted
to the country teams or the Secretary-General’s special
advisers on the prevention of genocide and on the
responsibility to protect. I would also like to mention
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy in Central Asia as a successful example in
this regard. It has helped to strengthen dialogue and
coordinate the response to shared challenges of the
States of the region: the terrorist threat, the crisis in
Afghanistan, drug trafficking and water management.
But we need to do more. The Security Council
should take better account of global challenges that
could undermine international peace and security. It
should have a comprehensive overview of the risks
to international security posed by climate change,
pandemics or disinformation. We also need to promote
the meaningful participation of women, youth and civil
society in mediation and prevention processes.
The Peacebuilding Commission could do more to
address situations that risk turning into conflicts and
make recommendations to the Security Council in this
regard. The Peacebuilding Fund has demonstrated its
capacity to carry out cross-border projects, as in the
Sahel. In his report entitled Our Common Agenda,
the Secretary-General calls on States to devote more
resources to the Fund. France has taken up this call. It
has quadrupled its contribution to the Fund this year.
The Security Council’s action in the area of
preventive diplomacy must be coordinated with those
of other bodies and organizations. The respective
missions entrusted by the Charter to the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council complement and reinforce each
20/32

16/11/2021

other. The warning role of the Secretary-General
under Article 99 of the Charter remains essential. The
jurisprudence of the International Court of Justice
contributes not only to the calming of relations between
States, but also to a better understanding and thus to a
strengthening of international law, which is the pillar of
this preventive diplomacy.
We must work even more closely with regional
and subregional organizations. The partnership with
the African Union is being transformed. The United
Nations must continue to support the Silencing the
Guns in Africa initiative and the achievement of the
objectives of the African Union’s Agenda 2063, in
particular the treatment of such threats as terrorism and
violent extremism. We must also fight together against
the resurgence of the scourge of mercenaries, which
is a destabilizing factor. We will also be attentive to
the implementation of the African Union Peace Fund,
which should include a component devoted to mediation
and preventive diplomacy.
Finally, I would like to welcome the growing role
of the International Organization of la Francophonie
in conflict prevention in the French-speaking world.
Under the impetus of Secretary-General Louise
Mushikiwabo, several observation, assistance and good
offices missions have recently been sent to Haiti, the
Sahel and the Gulf of Guinea. The aim is to support
political transition processes and strengthen the rule
of law. The United Nations would benefit from taking
greater advantage of the expertise accumulated by La
Francophonie, particularly in electoral matters.
Prevention in all its aspects remains a central issue
at the United Nations, and in particular at the Security
Council. For it is on our ability to anticipate risks,
prepare for them and provide sustainable, credible
responses focused on the needs of populations that our
capacity to maintain international peace and security
will depend. This is our responsibility.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I join others in thanking
the Mexican presidency for organizing today’s open
debate, as well as the esteemed briefers for sharing
their insights.
The topic of preventive diplomacy remains of
utmost importance to the United Nations and most of
all to the people on the ground. The proliferation and
prolongation of conflicts today requires the United
Nations to step up its efforts on the prevention front.
21-34053

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8906

As prevention involves action taken to prevent
disputes from escalating into conflicts, we cannot
underestimate the role of the International Court
of Justice in maintaining peace. Estonia values the
discussions held in the Council annually with the
President of the Court. As we have pointed out on those
and other occasions, Estonia believes that more frequent
and timely referrals of cases to the International Court
of Justice by the Council would contribute to resolving
disputes and thereby promote international peace and
security. Another important element of prevention is
for Council members to apply initiatives to deter the
use of the veto in cases related to the commission of
atrocity crimes.

In order for the United Nations to be relevant and
credible, it also needs to adapt to new challenges.
Preventive diplomacy needs to include being open to
new topics that we now consider to be part of peace
and security in order to make sure that its current tools
are the most effective and being willing to employ new
tools to tackle emerging issues.

Allow me to quickly highlight three areas that
Estonia considers important in the context of addressing
root causes.

In that light, Estonia condemns the continuation
of the massive repression by Belarusian authorities
against its people and the instrumentalization of
migration on a large scale for political purposes in order
to distract from human rights violations and brutal
repression in the country. We call on the Belarusian
regime to immediately stop such practices and other
hybrid threats to people’s lives and health, including
continuously blocking access to humanitarian aid.

First, the international community, including
the Security Council, needs to take climate change
more seriously by mandating the Secretary-General
to report on the impacts of climate change on
international security.
Secondly, accountability and respect for the rule of
law and human rights makes societies more resilient and
are essential for the maintenance of peace and security.
Human rights need to be put at the core of our actions.
Thirdly, we must ensure inclusivity with regard
to gender equality and engaging persons belonging to
marginalized groups. It has been demonstrated that
societies are more peaceful and peace more lasting
when women are involved in a substantive manner.
A safe and diverse civil society space remains a vital
component of resilient communities.
The Security Council needs to keep those elements
in mind when drawing up and reviewing the robust
mandates it establishes. At the same time, it is clear
than none of these or other issues of international
concern can be effectively tackled by one branch of the
United Nations only.
Estonia further acknowledges the interdependence
of security, sustainable development and human rights
and therefore recognizes the need for all United Nations
organs and agencies to pursue preventive strategies
and to take action. We recognize that the SecretaryGeneral’s has raised the aforementioned issues in his
comprehensive Our Common Agenda, which we have
recently begun to discuss in the General Assembly.

Estonia values the regular exchanges by the Security
Council with the representatives of other principal
organs of the United Nations. Communication, both
in public and private, is of vital importance. However,
more often than not, the problem is not the lack of
information, the early warning, but rather the lack of
early and united action.

Finally, we recognize that the United Nations has to
be able to offer solutions to the most urgent issues that
humankind is facing. While we hope that the Security
Council continues to discuss the topic of prevention,
we expect that the Council will take more meaningful
action on delivering on its prevention mandate, along
with the other United Nations principal organs, in
order to spare societies from lapsing into conflict
and suffering.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines commends Mexico for
convening today’s discussion, and we thank the briefers
for their remarks. Our delegation ardently supports
and conscientiously advocates for a comprehensive
whole-of-system approach that addresses peace and
security, development and humanitarian issues in a
holistic and systematic manner. To that end, we place
special emphasis on the theme of today’s debate.
The interconnecting health, socioeconomic,
political and security challenges brought about by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further
illuminated the need for steadfast political resolve,
buttressed by purposeful collective action, in order to
address our contemporary struggles. As we grapple
with the complexities of the pandemic, the multifaceted

21-3405321/32

S/PV.8906

Maintenance of international peace and security

ordeals of the climate crisis and the numerous emerging
security risks in fragile countries and regions, we must
work assiduously to end conflicts, build resilience
and procure peace, security and development for all
of humankind.
In pursuit of that noble cause, unilateral measures
and hegemonic motives — both of which undermine
the norms of multilateralism and erode essential human
rights, including the right to development — should be
abandoned. Political dialogue, preventive diplomacy
and other participatory approaches, underpinned by the
ideals of inclusivity and equality, should be earnestly
pursued by all States.
At the institutional level, it is essential that the
complementarity between and among the organs
and specialized agencies of the United Nations is
enhanced. At the strategic level and in the field, crosspillar engagements between all peace and security,
development, humanitarian and human rights actors
should be vigorously pursued.
The United Nations has provided the international
community with its most viable plans and development
models for widespread peace and prosperity. But as
we wade further into the uncharted waters of the
twenty-first century, with protracted conflicts that spur
large-scale humanitarian crises, disruptive technologies
that sever our social fabric and a climate catastrophe
that envelops many vulnerable countries and peoples
with great uncertainty, a more refined and collaborative
multilateralism is clearly needed.
The Security Council must continue its leading role
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
At the same time, more creative and innovative
approaches should be brought to bear to address
existing implementation gaps, which range from
conflict prevention to post-conflict peacebuilding and
across the spectrum of thematic questions concerning
women and youth, climate change and environmental
degradation and other fundamental challenges of
sustainable development.
The bridging, advisory and convening roles
of the Peacebuilding Commission, the functional
commissions and policy platforms of the Economic
and Social Council, the mediatory and technical
capacities of the International Court of Justice on
matters pertaining to the rule of law and the popular
consensus and agenda-setting powers of the General
Assembly ought to be leveraged more often. That much
22/32

16/11/2021

and more should be done with the full support of the
wider international community, including regional
and subregional organizations and the international
financial institutions in order to help deliver on existing
agreements, in particular the Sustainable Development
Goals. Preventive diplomacy and proactive political
engagements, underpinned by the guiding principles of
international law, must remain the centrepiece of this
multi-stakeholder approach.
In conclusion, let us keep the lessons of the
COVID-19 pandemic fresh in our minds — that
collective political action, steeped in the virtues of unity
and solidarity, remains the surest pathway to address
our current struggles and future afflictions. Let us
collaborate more closely to cultivate lasting peace and
prosperity to be enjoyed by the entire global community.
Finally, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered later by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
our briefers — Secretary-General Guterres, President
Shahid, our dear friend and colleague Ambassador
Kelapile and Judge Donoghue — for their interventions
this morning. It is really reassuring to have such
staunch supporters of multilateralism surrounding us
at the table today. Their powerful words remind us of
why we are here and reinforce our common purpose
to alleviate suffering and build peace across the globe.
The ambitious vision of the Charter was to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. Sitting
around this symbolic horseshoe table, we should always
carry the weight of that vision on our shoulders. There
are times when we come together that the optimism and
spirit of cooperation of our forebears shines through.
When that happens, we know that we can save lives.
However, far too often the positive impact of our
work is diminished by a siloed and sometimes disjointed
approach. The messages of our briefers today share a
common thread: our challenges are too great to tackle
alone. They convey the reality that, just as we Member
States need to work in lockstep, so, too, must the organs
of the United Nations.
I want to highlight three points that Ireland believes
are critical to achieving that goal.
21-34053

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

First, we need to invest in prevention. Too often,
the Security Council is in crisis-response mode. We
know that issues such as food insecurity, poverty and
gender inequality are often precursors to conflict.
We know that their intersection with climate change
further aggravates existing tensions. To address those
challenges, we see it as critical for humanitarian,
development and peace support actors to work in a
coordinated manner.
The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), through
its convening role, is uniquely placed to facilitate that
work — indeed, it is already doing so. The PBC is
providing the Council with very broad-based advice
on specific country and regional situations, such as the
Central African Republic and the Great Lakes region,
as well as themes relevant across a lot of our work.
What is needed now is for the Council to discuss that
advice and to heed it where we can.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s recommendation
in Our Common Agenda to expand the Commission’s
role to additional settings. That should go hand in
hand with a genuine commitment to ensuring that
peacebuilding activities, and in particular the valuable
work of the Peacebuilding Fund, are adequately and
sustainably financed.
My second point is the need to foster a more
coherent relationship between human rights and the
Security Council. Let us be clear: violations of human
rights are obvious harbingers of conflict to come. When
we protect and defend human rights, we create bulwarks
against conflict. That is why, in Ireland’s view, respect
for human rights belongs at the Security Council.
Put simply, human rights are a peace and security
issue. Bodies and entities such as the Third Committee
of the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR), treaty bodies and
Special Rapporteurs all play an important role in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Indeed, the entirety of the human rights architecture is,
in our view, inextricably linked to the work we do here
in the Security Council.
Many of the items on our agenda today are also
under discussion in the Human Rights Council. That
is no coincidence. Further mechanisms created by
the Human Rights Council, such as the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Myanmar,
are key to ensuring accountability. The joint

S/PV. 8906

investigation of OHCHR with the Ethiopian Human
Rights Commission into human rights violations in
Tigray, including sexual violence, is another important
example of the interplay between human rights and the
subjects of most acute concern to the Security Council.
We believe that the relationship between human
rights and the Council should be constructed around
an inclusive understanding of prevention. That
understanding must recognize the key role of human
rights in early warning and in building national
resilience. Critical to that relationship are the voices
of human rights defenders, women leaders and
civil society. We need to listen and learn from their
testimonies. Importantly, we need to take action.
My third point concerns the role of the International
Court of Justice as a key tool for conflict prevention. We
strongly believe that we should not underestimate the
Court’s potential role in determining disputes between
States that might otherwise have led to conflict.
However, in our view, the Court remains underutilized
as a resource for the peaceful adjudication of disputes
in accordance with international law. It is our view
that the Court’s role in preventing conflict could be
bolstered by greater interaction between the Council
and the Court. Ireland believes the Council should
consider, where appropriate, the possibility of seeking
the Court’s input in the form of advisory opinions.
The Council could also recommend that States with a
dispute on its agenda resolve the legal aspect of their
dispute before the International Court of Justice.
In conclusion, the inescapable reality that faces
us all, individually and collectively, is that the
contemporary challenges we face do not fit neatly into
preordained, predefined boxes. The effects of climate
change do not stop at the doors of this Chamber.
Human rights do not belong only in Geneva. Those
challenges cut right across all aspects of our work, from
development and human rights to peace and security.
We have heard today that the United Nations
system is ready to step up and step in — not just ready
to react to conflict, but to prevent it. It is incumbent
upon all of us around this table to do the same. Millions
of vulnerable people are relying on us, and we would be
in dereliction of our duty if we were to let them down.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Norway thanks you, Sir, for
convening this important debate and in particular for
bringing together so many important parts of the United
Nations system. My thanks go to the briefers.

21-3405323/32

S/PV.8906

Maintenance of international peace and security

This issue is of great importance to Norway. We
firmly believe that preventative diplomacy should be
at the heart of the Security Council’s work. As the
Secretary-General set out in Our Common Agenda,
investments in prevention and preparedness pay
for themselves many times over in terms of both the
human and financial costs that are spared. Early
engagement with potential threats to international
peace and security will also protect civilians, including
children, and enhance the safety and security of United
Nations personnel.
In searching for ways to facilitate early responses,
we need to improve the Council’s situational awareness.
More effective sharing of information and insights will
allow all members of the Council to participate on a
more equal footing and contribute their valuable views
and unique perspectives. In that regard, there is a key
role for the Secretariat and the United Nations system
briefers to use their interactions with the Council to
bring emerging issues to its attention and sound the
alarm. Indeed, the Secretary-General — the principal
preventive diplomat of the United Nations — also has a
defined Charter-based mandate to do so in accordance
with Article 99. While better situational awareness may
not fix political differences in how to resolve a conflict,
it will build a common baseline of understanding
and bring forward the point at which the Council
first engages.
The use or threat of use of the veto also continues to
prevent the Council from acting on vital topics. We call
for restraint on the use of the veto, especially for actions
aimed at preventing and ending mass atrocity crimes,
which are at the very heart of the Council’s mandate.
While, as we heard this morning, the Security
Council has the primary responsibility for international
peace and security, it certainly does not stand alone. All
parts of the United Nations system must work together
to prevent conflict and build peace.
There is no better guarantee for the prevention of
conflict than for Member States to fulfil their human
rights obligations. As we look to join up approaches
across the United Nations system, the clear mandate of
the Human Rights Council to work through dialogue
and cooperation, towards the prevention of human
rights violations, is of the utmost importance. Greater
interaction among the Security Council, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
24/32

16/11/2021

the Human Rights Council is needed to facilitate early
engagement and prevent conflict.
The Peacebuilding Commission is another, may I
say, underutilized tool within our conflict prevention
toolbox. Working together with the Peacebuilding
Fund, the Commission has proved its added value,
for example, in supporting important prevention
programmes in Africa, in line with the Silencing the
Guns initiative.
The integrity and independence provided by
the good offices of the Secretary-General are also
essential tools of the United Nations system to prevent
conflict through mediation. The capacities within the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
and the Mediation Support Unit are of a high quality
and merit our greater support. We have all witnessed
how negotiating with authorities and armed groups in
humanitarian crisis can provide safe and unimpeded
access to those in need. We have also seen the difference
that preventive diplomacy can make in the lead-up
to elections, contested political transitions and the
challenging implementation phases of peace accords.
The Secretariat is well placed to provide that expertise
and experience.
Preventive diplomacy is more often than not
resisted where it is most needed. As members of the
Security Council, we must keep a particular focus on
where early engagement can contribute to preventing
escalation and draw on all the resources, as well as
partners, throughout the United Nations system that
we can.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked
for the floor to make a further statement. I give her
the floor.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have to take the floor, since we regret the
fact that some delegations are continuing to use the most
inappropriate reasons for promoting their propaganda
work. The important topic of conflict prevention is
not an exception. The situation in Belarus is a clear
example of the destabilizing external interference that
we talked about earlier in our statement and a blatant
example of double standards. That also applies to the
situation concerning migrants. We believe that the
European Union should refrain from resorting to such
double standards in dealing with that issue and that
it should bear the responsibility for its actions. With
21-34053

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

regard to the specific situation on the Belarusian-Polish
border, resolving the issue in a lasting way can be done
only by entering into an equal dialogue with Minsk. If
Brussels is prepared to do that, we are ready to assist.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Council has
before it the text of a statement by the President on behalf
of the Council on the subject of today’s meeting. I thank
the Council members for their valuable contributions to
this statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2021/23.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphones will
prompt speakers to bring their remarks to a close after
four minutes.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Kai
Sauer, Under-Secretary of State for Foreign and Security
Policy of Finland.
Mr. Sauer (Finland): I have the pleasure to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries:
Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own
country, Finland.
We thank the briefers for their valuable insights,
and we welcome this exchange organized by the
Mexican presidency of the Security Council on
preventive diplomacy and how the principal organs of
the United Nations can work together to achieve that
common objective.
Recently, we have witnessed several outbreaks
and escalations of violent conflicts. Unfortunately,
responses to crises have too often been reactive and
sporadic rather than preventive. Vital signs may have
been missed and the driving factors behind conflicts
not properly understood or maybe our foresight and
analysis were not sufficiently comprehensive and
inclusive. Recent events have underlined the need for
better preparedness, strategic foresight and, above
all, enhanced cooperation and coordination to enable
effective early action.
As we speak about conflict prevention, the pacific
settlement of disputes, namely, political, diplomatic

S/PV. 8906

solutions, should always be the first option. That
applies to whether we are talking about active peace
mediation in the event of a crisis or more long-term,
structural work to address the root causes of conflicts.
Inclusive political structures and processes should also
be ensured, with the full and meaningful participation
of women and young people.
As violent conflicts become more complex, the
need for integrated multisectoral approaches that link
conflict prevention, human rights, protection and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development are vital.
Effective conflict prevention is not possible without a
comprehensive approach, underlining the importance
of understanding the political realities of a context
and including all relevant stakeholders in the process.
To that end, we need the long-term commitment and
cooperation of all actors regarding the developmenthumanitarian-peace nexus, Moreover, the protection
of civilians and civilian objects should be at the centre
of crisis response in order to achieve sustainable peace
and reconciliation.
The principal organs of the United Nations all have
key roles to play in preventing conflicts and sustaining
peace within their respective mandates. We encourage
closer cooperation between the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission, as well as with the
Human Rights Council and the Economic and Social
Council, respectively. We urge the Security Council
to strengthen its engagement with the Peacebuilding
Commission and its unique advisory role. Interaction
and cooperation with Human Rights Council and the
wider human rights architecture are also crucial, as
human rights violations are often the first sign of an
emerging conflict.
The International Court of Justice contributes to
the prevention and resolution of international disputes,
in accordance with its mandate. The submission of
a dispute to the Court should not be regarded as an
unfriendly act. It is, rather, an act to fulfil the obligation
of all States to settle their international disputes
peacefully. We call upon States that have not yet done
so to consider accepting the jurisdiction of the Court.
In his report Our Common Agenda, the SecretaryGeneral pays special attention to enhancing conflict
prevention by investing in prevention and peacebuilding
and by strengthening international foresight. He also
calls for better preparedness, partnerships, digital
cooperation and a more participatory United Nations,

21-3405325/32

S/PV.8906

Maintenance of international peace and security

to name but a few of the Secretary-General’s proposals,
which can all contribute to more comprehensive and
effective conflict prevention.
The Nordic countries support that broad approach
to peace and security, and we will do our best to help
to turn these commitments into concrete actions. We
hope that by strengthening system-wide cooperation
within the United Nations system and improving our
tools for early warning, we can build a true culture of
prevention and deliver on the promise of the United
Nations Charter to “save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to the Mexican presidency for convening
this open debate. I also would like to thank all the
briefers for their insights. I welcome this meeting,
which gives us a precious opportunity to underscore the
importance of preventive diplomacy.
The international community focuses heavily on
responding to conflict only after it occurs or recurs.
So many lives have been lost and financial and human
resources spent to respond to humanitarian crises due
to conflicts every year. We must shift our focus to
prevention, not only in the Security Council but in the
entire United Nations system.

16/11/2021

work conducted under the New Approach for Peace and
Stability in Africa.
Secondly, building effective, accountable and
inclusive institutions in conflict-prone countries
should be the priority in the work of the United Nations
principal organs and their subsidiary bodies. Effective
and impartial institutions in the security and judicial
sectors, as well as institutions to ensure equal access
to basic social services, have critical importance
in preventing conflicts. The work to support
institution-building requires coordinated action by the
entire United Nations system.
Last but not least, the role of women and civil
society in conflict prevention should be further
strengthened, as emphasized in resolution 2171 (2014).
We will never be able to achieve just and inclusive
societies that are resilient against conflict or relapse
into conflict without the meaningful participation of
women, youth and marginalized groups. Their voices
must be heard and taken into account in the work of the
United Nations related to conflict prevention.
Japan looks forward to contributing to the United
Nations work for conflict prevention in its principal
organs, subsidiary bodies and in the PBC.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iran.

I would like to make three points that Japan believes
to be the key to mainstreaming prevention in the United
Nations peace and security agenda.

Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting. I also thank the heads of all the principal
organs of the United Nations for their inputs.

First, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
has a critical role to play in conflict prevention, as
acknowledged in resolution 2171 (2014). With its
advisory role to the Security Council, the Economic
and Social Council and the General Assembly, the
PBC can play a greater role in strengthening coherence
across the principal organs. The Security Council and
other relevant organs should seek the PBC’s advice to
incorporate prevention perspectives into their work.

Peace and security through prevention is the
dominant paradigm of the Charter of the United
Nations. Today prevention is as valid and useful as it
was in 1945, when the Organization’s founding fathers
adopted it as the overriding principle in the maintenance
of international peace and security. A pertinent question
is — how successful has the Security Council been in
applying this principle in discharging its mandate?

As stressed in resolution 2171 (2014), the prevention
of conflicts remains a primary responsibility of States.
The PBC, with its convening role, can bring together the
experience of different countries and regions, their best
practices and lessons learned, and share them with the
United Nations principal organs. Like many countries
in Asia and other regions, Japan also has a lot to share
and contribute to the work of prevention, including its
26/32

A general review of the Council’s practices reveals
that, despite being mandated to use prevention and
non-coercive means under Chapter VI of the Charter,
the Council has very rarely applied that principle and
has, at times, treated its Chapter VI functions as if they
did not exist.
Conversely, the Council has too frequently, hastily
and excessively resorted to coercive measures set forth
21-34053

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

in Chapter VII, without attempting its Chapter VI
functions first, as is logically and legally expected of
it, let alone exhausting them. In many cases, that trend
has resulted in the further complication of situations,
violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States, human rights abuses for entire populations and
the like.
When combined with other factors such as the
Council’s ultra vires decisions or the exploitation of the
Council by certain permanent members, the adoption
of that approach has also resulted in the further
prolongation of conflicts. All in all, the application of
this approach has been detrimental to the maintenance
of international peace and security and must therefore
be reversed.
Chapter VII functions, including sanctions, must
be applied only as a measure of last resort, if necessary,
and after all means of peaceful settlement of disputes
have been exhausted. In discharging its functions, the
Council must accord priority to prevention and the use
of non-coercive measures, pursuant to Chapter VI of
the Charter.
Despite its importance, the principle of prevention
and Chapter VI functions cannot and must not be applied
arbitrarily. Rather, it must be adopted cautiously, in a
smart manner and in full conformity with the letter and
spirit of the Charter and international law. According to
paragraph 1 of Article 33, the responsibility to settle an
international dispute, the continuance of which is likely
to endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security rests entirely with the parties concerned. That
principle must therefore be fully respected and strictly
observed by the Council.
More importantly, Chapter VI functions must never
be invoked for the consideration of matters that are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of States or
situations whose continuation is not likely to endanger
the maintenance of international peace and security, or
for violating or undermining the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of States.
Finally, the Council and all other principal organs
of the United Nations must adopt prevention as their
main approach and, in full compliance with their
respective mandates and the principles enshrined in
the Charter, strive for the full and effective realization
of the purposes of the Organization and the common
interests of our nations.

S/PV. 8906

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Brazil thanks
Mexico for organizing this open debate. We also
thank the Presidents of the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, the International
Court of Justice and the Secretary-General for their
insightful considerations.
As an incoming member of the Security Council,
we will continue to support the peaceful settlement of
disputes, a principle inscribed in our Constitution, and
the advancement of preventive diplomacy in order to
reduce threats to international peace and security. A
genuine and lasting peace can only be achieved through
respect of fundamental human freedoms and human
dignity and the prevalence of human rights.
Mediation, preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding
are crucial tools to prevent crises from escalating into
conflicts. Conflict prevention requires sustained and
inclusive action, with a people-centred approach that
tackles the root causes of crises. Once tension escalates
to armed conflict, it creates a vicious cycle that is hard
to break.
Brazil firmly believes that the purposes of the
United Nations Charter are better achieved through
increased coordination, cooperation and interaction
between the Security Council and the relevant organs
of the United Nations, including the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). It is our desire to have a more
transparent, efficient and inclusive Security Council.
We have seen a number of improvements in recent
years, including more public briefings and stronger
recognition of the need for increased cooperation
between the Council and regional organizations, such
as the African Union. We welcome the progress made
through Note by the President of the Security Council
S/2017/507, but there is more to be done.
With respect to the relationship between the
Council and the General Assembly, we advocate
improved accountability of the Security Council to the
wider membership. We commend the regular dialogues
between the Presidents of the General Assembly
and the Security Council, aimed at streamlining
and coordinating the agendas of the two organs. We
encourage the continuity of this practice. We also
encourage more analytical reports to the General
Assembly, with a comprehensive assessment of its work.

21-3405327/32

S/PV.8906

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Council should engage more regularly with the
General Assembly, not only to enhance its effectiveness
but also to avoid encroachment on the mandate of the
General Assembly and unnecessary duplication of
work. The same goes for the Council’s relationship with
the Economic and Social Council. As the Council starts
considering a broader set of issues in order to better
fulfil its mandate, it also becomes imperative to enhance
its cooperation with other United Nations bodies.
Moreover, there is potential for increased
cooperation between the Security Council and the
International Court of Justice, such as on requests for
advisory opinions on legal issues related to both countryspecific situations and thematic items on the agenda of
the Council. The Council could also make more use
of the possibility of recommending that conflicting
States submit their disputes to the International
Court of Justice. Another area of cooperation lies in
the enforcement of the Court’s decisions in cases of
non-compliance, taking into account Article 94 of
the Charter.
Prevention requires tackling the root causes of
conflict, especially those of a socioeconomic nature.
In this context, the PBC is uniquely positioned to
bridge discussions across the different United Nations
pillars. To strengthen the effectiveness and coherence
of United Nations peacebuilding efforts, the PBC
should continue to enhance its advisory capacities. In
particular, the PBC can provide important inputs to the
Council in discussions of the renewal of mandates and
the drawdowns of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. PBC representatives could also be
invited to accompany the field visits of the members
of the Security Council and to periodic briefings to its
subsidiary bodies
I would also like to address the role of the
special political missions. We have seen a rise in the
establishment of those missions, as opposed to the
downward trend in peacekeeping operations. It would
be important to ensure that other United Nations bodies
are involved in the elaboration of the mandates of the
special political missions and in assessing current
inconsistencies in their financing system.
In its eleventh mandate as an elected member, Brazil
will continue to support the Security Council’s role in
the prevention and resolution of threats to international
peace and security.
28/32

16/11/2021

Mr. Ruidíaz Pérez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Mexico for organizing this debate. We are
pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over the Council. We
also thank the briefers for their relevant contributions.
We know that preventive diplomacy has been
useful for the Organization, almost from its inception,
in containing and addressing conflicts and disputes.
We know of successful cases that encourage us to
keep this concept current. In that sense, we note
that while some bodies are more oriented towards
operational prevention, others are responsible for
structural prevention.
Chile recognizes that human dignity is the
fundamental value for the success of any conflict
prevention. For that reason, we must defend the
essential values of the United Nations — the rule
of law, human rights and democracy — which are
mutually reinforcing and make up an indivisible
whole. In that regard, we highlight the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development as a road map that has
been incorporated and adopted by all States, and that
is people-centred and based on human rights, setting
out a comprehensive view of sustainable development,
subjects that are the competence of the principal organs
of the United Nations and essential to building peaceful
and inclusive society.
Just a week ago, in this Chamber (see S/PV.8900),
the Secretary-General told us that we were facing the
highest number of violent conflicts since 1945 and that
they were growing longer and more complex, while
the number of humanitarian needs that we are seeing,
for various reasons, has reached a tragic record in this
period. Chile therefore maintains that, now more than
ever, preventive diplomacy must be made to work. In this
regard, we are sure that coordination among the main
organs of the United Nations, in accordance with their
Charter mandates, is the best way to prevent conflicts.
A number of factors are necessary if this prevention
is to be successful, since the will of the parties is not
enough to stop conflict but is the starting point.
In this sense, we agree with the first report of the
Secretary-General on preventive diplomacy of 2011
(S/2011/552), to the effect that success depends on
adequate warning systems that allow predicting crises;
the flexibility to adapt available resources to cope with
changing forms of violence; collaborative associations,
such as regional and subregional organizations; the
sustainability and durability of peace accords; empirical
21-34053

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

assessment and demonstration; and human and
financial resources adequate to the task. Similarly, we
believe that it is appropriate to highlight the preventive
functions that groups of friends, contact groups and or
ad hoc can perform.
Chile has consistently supported the SecretaryGeneral in playing a relevant role in preventive
diplomacy. In accordance with Article 99 of the Charter,
the Secretary-General has the responsibility of drawing
the attention of the Security Council to any matter that
may endanger international peace and security.
We encourage the joint work of the bodies continue
to develop, as established in resolution 2282 (2016), the
input of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review
of the Peacebuilding Architecture, entitled “The
challenge of sustaining peace” (S/2015/490). It is worth
recalling that the resolution states that
“sustaining peace requires coherence, sustained
engagement, and coordination between the General
Assembly, the Security Council, and the Economic
and Social Council, consistent with their mandates
as set out in the Charter of the United Nations”
(resolution 2282 (2016), para. 2).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica,
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish)
Costa Rica thanks Mexico for convening this open
debate, and the briefers for their presentations. Let me
highlight three points.
First, Costa Rica reaffirms that the gender
perspective must mainstream preventive diplomacy.
There is a strong consensus on the need for the full and
effective participation of women in conflict prevention
and in all decision-making processes. That consensus
recognizes that women and girls are affected differently
and disproportionately by armed conflict. However,
when we debate the impact of small arms and light
weapons on gender-based and sexual violence, that
consensus collapses. In a world where gender identity
and sexual orientation continue to be a reason to be
killed, mutilated, trafficked, sexually abused, exploited
and rejected, closing the gap between the silos of the
Organization can and should save lives.
Secondly, according to the principle of pacta sunt
servanda, the norms and commitments contained in
international treaties are binding and should not be
ignored when the preferences of States change. That

S/PV. 8906

applies to the commitments set out in Articles 6 and 7
of the Arms Trade Treaty, which oblige States parties
to deny authorization or stop an arms transfer if there
exists knowledge, or an overriding risk, that the arms
transferred could be used to commit, or facilitate the
commission of, serious violations of international
humanitarian law or human rights.
However, ensuring that such risk assessment
is carried out with consistency and that action is
based on an assessment undertaken remains an
aspiration. In the absence of a specific international
accountability mechanism, States parties to the Arms
Trade Treaty must rely on transparency. States must
comply with their obligations not only to conduct
and act on risk assessments, but also to share the
information — to both demonstrate and encourage
compliance. It is transparency that builds trust and
confidence in the Treaty, which therefore strengthens
compliance by all.
Thirdly, Costa Rica reiterates the importance of
improving the working methods of the Security Council
by deepening its communication with other organs and
actors. Such communication should be more fluid and
dynamic, and not only with the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the Secretariat,
but with the Peacebuilding Commission, Special
Representatives and Envoys of the Secretary-General
and, in particular, with the International Criminal
Court and the International Court of Justice. And that
communication should also extend to regional and
subregional organizations, troop-contributing countries
and civil society organizations. Costa Rica regrets
that representatives of civil society are excluded from
participating in person in negotiations of such great
importance, especially in matters of peace and security.
Lastly, it is tempting to fight fire with fire, but
that will only fuel the flames of conflict. Laws, strong
institutions, compliance with international treaties and
respect for human rights are the path to stability and
human security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malta.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s open debate. I
also thank the Secretary-General, the President of the
General Assembly, the President of the Economic and
Social Council and the President of the International

21-3405329/32

S/PV.8906

Maintenance of international peace and security

Court of Justice for sharing their valuable thoughts
and insights.
As strong supporters of the multilateral system and
as a country that sees value in investing in prevention,
Malta welcomes this discussion, which will also serve
as an opportunity to reflect on how the international
community can maximize existing resources and
minimize the risk of war and violent conflict.
The United Nations was established 76 years ago
with the task of preventing another global conflict right
after two devastating world wars. It was the dawn of a
new era, where countries chose dialogue over fighting,
cooperation over competition and multilateralism over
nationalism. It is now up to us to make sure that our
institutions remain relevant today and that they be
given the necessary flexibility to adapt to an everchanging world. It is our responsibility to protect them,
strengthen them and counter contempt for them.
Investing in preventive diplomacy is our duty. We
strongly believe that all bodies of the United Nations
have an important role to play to that end. While it may be
difficult to quantify and demonstrate the effectiveness
of preventive measures, we just need to keep in mind
the incalculable price of conflict in terms of loss of
life, economic loss, societal divisions, environmental
degradation and other long-term consequences, to
better appreciate its value.
Against that backdrop, we believe that the
international community must redouble early-warning/
early-action efforts to identify and tackle the root causes
of conflict, such as human rights violations, genderbased violence, injustice, the lack of accountability,
exclusion and inequality, before things escalate into a
full-blown conflict.
The Charter of the United Nations clearly identifies
ways in which the various United Nations organs
can contribute to preventive diplomacy. Articles 10
and 11 state that the General Assembly may discuss
any matters within the scope of the Charter and that
it may call the attention of the Security Council to
situations that are likely to endanger international
peace and security. Furthermore, Article 14 states that
the General Assembly may recommend measures for
the peaceful adjustment of any situation. Those are
important powers that could yield even better results if
triggered in a timely manner and if synergies between
the General Assembly and the Security Council were
strengthened further.
30/32

16/11/2021

The Economic and Social Council can also
play a central role in identifying the socioeconomic
drivers of conflict in specific contexts and country
situations and form an integral part of a comprehensive
early-warning system.
The expertise of the Peacebuilding Commission on
thematic issues, such as the role of women and youth in
peace and security, must be used to its full potential,
and its advisory role to the Security Council and the
General Assembly must be intensified. We also stress
the importance of ensuring that the Peacebuilding Fund
be adequately funded. And it is in that spirit that Malta
started contributing to it from this year. We strongly
believe that, if we all contribute, we will achieve
significant results.
Injustice and the lack of accountability are also
root causes of conflict. And the International Court of
Justice has a key role to play in upholding international
law, the rule of law and the fight against impunity.
Holding annual or biannual interactive dialogues
among the President of the Security Council, the
President of the General Assembly, the President of
Economic and Social Council and the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, along with representatives
of civil society, is an idea that could be worth considering
and studying in further detail. Such a forum would
provide civil society members from different regions
with the space they need to express their concerns and
highlight emerging challenges at an early stage. In turn,
that would give the Security Council and other relevant
United Nations bodies sufficient time to examine these
issues and develop comprehensive solutions towards
peace, security and stability.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Rodríguez Cuadros (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Yesterday the General Assembly adopted by consensus
resolution 76/6, on follow-up to the report Our
Common Agenda. I believe that this debate should be
guided by the context of the proposals that the Agenda
makes available to States, centred on the functioning
and interaction of all United Nations organs with
competencies in the maintenance and consolidation
of peace.
The agenda for peace proposed in that report
includes components linked to preventive diplomacy;
reducing strategic risks, particularly on disarmament
21-34053

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

and nuclear non-proliferation; the effective control of
conventional weapons; the prevention and fight against
terrorism; strengthening international early-warning
and capacity to detect new risks to peace and security;
greater investment in prevention and peacebuilding;
and support for regional prevention activities. To that
must be added the proposals for the extension of the
mandate of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
eventual establishment of an emergency platform for
complex crises, the desirability and nature of which
will also have to be debated and discussed.
In the general approach of the new peace agenda
proposed by the Secretary-General, the crucial issue
of preventive diplomacy is focused on a societal vision
of conflict from a structural and systemic perspective,
which somehow ignores the primarily State nature
of the management of conflicts and the promotion
and consolidation of peace — whether it involve
international or intra-national conflicts. In that regard,
it would seem essential to associate the ideas set out
in the report with a more specific vision of preventive
action, one that considers inter-State diplomacy as
a negotiating process that is part of the capacity for
collective action of the United Nations, in accordance
with the Charter, and of Secretariat itself in the context
of its competencies powers.
Preventive diplomacy includes the principles,
methods, capacities, mechanisms and resources aligned
with the action that allows avoiding that conflicts,
disputes or controversies arise between the parties;
prevent disputes from turning into conflicts; limit
their spread if they occur; and, if peace is achieved,
consolidate it with social and national cohesion.
From that perspective, the issue is how to determine
the strengths and vulnerabilities of the current structure
and mechanisms for action of the United Nations system
so as to prevent conflicts and disputes and to affirm
the maintenance of international peace and security,
as well as the functional coordination of the various
organs of the system and the provision of resources to
fulfil three essential tasks.
The first task is to carry out, in a timely and efficient
manner, the processes that the Charter itself provides
to prevent and control conflicts, that is, good offices,
mediation, negotiation and arbitration, and, obviously,
at the level of decision by States themselves, resorting
to activating the jurisdictional role of the International
Court of Justice to resolve disputes that might turn into

S/PV. 8906

conflicts. In that sense, the Court is also a conflictprevention body.
The second task is to carry out, in a coordinated
and integrated manner and while respecting the spheres
of action and the mandate of each organ, the structural
prevention of conflicts. That includes confronting
social imbalances and divisions, inequality, exclusion
and marginalization of vulnerable sectors of the
population. And it includes bringing about results on
the agenda that links conflict prevention with economic
and social development and the fight against exclusion
and inequality.
And the third task is to establish realistic and
multidimensional agendas to consolidate peace
processes and help national and sub-national
Governments, the population and civil society to rebuild
a peace based on a fair distribution of, and access to,
public goods.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Let me congratulate you,
Sir, and the Mexican presidency for skilfully guiding
the Security Council. I also thank the briefers who
spoke today.
We are living in dangerous times marked by the
unilateral use or threat of force, foreign intervention,
foreign occupation, the suppression of legitimate
freedom struggles, as in Jammu and Kashmir, the
resurgence of the ideologies of hate, fascism, racism,
anti-Semitism and Islamophobia, growing poverty,
inequality and environmental degradation, rising
global tensions, proliferating military alliances and a
destabilizing and dangerous nuclear and conventional
arms race.
Addressing the root causes of conflicts and
disputes must be the principal modality for preventive
diplomacy. The General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the International Court of Justice and
the Peacebuilding Commission all have important roles
in addressing the root causes of conflict, especially
a conflict between nuclear-armed States. In the final
analysis, however, it is the Security Council that
must utilize its primary authority under the Charter
of the United Nations to secure the just and peaceful
settlement of conflicts and disputes in accordance with
its own resolutions and decisions.

21-3405331/32

S/PV.8906

Maintenance of international peace and security

16/11/2021

For the past two years, Pakistan has repeatedly
drawn the attention of the Security Council and the
Secretary-General to the grave and ever-present threat
to international peace and security posed by the conflict
over Jammu and Kashmir. There is considerable and
credible evidence that human rights are being massively
violated in the Indian-occupied parts of Jammu and
Kashmir. Those violations escalated sharply after
the unilateral measures taken by India on and after
5 August 2019 to forcibly annex occupied Jammu
and Kashmir and change its demography, in violation
of the Security Council resolutions that prescribe a
United Nations-supervised plebiscite by the people
of Jammu and Kashmir to determine the state’s final
disposition. Those actions constitute grave violations of
international law, Security Council resolutions and the
Geneva Conventions and could amount to war crimes
and crimes against humanity.

by the representative of Pakistan earlier. This is not the
first time that the representative of Pakistan has misused
platforms provided by the United Nations to propagate
false and malicious propaganda against my country,
while seeking in vain to divert the world’s attention
from the sad state of his country, where terrorists enjoy
a free pass while the lives of ordinary people, especially
those belonging to minority communities, are turned
upside down.

Three wars have been fought over Jammu and
Kashmir. Another war was narrowly averted in
February 2019 owing to Pakistan’s exercise of selfrestraint. Despite the revival of the 2003 ceasefire,
threats against Pakistan and the repression in Kashmir
have not abated. A conflict could have catastrophic
consequences for South Asia and the world.

I would like to be categorical about India’s position:
the entire union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and
Ladakh were, are and will always be an integral and
inalienable part of India. That includes the areas that
are under the illegal occupation of Pakistan. We call
upon Pakistan to immediately vacate all areas under its
illegal occupation.

It should be a high priority for the Security Council
to prevent such a conflict by promoting a just and
peaceful resolution of the Jammu and Kashmir dispute
in accordance with its own resolutions. It should be a
high priority for the Secretary-General as well to fully
utilize his broad authority under the Charter to promote
such a fair and peaceful resolution of the dispute and
end the massive human rights violations taking place in
Indian-occupied Kashmir. That, surely, is the essence of
preventive diplomacy envisaged in the United Nations
Charter. No party should have the ability to veto the
exercise of the endeavours of the Security Council or
the Secretary-General for conflict resolution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of India has asked the floor to make a
further statement. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Bhat (India): We are forced to take the floor
once again to respond to some frivolous remarks made

32/32

Member States are aware that Pakistan has an
established history and policy of harbouring, aiding
and actively supporting terrorists. This is a country
that has been globally recognized as, first, openly
supporting, training, financing and arming terrorists as
a matter of State policy. It holds the ignoble record of
hosting the largest number of terrorists proscribed by
the Security Council.

India desires normal, neighbourly relations with
all countries, including Pakistan, and is committed to
addressing outstanding issues, if any, bilaterally and
peacefully, in accordance with the Shimla Agreement
and the Lahore declaration.
However, any meaningful dialogue can be held only
in an atmosphere free of terror, hostility and violence.
The onus is on Pakistan to create such a conducive
atmosphere. Until then, India will continue to take firm
and decisive steps to respond to cross-border terrorism.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. Given the lateness of the hour, I intend, with
the concurrence of members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

21-34053
