S/PV.7637

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7637th meeting

Monday, 29 February 2016, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ramírez Carreño. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of))

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Mahmoud
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Klein
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-05416 (E)
*1605416*

S/PV.7637

UNMIK

The meeting was called to order at 3.30 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2016/99)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Serbia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Tanin,
who is joining the meeting via video-teleconference
from Pristina.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Vlora
Çitaku to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/2016/99, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
I now give the floor to Mr. Tanin.
Mr. Tanin: Today is the Security Council’s first
meeting on Kosovo in 2016. It is taking place at a
moment of significant developments, not least of
which is the fractious, but successful, election of a new
President on Friday. This is a year in which Kosovo will
face countless complex challenges. Accordingly, today
I will take time to assess key developments emerging
from 2015 and, most important, to look ahead.
2/25

29/02/2016

In recent months, the polarization of the Kosovo
political landscape has reached levels where progress
is being impeded despite considerable Government
efforts to pursue an ambitious reform agenda. The
extreme political antagonism has clearly transgressed
basic democratic norms. The most obvious examples
of this has been the repeated use of violence by the
opposition to prevent the Kosovo Assembly, as well as
other Government institutions, from conducting their
work.
I have joined many of my colleagues in the
international community to stress that adherence to
the basic democratic rules of the game is more than
simply a responsibility of all political leaders. It is also
what empowers the voices and messages of all genuine
political actors in the democratic process, including
those of the opposition, which otherwise could be
squandered and lost.
With matters having reached this point, I believe
this is an opportune time for everyone to stand back
and evaluate, and perhaps also to shift local and
international focus away from political battles towards
more fundamental issues. The intrinsic links among
post-conflict development and the enforcement of the
rule of law and human rights should be at the centre
of a proactive and results-oriented agenda for Kosovo.
Political leaders should be more outward-looking in
exploring opportunities for regional cooperation — as
exemplified by the Western Balkans Investment Summit
in London one week ago — rather than focusing on
limited political interests. With so much already
invested in building stability in Kosovo and the region,
continued attention to core issues and more focused
deployment of resources can help make the difference
between setting a course for progress or decline.
Throughout all this, it is important to acknowledge
that many essential commitments made by Kosovo’s
political leadership have remained firm. Those include
continuing to normalize relations with Belgrade
through the European Union-facilitated dialogue,
meeting the fiscal and financial obligations set forth
by international creditors and ensuring the conditions
necessary for full establishment of the special court.
The additional and emerging challenges underscore the
importance of working with all leaders in Pristina to
ensure that those essential commitments do not waver.
Several fundamental steps were taken last year
towards strengthening Kosovo’s European perspective.
16-05416

29/02/2016

UNMIK

At the same time, they were accompanied by detailed
and at times critical assessments by European bodies
of the condition and efficiency of public institutions,
especially the Kosovo judiciary. I refer in particular to
the European Commission’s Kosovo 2015 report and
to the recent report of the Council of Europe on the
situation in Kosovo, among others.
Building respect for the rule of law and ensuring
adequate enforcement are great challenges in many
parts of the world. In Kosovo those crucial goals are not
always as high on the agenda as they should be. A strong
legislative framework is already in place, including
several key laws enacted just in the past year. However,
its application is inconsistent, the administration of
justice is unacceptably slow and instances of political
interference are common. Corruption at many levels
increases the public’s frustration, impairs the daily
life of everyone in Kosovo by reducing economic
development and opportunity and undermines faith
in the political system. Steadily improving the
coordination of support for the rule of law should, I
believe, remain a central objective this year, and it is
one in which the United Nations remains ready to play
a part, within the available resources and our mandate.
At times, the security and political issues take too
much attention away from Kosovo’s serious economic
development challenges. As the Government has
acknowledged, intensive efforts are needed to create
more economic growth and opportunity, which in turn
would ease political tensions. Despite extensive natural
and human resources, few opportunities are opening
up for major investment. Unemployment is high.
Education needs to be modernized and depoliticized.
And harmful environmental practices that significantly
affect public health should be systematically addressed.
As the Secretary-General has so often stressed, the close
nexus between peacebuilding and development requires
coherence and complementarity with all the United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes in Kosovo,
as well as with the broader range of multilateral and
bilateral development initiatives. That will be another
central focus of our efforts this year.
Kosovo’s legal framework guarantees the protection
of human and fundamental rights, but implementation
is uneven and directly influenced by political and
inter-community tensions. Although Kosovo cannot
directly associate itself with international and
European human-rights instruments and institutions
without facilitation by the United Nations, that has

S/PV.7637

never prevented it from enacting robust human-rights
legislation. I welcome the Government’s willingness to
engage with the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) on human-rights
reporting to the special procedures of the Human
Rights Council. I also welcome the positive working
relationship we have established with the Government
on policy development, including on the Kosovo
human rights strategy. We and many international
partners remain committed to working closely with the
authorities to encourage positive trends, particularly in
the full implementation of the established legislative
framework. The recent agreement signed on new
premises for the Kosovo Ombudsperson, in line with
the Paris Principles, and the appointment of a new
Chair for the Pristina delegation of the Joint Working
Group on missing persons, are welcome developments.
Laws and programmes designed to uphold the rights
of minority groups and to protect cultural heritage, along
with the realization of property rights and women’s stilllimited access to property ownership, remain matters
of real concern. The returns programme for displaced
persons has faltered, partly due to the significant
shortcomings in those areas. Without ensuring the
necessary conditions for people’s reintegration into
social, economic and political life, even limited returns
are unlikely to become more sustainable.
Cooperation between the Serbian Orthodox Church
and the Kosovo authorities suffered several setbacks
last year. Unresolved issues related to church property
and the enforcement of legal protection have strained
relations. We continue to receive reports of incidents,
including thefts, in households owned by Kosovo
Serbs, which are causing concern. We are joining with
the European Union and other partners to improve
facilitated dialogue at all levels, from the central
authorities to civil society.
In the next few months, Kosovo and the entire region
are likely to face substantial external shocks that will
test the resilience of their institutions. The vast refugee
and migrant flows through the Balkans are unlikely to
abate, and they constitute both a human tragedy and
a political crisis. Kosovo’s planning for contingencies
should benefit from international resources and
planning support, as well as regional cooperation. It
is important to emphasize that any measures taken
should not restrict the universal rights of refugees and
asylum-seekers, and that our understanding of their

16-054163/25

S/PV.7637

UNMIK

plight as individuals should remain at the forefront of
all policy considerations.
Assuring adequate institutional capacity and
responses to the problems of radicalization and
extremism, terrorist training and financing, and the
associated trafficking in human beings and weapons
is likewise becoming more pressing. The presence of
groups driving radicalization and the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters are challenges that demand
a close and efficient partnership between the Kosovo
authorities and regional and international bodies.
Kosovo’s strategy and action plan on the prevention of
violent extremism should benefit from wide-ranging
international support commensurate with the
extensive bilateral assistance already being directed to
intelligence and law-enforcement bodies.
While politicians usually focus on near-term and
insular priorities, regional partnerships mark the real
path to progress. The Pristina-Belgrade dialogue is
essential, while its ultimate success must be grounded
in collaboration among all leaders across the region.
Where the international community is concerned,
safeguarding the considerable investment already
made in Kosovo requires a proactive attitude both to
the current challenges and to additional emerging ones.
Political progress and institutional resilience in the
region are both essential. However, they are by no means
assured. Accordingly, our work in UNMIK is aimed
at, and must be part of, an international, as well as a
local, partnership to address problems that realistically
cannot be tackled in isolation. By working with all
those who recognize and embrace the aims of peace,
security and prosperity, we can actively support
Kosovo and the entire region in meeting the formidable
challenges ahead.
I wish to conclude my remarks by expressing my
deep appreciation to the members of the Council for
their suppor, which is indispensable to success.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Tanin
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dačić.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English
text provided by the delegation): I would like to thank
thank the Security Council for the attention is accords
the question of Kosovo and Metohija via a regular
exchange of views on the work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
4/25

29/02/2016

and the Security Council meeting convened every three
months. The message that we send from here to all
sides involved is exceptionally important. The force of
that message is understood by all political actors and,
even more important, by all communities in Kosovo
and Metohija.
Notwithstanding the many challenges, UNMIK’s
role in the process of coordinating the activities of all
segments of the international presence, as well as in
stabilizing the situation in the province, is irreplaceable.
UNMIK’s engagement is of paramount importance for
the Republic of Serbia; the Serbian population trusts
UNMIK the most, whereas, for its part, UNMIK is the
guarantor of the status neutrality of the international
presence in the province as provided for by resolution
1244 (1999). Very important also is the contribution
of other international organizations whose missions,
such as the European Union Rule of Law Mission, the
Kosovo Force and the Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), carried
out under the auspices of the United Nations, are
constituent parts of the international civil and security
presences in Kosovo and Metohija.
Serbia commends UNMIK’s consistency and
commitment to the realization of the priorities mandated
by its mission. In view of its task of promoting security,
stability and respect for human rights, I would like to
emphasize that UNMIK’s engagement, in its present
scope and with undiminished budget capacities, is
essential for the creation of conditions conducive to
reaching a durable and sustainable solution for the
question of Kosovo and Metohija. At the same time,
it sends a message to Kosovo and Metohija Serbs and
other non-Albanians who see in UNMIK a guarantor
of their survival that they are not forgotten. In that
sense, it is also important that we maintain the present
Security Council reporting dynamic on the work of
UNMIK. I expect UNMIK to continue to carry out its
mandate in a status-neutral way in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999), especially in areas relevant to
the survival and normal and dignified life of the Serbs
and the members of other non-Albanian communities
in Kosovo and Metohija.
Turning to the report (S/2016/99) before us, I would
like to reiterate that, in order to present a broader
picture of the situation in which the Serbian and other
non-Albanian populations live in the province today, the
periodic reports must reflect the life of the communities
south of the Ibar River as well. Disregard for human
16-05416

29/02/2016

UNMIK

rights and the problems encountered by minority
communities all over Kosovo and Metohija make their
feelings of isolation, neglect and hopelessness ever more
intense. I therefore propose that the next report include
a thorough review of the situation of the members of the
communities south of the Ibar River.
As I have done on previous occasions, I would like
to point to the importance that Serbia attaches to the
quest for solutions for internally displaced persons
from Kosovo and Metohija. The strategy of my country
in that regard is to fully support the persons displaced
from Kosovo and Metohija, whether they opt for a
sustainable return or for integration in the place of
displacement. Yet whatever support that Serbia may
provide to potential returnees will be insufficient, short
of adequate engagement by the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government in Pristina and their acceptance, or
at least toleration, by local communities, coupled with
the active participation of the international community.
The answer to the question of why an ever-smaller
number of people opt to return home to Kosovo
and Metohija is complex: they become frustrated
by administrative, security, institutional and legal
barriers and decide to integrate locally not as an
act of a conscious, personal choice, but rather as a
consequence of a lack of genuine possibilities to return.
The OSCE Mission in Kosovo report of last November
is very indicative in that regard: out of 479 incidents
in Kosovo and Metohija, 310 were directed at Kosovo
and Metohija Serbs, 22 per cent of them returnees.
According to data from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner of Refugees, only 12,145
displaced Serbs and other non-Albanians returned,
while just 4,000 of them realized sustainable returns.
The quarterly reports of the Secretary-General are also
indicative of the worrisome trend of declining returns,
wherefore much more attention should be devoted to
this problem, as well as to measures to overcome it. The
worrisome statistical data should provide motivation
and lead to intensive work to remove the obstacles that
prevent and make it more difficult for the internally
displaced persons to achieve sustainable returns in
larger numbers in which, under resolution 1244 (1999),
UNMIK also should play an exceptionally important
role. Promises alone are not enough; effective measures
and concrete results are needed.
I have already lost count of how many times I have
drawn the attention of the members of the Council, which
represents the most important body of the international

S/PV.7637

community, that, year after year, we keep repeating the
data that over 220,000 Serbs were expelled from their
ancestral homes in Kosovo and Metohija and that only
1.9 per cent of them realized sustainable return. Does
that mean that the international community has given
up on the return of 220,000 Serbs? Will it legitimize the
ethnic cleansing of Serbs from Kosovo and Metohija?
How many more years must go by before the Serbs are
able to return? Sixteen or seventeen years have already
passed. Or is no one planning on their return at all? Or
are they fair game indeed?
Piecemeal data on attacks on the life and property of
Serbs and other non-Albanians create a somewhat fuzzy
picture of a civilizationally unacceptable phenomenon:
the persecution of people only because they do not
belong to a majority community. Unfortunately, there
are many examples. Last October, a group of Albanian
youths beat four Serbian boys younger than 15 years
old in the village of Donje Kusce near Gnjilane. Two
of them sustained serious injuries: one was stabbed
with a knife, the other was hit with a metal bar. At the
beginning of December, a number of Serbian houses
were shot at in repeated gun bursts, a car was set on fire
and the memorial to the victims of the NATO bombing
and the monument to children killed at the Bistrica
River in 2003, whose killers were never found, were
vandalized at Gorazdevac, municipality of Klina.
The presentation of the response of institutions,
including police investigation, prosecution and the
sentencing of perpetrators, would be welcome indeed.
The Council will agree that the statistics on the
processing of crimes and the providing of compensation
for criminal offences, including murders committed
against Serbs, would make for illuminating reading. Let
me remind the Council that the number of killers of over
1,000 Serbs since 1999, tried and given legally valid
sentences to date continues to be zero. These things,
however, are the litmus test for the achievements of a
society in the area of democracy and the rule of law.
One question is very pertinent in this regard, namely,
whether the murder of Serbs is a criminal offence or
whether that, too, can go unpunished? How, then, can
the Serbs believe in the rule of law if up until now no one
has been prosecuted and sentenced for those murders?
In the light of what I have said here, I call again on
the United Nations and representatives of the Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and Metohija to
help overcome the problems that make the return
of internally displaced persons to their homes more

16-054165/25

S/PV.7637

UNMIK

difficult. We should keep in mind that, beyond the lack
of security, the absence of effective mechanisms for
the restitution of usurped property is one of the most
important factors that prevents or limits returns. The
April 2015 report of the Secretary-General states that
“[u]nresolved property rights remained a
key impeding factor to progress in voluntary
returns and intercommunity relations in Kosovo.”
(S/2015/303, para. 34)
To that end, we would draw attention to the
institutional measures taken by Pristina, such as the
draft law on the Kosovo agency for property comparison
and verification, which contravenes the 2011 technical
agreement on customs stamps and cadastre. The draft
law’s adoption would make it possible to legalize the
unlawful seizure property and would cause irreparable
damage to the Serbian community in Kosovo and
Metohija. The realization and protection of property
rights are one of democratic society’s most important
achievements and represent the vital interests of a
community, as also stated in the October 2014 report
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe entitled An Assessment of the Voluntary
Returns Process in Kosovo. It is therefore of paramount
importance to draft a new law using a process in which
representatives of displaced persons and the Serbian
Orthodox Church would also participate.
The fragility of the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija in various sectors is noted also in the European
Commission 2015 report on Kosovo. The report notes,
inter alia, that Kosovo’s judicial system is in its early
stages of development and is still prone to political
interference. The attitude of the Pristina authorities
and judiciary towards Mr. Oliver Ivanović — the leader
of the Serbian Civic Initiative “Serbia, Democracy and
Justice”, about which I have spoken in the Security
Council on a number of occasions — led to a verdict
that can be characterized only as political, proving
the existence of political interference in a convincing
manner. The verdict, without foundation in justice or in
law, is a far cry from contributing to the stabilization
process in the province and to the building of trust in the
institutions and the rule of law in Kosovo and Metohija.
The absence of the rule of law, the existence
of divergent interests between the Government and
opposition political structures, as well as the lack
of genuine will to fulfil the conditions put before
the Government in Kosovo and Metohija by the
6/25

29/02/2016

international community, will be a destabilizing factor
for some time to come. A negative climate for Serbs is
being created because of alleged concessions made by
the Pristina side during the Brussels dialogue. There is
therefore a danger that violence could spill over from
Pristina into Serbian enclaves in the other parts of
Kosovo and Metohija.
Kosovo and Metohija’s level of religious
extremism is the highest in the region. Radical Islamist
structures, supported by a large number of Islamic
clerics — Imams — from the official Islamic community
of Kosovo and Metohija, as well as international and
local Islamist organizations, is proof of a serious threat
of terrorism, particularly given their associations and
links with foreign terrorist fighters in Syria and Iraq
who have left the region at the highest rates of any
Muslim population in the Balkans.
Political radicalization and the worsening of the
security situation due to the escalation of political and
religious extremism threaten all residents of Kosovo
and Metohija, and returnees in ethnically mixed
communities are generally the most threatened. That
calls for additional measures to improve the security of
Serbs and members of non-majority communities who
are, as stated in the report I mentioned, regular targets
and victims of ethnically motivated attacks.
The presence of terrorist elements and the activities
of radicalized extremists, including returnees from
conflict-ridden areas in the Middle East, give rise to
particular concern. The report itself speaks of arrests
and indictments of a number of Kosovo and Metohija
Albanians suspected of being connected with terrorist
organizations, while in the reporting period graffiti
making explicit reference to the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant has defaced Serbian houses, the walls of
Serbian Orthodox churches and road signs. Four armed
Islamists were arrested in January at the portal of the
Visoki Dečani Monastery, a jewel of Serbian, European
and world spiritual and cultural heritage, which is on
UNESCO’s List of World Heritage in Danger.
The Republic of Serbia is fully committed to
the dialogue being conducted between Belgrade and
Pristina and facilitated by the European Union and
to the implementation of agreements reached. In the
circumstances in which the Serbian people of Kosovo
and Metohija live, they see in the covenants entered into
by the European Union under the Brussels agreement
the guarantee of their survival and development. The
16-05416

29/02/2016

UNMIK

community of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo
is intended to articulate the interests of the Serbian
population and provide an institutional mechanism
for collectively realizing and protecting their basic
rights and contribute to a continued and more rapid
normalization of relations.
In all reports of the Secretary-General, it has been
asserted that a speedy establishment of the community
of Serb majority municipalities is crucial for the
implementation of the Brussels agreement. Yet so far
the community has not been established. Instead of
positive steps in that direction, a new element has been
introduced contrary to the Brussels agreement, namely,
the inclusion of the so-called Supreme Court of Kosovo
in the process of review and de facto revision of the
agreement. If the Supreme Court of Kosovo is tacitly
accepted to be an institution empowered to alter a
political agreement facilitated by the European Union
reached at the highest level, the purpose of dialogue and
the guarantee that every agreement will be implemented
in the form in which it has been reached are thrown
very much into question. It sends a negative message
to the Serbian community, as well as to the European
Union as a facilitator and to the United Nations.
I would reiterate that my country’s commitment to
contributing to the stabilization of the situation in the
region and to the agreement I signed with Mr. Hashim
Thaçi, which clearly defines the obligations of both
sides, the main reason for the signing of the Brussels
agreement was, in the absence of substantive progress
in the realization of basic human rights for Serbs and
members of other non-Albanian communities in Kosovo
and Metohija, to establish a separate mechanism that
will make it possible for those communities to lead a
normal life. In that sense, the idea of establishing the
community of Serb majority municipalities draws
intrinsically on the spirit of resolution 1244 (1999) as a
mechanism, the primary function of which is to protect
human rights, ensure the safe and sustainable return of
all refugees and displaced persons and permit them to
live a normal twenty-first century life.
In conclusion, I would like to point out once again
that the Republic of Serbia’s national priority is to
achieve a political solution for the question of Kosovo
and Metohija. In order to reach such a solution, it is also
necessary to achieve reconciliation. Serbia is therefore
strongly committed to dialogue with the representatives
of Pristina, facilitated by the European Union, within
which very important agreements have been reached.

S/PV.7637

My country’s commitment to the process reflects its
firm determination to make an active contribution to
stability in the Western Balkans and the settlement
of all outstanding issues by political and diplomatic
means. It is exactly with that goal in mind, and despite
the many challenges, that we have been constructive
in the dialogue and ready to compromise, which has
not often been easy. Our approach has made it possible
for mutually acceptable solutions to be reached on
many complex issues, from legislation to energy and
telecommunications, in the interest, above all, of
reconciliation and a shared future.
We expect the European Union to continue to
facilitate our dialogue with Prístina. For its part, the
Government of the Republic of Serbia will undoubtedly
continue to be actively engaged in implementing the
Brussels agreement in the interest of the peace, stability
and economic prosperity of the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Ms. Çitaku.
Ms. Çitaku: It is an honour for me to present some
of the latest developments in the Republic of Kosovo.
On 17 February, Kosovo marked its eighth
anniversary as a free, independent and sovereign
State. The journey that the people of Kosovo have gone
through to obtain freedom was long and painful, and
the price we had to pay in order to exist as a free nation
under the sun was very steep.
When we were living through the terror of war,
accompanied by violence and ethnic cleansing deployed
by Serbia, only in 1998 did Kosovo start to make
headlines in the world. Not many people still remember
that we had lived through repression decades before,
harshly discriminated against and with our fundamental
rights violated; without schools in our language; and
with our parents thrown out of their rightful jobs, just
because of our being Albanian.
This happened only a few decades, ago in the heart
of Europe, in silence. I am not going to even mention
the 1960s and 1970s, when violations of human rights
in Kosovo were not known and people were afraid to
speak of them, even among ourselves.
I am remembering this because sometimes we have
to step back and see where we have come from in order to
see the whole picture and understand what is happening
now, at a time when we all are confronted with new
challenges, when no one is afraid of losing friends or

16-054167/25

S/PV.7637

UNMIK

loved ones, when we all condemn atrocities together, in
alliance, and we want to see the perpetrators punished.
In Kosovo, we are still waiting for justice to be
served. Although we in Kosovo were the victims,
and although our just cause has been addressed by
international justice, be it at the International Tribunal
in The Hague or in the various international missions
that operated in Kosovo, including the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, Kosovo
institutions have established a Special Court, which
will try the crimes allegedly committed in 1999.
The sitting President of Kosovo, Ms. Atifete Jahjaga,
ratified the agreement signed by the Government of
Kosovo and the Netherlands. With this, Kosovo has
concluded all of its international obligations towards
the establishment of the Special Court. We will always
cooperate with international justice, as we have done in
the past, because we have nothing to hide. War was not
our choice.
We all know who generated the violence and
atrocities in the former Yugoslavia. History cannot
be rewritten, and roles cannot be shifted. Precisely
because we are fully conscious of our past, our record
of cooperation with international justice has always
been impeccable. Every single Kosovar Albanian
who has been indicted for war crimes in Kosovo since
1999, be it by international or local justice, has always
surrendered voluntarily to the Tribunal. Unlike our
northern neighbour, which provided shelter for those
who were indicted and later used their arrest for leverage
and benefits, we in Kosovo believe that cooperation
with international justice is not a subject for negotiation
but rather a duty — a duty and obligation not only to
our past but, first and foremost, to our children and to
future generations. We need to clear the fog and remove
any suspicion so that they can live in their Republic, not
in the midst of doubts but proud of their past.
Unfortunately, in Serbia many serious human
rights violations have not been investigated and have
gone unpunished. Somehow indictments for war crimes
seem not to be taken seriously. Furthermore, in Serbia,
when one former paramilitary official was arrested
for war crimes and given a minimum sentence, there
was a massive and institutional condemnation of the
justice institutions. General Vladimir Lazarević, on
the other hand, was sentenced by the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for war
crimes committed in Kosovo. Upon his return to Serbia
8/25

29/02/2016

last December, after serving two thirds of his 14-year
sentence, he received a hero’s welcome. The Minister
of Justice and Minister of Defence of Serbia and a long
row of State officials lined up to welcome the infamous
General, who was responsible for the loss of thousands
of lives. This is what I call impunity.
This is not only my opinion, as all respectable
institutions, including the ICTY, have documented this.
Thousands of victims have been denied their right to
justice. I want to bring to the attention of the Council
one particular group: women and girls who suffered the
war crime of sexual violence. While Serbia is governed
by a climate of impunity, time is passing, witnesses are
dying, memories are fading and the perpetrators of rape
must urgently be brought to justice in order to ensure
justice for the victims before it is too late.
Survivors of sexual violence in Kosovo, and there
are 20,000 of them, still bear the scars, both physical and
psychological, of this form of torture. Many were raped
in front of their families as Serbian forces came to kick
us out as part of their ethnic cleansing campaign. With
the systematic rape campaign unleashed in Kosovo
during the war, the Serbian security forces intended to
continue the war long after it ended by aiming to leave
us fragile.
Yet there has been no trial for the perpetrators
of rape, not at The Hague, not even in Kosovo, even
though Kosovo was administered by the United
Nations. Even today, the survivors of war rape in
Kosovo are not included in United Nations resolutions
or reports. On behalf of them, I seek justice. We need
to see the perpetrators behind bars, and we need to
collectively and globally do more, so that the victims
of sexual violence in conflict throughout the world feel
supported and not alone.
The elderly make up another very vulnerable group
that is still suffering the consequences of the war.
There were 88,900 Kosovar Albanians who were left
without their rightful access to their contributions on
their pension fund. All their hard work, savings and
contributions made in the most honest way were taken
away from them and never returned. The European
Court of Human Rights handed down a decision stating
that Serbia violated local and international law by the
violent interruption of pension paymentss to KosovoAlbanian citizens, which should be not only returned
retroactively, but also with damages suffered during
the years. This is an issue that needs to be addressed,
16-05416

29/02/2016

UNMIK

and we believe the dialogue in Brussels is the platform
for it.
Every time we come to debate in this Chamber,
Serbia tries to portray a very dark picture regarding the
living conditions of the Serbian community in Kosovo.
I can only reassure the Council that minorities in
Kosovo cherish a wide range of extensive rights, which
are enshrined in our Constitution. Unfortunately, the
same cannot be said for Serbia itself, where even the
Council of Europe called on it to step up the efforts with
regard to the effective and consistent implementation
of legislation on the protection of minorities and the
non-discriminatory treatment of national minorities
throughout Serbia, especially with regard to education
and the use of native languages. The Albanian
community in Preševo, Medveđa and Bujanoc are a
testimony to the problems that exist.
Minorities in Kosovo are fully represented, and we
are doing our best to support them. We have in place
the Development Fund for Northern Kosovo, which
derives its revenues from taxes collected at the Jarinje
and Tabavije border crossing points. The revenues
collected so far amount to €8.3 million and are used to
support the socioeconomic development of the northern
municipalities. The board of the Fund is managed by our
Minister of Finance and a Serbian representative and is
chaired by the European Union Special Representative.
In the current month alone, €1.9 million was awarded to
Kosovo’s northern municipalities. So far, €6.6 million
has been awarded from the Development Fund to
the four northern Kosovo municipalities. For the
full integration of all municipalities in the justice
system, 39 agreements, totalling €1 million, were
signed for capital investments from our Ministry of
Local Government and four municipalities. Another
89 agreements for capital investments, amounting to
€14.5 million, were signed between different ministries
of the Government and the northern municipalities.
With regard to the returnees, 121 houses were
rebuilt in 2015 under just one programme, co-funded
by the European Union and the Government of Kosovo.
Our Government has also continued to provide financial
support to initiatives for return and reintegration. The
construction of houses is a clear example of the ongoing
efforts of our Government to accommodate returnees
and their reintegration. One hundred and thirty-four
returnee families benefit from support in different
regions. Every citizen of Kosovo is free to return, but the
figures put forward often project an unrealistic starting

S/PV.7637

point. It is true that more Serbs lived in Kosovo before
1999, but we also need to remember that many of them
were part of the military and police establishment that
came from Serbia as part of the repressive apparatus in
Kosovo. Obviously, they will not come back.
The picture is very different from the one Serbia
insists on painting here every three months by reading
from police reports and by trying to give a political
and ethnic dimension to every single stone thrown
in Kosovo. Let me be honest: while progress has
been made and the normalization of relations in the
region has gained new momentum, especially with
the inter-State dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia,
reconciliation among people will be possible only after
there is recognition by Serbia for the crimes committed
and after a sincere and official apology is made.
Serbian human rights champions Sonja Biserko and
Nataša Kandić have continuously raised their voices
and advocated for that. We need that acknowledgement
from Serbia, because everyone in the region needs to
move forward and address the challenging issues of
the present.
The Constitutional Court in Kosovo gave very clear
guidelines as to how the association of the Serbian
municipalities should be established. Legitimate
concerns were raised about it, but now the Government
has a clear road map in its hands on how to establish
the association, without hurting the functionality of
our State. We will not allow the reproduction of the
dangerous models we have witnessed in the region,
where one entity hinders the progress and road forward
for the entire community and countries.
We in Kosovo believe that dialogue is important,
but good faith and the implementation of agreements,
in earnest and without ambiguity, is everything.
Engaging in dialogue with the cynical objective of
obtaining favours and compliments from Brussels is
counterproductive, if we all do not talk in earnest with
our public about what dialogue is about. The dialogue
is not about reinstating Serbia in Kosovo. The dialogue
is not about rewriting history. Kosovo is a free,
independent and sovereign State. That will not change.
What must change is Serbia’s attitude towards us.
The dialogue in Brussels is a good first step. Dialogue
is about making sure that history does not repeat
itself. Dialogue is about building trust and bridges of
cooperation for the common good and common benefits.
Dialogue is about making sure that what we leave behind

16-054169/25

S/PV.7637

UNMIK

for future generations is not characterized by tension,
ambiguity and mistrust. Dialogue is about making sure
that we treat each other with dignity and as equals, as
two States that are, and will be, neighbours — and,
hopefully, members of the European Union. That is the
dialogue Kosovo wants. That is the dialogue we want
to engage in.
The political climate in Kosovo is fierce and often
tense. We are still a very young democracy, and we
are still learning. The Parliament of Kosovo elected a
new President, Mr. Hashim Thaçi, with 71 votes. There
were protests and there were celebrations. While our
political leaders have their obvious disagreements, let
no one have any doubt as to our collective aspiration to
Euro-Atlantic integration and values. The 21 January
ratification of our Stabilization and Association
Agreement by the European Parliament cemented that
path. Another milestone for Kosovo was its selection
by the Millennium Challenge Corporation as a country
eligible for assistance. Kosovo had to work hard to
improve its performance in many indicators, and much
more remains to be done.
On behalf of the Government of Kosovo, I want
to state the following. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is now
only a reporting mission, based on the report of the
Secretary-General that was approved by the Security
Council in 2008 (S/2008/692). The United Nations may
decide to keep an expensive mission in Kosovo that is
costing the Organization a quarter of a billion dollars
a year, at a time when those resources could be used
elsewhere, but there is no doubt that the wheel of history
cannot be turned back. While we are thankful for the
role played by UNMIK in the immediate aftermath of
the war, this is 2016 — not 1999.
As we look ahead, there is no doubt that many
challenges remain, and that a lot more needs to be
done to fulfil the rightful expectations of all Kosovar
citizens. They have the absolute right to demand more
from our Government and institutions, as they give
us reasons to be proud every day. Just last night, two
Kosovar teenage boys walked the red carpet in Los
Angeles as the entire nation stayed awake and united
to celebrate our first Oscar nomination. Although we
did not win the Oscar this time, the movie won millions
of hearts, telling the story of Kosovo better than any
Ambassador ever could, and reminding us of the steep
price we had to pay for our freedom. We were reminded
that no dream is too big and no hope too high. While we
10/25

29/02/2016

prepare for our first appearance in the Olympic Games
in Rio de Janeiro, where our flag will be raised for the
first time, our nation is uniting again to support our
golden champion, Majlinda Kelmendi.
These are the new heroes of Kosovo — artists
and athletes who inspire the nation. It is a generation
that is fighting isolation by providing examples for all
of us through their hard work and dedication. While
Majlinda and our athletes prepare for the Olympics,
we should be working even harder to enable Kosovo’s
participation and membership in all international
organizations. Our young people cannot and should not
remain hostage. Kosovo is here to stay — forever. And
we will do our outmost to have our flag and our voice
raised in all international organizations, including the
United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the members of the Security Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation of Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, in this meeting, and we share
the assessments he has made here today.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for
his briefing on the situation of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
which paints a worrisome picture of the situation in the
province. That is no surprise. No matter how convincing
Ms. Vlora Çitaku’s interesting interpretation of history
and contemporary realities may be, the situation in
Kosovo is characterized by ongoing crisis and disorder.
Clashes with the opposition regularly spill out into the
street and mass confrontations erupt against the police.
We hope that the international presence will manage to
keep the situation under control.
The situation of the Kosovar Serbs remains
very serious. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/99) notes instances of physical violence used
against them, including the stoning of a bus with
internally displaced persons and gunfire against
Serbian homes. After UNESCO rejected Kosovo’s
application for membership, further flagrant evidence
was received of threats against Orthodox holy sites in
Kosovo. In January, participants in anti-Government
demonstrations in Pristina desecrated the unfinished
basilica of the Church of Christ the Saviour in that city
without intervention by the Kosovar police.
16-05416

29/02/2016

UNMIK

The main channel for communication between
Belgrade and Pristina is the dialogue mediated by
the European Union (EU). Despite the important
agreements reached in August 2015, there has been
little real progress in that area. First of all, for the
time being the key idea of creating an association of
Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo exists only on
paper. That project was intended to contribute to the
improvement of inter-ethnic relations in the province
by granting genuine rights to the Serbian community.
The parties agreed to that in April 2013 — almost three
years ago.
The situation is hardly satisfactory, and the reason
for that is simple. It is due to the continuing neglect by
the Kosovar side of its commitments, and to attempts to
unilaterally revise its commitments under the pretext
of the rulings of the so-called Constitutional Court of
Kosovo. European Union mediators remain silent and
appear to lack the strength — or possibly the will — to
force Pristina to play by the rules. Nor has their been
much headway after the latest round of high-level
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina on 26 January.
It appears that the meeting was a simple observation
of formalities.
There is a major situation around which dialogue
has been taking place. As we know, in December
2015 membership discussions were launched between
Serbia and the European Union under chapter 35,
“Other matters”, in which the issues of Kosovo are
to be addressed. The Brussels negotiating platform
has a number of provisions that are cause for serious
concern for the Serbian side. It is difficult not to shake
the impression that the majority of the EU, which has
been seeking to legitimize Kosovo statehood, is trying
to push Belgrade to surrender its positions one step at
a time and to blackmail it with the suspension of its
membership in the European Union. How else can we
interpret the demand to stop Belgrade’s financing of
Serbian municipalities or the forcing of Serbs to adopt
Kosovar insignia? How can we interpret the sending
of statements concerning pension payments by Serbia
to Kosovar agencies, or the right for citizens of third
countries to enter Serbia? On what basis are these
demands being made? Resolution 1244 (1999), which
remains the framework for the peace settlement, does
not mention any of that. The EU approach to mediation
raises, at the very least, serious questions about
its impartiality.

S/PV.7637

Steady progress in repairing the legacy of the
conflict, including investigating the crimes of the
Kosovo Liberation Army, without which it will be
impossible to achieve inter-ethnic reconciliation.
The readiness of the Netherlands to host the main
infrastructure of the specialist court is a step forward.
At the same time, more than five years have passed
since Dick Marty, Deputy of the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe, submitted a report
that launched real work in that area. The time for the
international community to at least partially atone for
its moral responsibility to the victims it was unable to
protect is slowly passing. Unfortunately, we see that the
launching of the tribunal mechanism is being delayed
due to the domestic situation in Kosovo, where the idea
is causing acute protest, especially from the opposition.
We hope that this year there will be progress on the
matter. Crimes need to be investigated, and criminals,
no matter what position they currently occupy, need to
be punished.
At the same time, against the backdrop of the
ongoing lack of justice in relation to the fighters of the
Kosovo Liberation Army, we are puzzled by the guilty
verdict handed down by the Court of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo against the
Kosovo Serb leader Oliver Ivanović, who received the
severe punishment of nine years of prison. Ivanović
was found guilty of killing Albanians, based on flimsy
arguments and without concrete testimony that he
personally took part or ordered those killings. We hope
that within the framework of the upcoming appeals
process, the international judges will rectify what has
emerged as a politicized verdict.
On more than one occasion, we have drawn attention
to the danger of disregarding the fact that the lack of
proper law and order in Kosovo leads to the use of
territory by Islamic terrorist groups for recruiting and
training of militants. A recent and alarming indication
of that was the arrest of an armed group of Islamists
near the monastery of Visoki Dečani in late January.
According to several reports, the members of that
group were carrying the insignia of the Islamic State.
We hope that that case will be thoroughly investigated
and that the channels used by the extremists to
penetrate Kosovo and acquire supplies will be shut
down. It is still incomprehensible why the international
institutions lack any information concerning the
circumstances surrounding the Kumanovo incident,

16-0541611/25

S/PV.7637

UNMIK

29/02/2016

involving incursions by a group of militants from
Kosovo in Macedonia in May 2015.

Pristina, aimed at strengthening cooperation among
business communities.

In conclusion, we wish to confirm that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
remains a key element of the international presence
and control over the situation, making it possible to
maintain relative stability in the province. In such
conditions, we believe it extremely important to ensure
that the Mission’s human and financial resources
remain unchanged. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains
fully in force as the international legal basis for a
settlement in Kosovo. We consider Pristina’s ongoing
attempts to infiltrate international organizations to
be unacceptable, especially in the light of how the
modalities of Kosovo’s participation in supranational
structures are defined in the First Agreement on
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations of
2013 between Belgrade and Pristina.

However, despite those positive developments,
we acknowledge how disturbing the Special
Representative’s briefing is with regard to the
polarization of Kosovo’s political landscape, which
has reached unacceptable levels, while the extremes
of political antagonism have clearly transgressed basic
democratic norms. Moreover, also of great concern
are the rejection by the opposition of the integration
of the association of Serb-majority municipalities into
Kosovo, the opposition to the agreement on territorial
delineation signed with Montenegro, and the opposition’s
continued use of violence and inflammatory rhetoric,
which is undermining the functioning of the Assembly
of Kosovo.

Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Special
Representative Zahir Tanin for his briefing on the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2016/99) on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We welcome the participation of Mr. Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, at this briefing.
We equally welcome Ambassador Vlora Çitaku.
The overall security situation in Kosovo remains
stable in general, despite outbreaks of violence during
political protests. We underline the fundamental role
played by the United Nations through UNMIK in
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights, as well as its cooperation with the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), and
its engagement with Pristina and Belgrade. We will
focus our intervention on three main issues.
First, we will focus on key political developments.
We highlight Belgrade and Pristina’s commitment
to continuing the high-level dialogue facilitated by
the European Union and the progress achieved in the
process of European integration with the signing of
the Stabilization and Association Agreement with
the European Union, which has been ratified by the
Assembly of Kosovo. We also welcome the progress
achieved in the integration into Kosovo of institutions
of former Serbian civil protection personnel. Another
positive note is the initiatives taken by business leaders
within the chambers of commerce in Belgrade and
12/25

Secondly, with regard to human rights, we welcome
the appointment of a Joint Working Group by Belgrade
and Pristina on the persons unaccounted for in
connection with events in Kosovo, while stressing the
right of return for those Serbians, who were forced to
leave their ancestral lands. We appreciate the Sixteen
Days of Activism against Gender-Based Violence
campaign, held in Kosovo at the end of last year,
aimed at raising awareness of gender-based violence
and advocating for improved institutional responses.
UN Women further supported the implementation of
the the plan of action of the Kosovo Council on the
survivors of sexual violence, aimed at ensuring their
access to justice and providing joint training with
EULEX on sexual violence for investigators, judges
and prosecutors.
Thirdly, we commend UNMIK’s maintaining
technical cooperation with rule of law-related
institutions. UNMIK’s continued facilitation of
communication between the Kosovo authorities,
INTERPOL and its member States has also been
facilitating requests for mutual legal assistance from
States that do not recognize Kosovo. We value UNMIK’s
role in facilitating dialogue between communities and
officials and monitoring relations among them, as well
as the maintenance of technical cooperation with the
relevant institutions and international organizations.
Finally, we want to reiterate our position that
resolution 1244 (1999) continues to be the applicable
legal framework for a comprehensive solution to the
Kosovo issue, through dialogue and negotiations,
based on the purposes and principles of the Charter of
16-05416

29/02/2016

UNMIK

the United Nations and the framework of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for
having introduced the latest quarterly report (S/2016/99).
I also thank the First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia
and Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
Uruguay supports the role played by UNMIK in
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights. It also values the cooperation and contribution
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo on the ground. Resolution
1244 (1999) remains the internationally accepted legal
basis to resolve the situation in Kosovo, including full
and strict respect for the principle of the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Serbia. In that regard and
as was demonstrated in the framework of UNESCO,
Uruguay has maintained its position of not recognizing
Kosovo, thereby highlighting the principle of the
territorial integrity of States as an imperative norm of
international law. That principle constitutes a central
element of peaceful coexistence and cooperation among
the members of the international community.
Although the security situation has been
qualified as stable, we are concerned by the ongoing
disturbances in the functioning of the Assembly
of Kosovo, owing to the opposition parties’ use of
violence. It is critical that such differences be settled
through dialogue, rather than by resorting to violence
and undermining democracy. Furthermore, Uruguay
welcomes the agreements approved on 25 August 2015
in the framework of dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, facilitated by the European Union, and in
particular the establishment of the association of Serbmajority municipalities. We appreciate the fact that the
Government of the Netherlands has agreed to host the
specialist court. We hope that the court will be able to
begin its work as soon as possible so as to advance the
enforcement of justice and accountability.
Regarding human rights, we are concerned about
the fact that the UNMIK Human Rights Advisory Panel
has reported 31 incidences of violations, including
violations of the right to life, of the prohibition of
torture, inhumane or degrading treatment, as well as

S/PV.7637

the right to social security and an adequate standard
of living. We note that since the previous report
(S/2015/833), no progress has been made with regard to
the recommendations on the payment of compensation.
In that regard, and in conclusion, we would like to
reiterate our belief in the importance of ensuring that
UNMIK implements the recommendations of the
Human Rights Advisory Panel, particularly regarding
the issue of enforced disappearances, abductions or
violations of civilians, whatever their ethnic origins,
for in such incidents there can be no justification for
making any kind of distinctions.
Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Mr. Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing on the work
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). China welcomes the statement of
Mr. Ivica Dačić, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and his presence at
today’s meeting. I have also listened attentively to the
remarks of Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia, and we understand Serbia’s
legitimate concerns regarding the question of Kosovo.
Resolution 1244 (1999) is the principal legal basis for
resolving that question, and it is vital that in doing
so we adhere to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and engage in dialogue
and negotiations within the framework of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in order to reach an
appropriate settlement that is acceptable to all the
parties. We appreciate Serbia’s positive efforts in the
search for a political solution to this issue, and welcome
the significant consensus that has been reached in the
high-level dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
on mutual recognition of academic credentials and
personnel integration. China supports both parties in
their efforts to continue their pragmatic and constructive
dialogue, implement the agreements that have been
reached and seek a lasting solution acceptable to both,
so as to safeguard peace and stability in the Balkans
and, for that matter, in Europe as a whole.
The recent security situation has remained
generally stable, but Kosovo is still dealing with
complexities and uncertainties in its efforts to achieve
social development. The parties concerned should
work to effectively protect the legitimate rights of all
of Kosovo’s ethnic groups, actively promote national
reconciliation and avoid acts that might complicate

16-0541613/25

S/PV.7637

UNMIK

or escalate the situation. China appreciates the work
being done by UNMIK under Special Representative
Tanin. We support its continued efforts to carry out
the Security Council’s mandate, and we hope that the
international presence in Kosovo, including UNMIK,
the European Rule of Law Mission and the Kosovo
Force, will improve their coordination with a view to
playing a positive and constructive role in achieving an
appropriate settlement of the Kosovo issue.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his very informative
briefing on the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I
would also like to welcome Mr. Ivica Dačić, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku, and to thank them for
their statements.
Egypt has been following political developments in
Kosovo closely and urges all the parties concerned to
shoulder their responsibilities, to demonstrate wisdom
and restraint and conduct a constructive and transparent
political dialogue aimed at reducing tensions, mitigate
and resolve the crisis and avoid moves that could lead
to confrontations with the potential to undermine the
stability of the entire region. We warn the various
parties in Kosovo against escalations and ratcheting up
tensions, which could have an impact on the agreements
that have been made with the Republic of Serbia.
Egypt supports every effort aimed at reaching a
solution that responds to all the issues under discussion
between Belgrade and Pristina, through dialogue and
serious negotiations based on good faith and mutual
respect and on the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolution 1244 (1999), as well
as the agreements concluded between the parties in
April 2013 and August 2015. We emphasize that all the
parties should work to achieve a genuinely constructive
atmosphere in order to restart the political dialogue,
facilitated by the European Union, whose efforts
culminated in the August 2015 agreement. In our view,
the agreement must be implemented if stability is to be
achieved through a plan of action. All the provisions
of the package, with its four agreements, should be
implemented in full, without exceptions, in order to
avoid the possibility that the agreement could become a
focus of discord. Every effort should be made to arrive
14/25

29/02/2016

at a definitive settlement that can help bring prosperity
to the peoples of the region.
The positive developments discussed in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/99) should also
form the foundation for greater progress, particularly
those in the areas of communications, cooperation
between the Chambers of Commerce in Belgrade and
Pristina and the reintegration of former Serbian civil
protection personnel into Kosovo institutions, as well
as the interchanges between the mayors of North
and South Mitrovica. We commend the Government
of the Netherlands for hosting the specialist court
for prosecuting war crimes committed during the
conflict. We hope the court will be able to establish the
principles of the rule of law, of judicial accountability
and, based on that, of reconciliation generally. We wish
it every success.
We also hope to see progress on the voluntary
returns of displaced persons to Kosovo, the protection
of cultural and religious heritage sites, and strengthened
efforts to achieve reconciliation and equality,
non-discrimination among all the parties concerned,
the protection of minority rights and the rule of law,
while dealing with the challenges of migration and the
possible spread of extremism and terrorism.
Lastly, Egypt supports the work of UNMIK and the
Special Representative, as well as of all the regional and
inter-regional organizations, and the cooperation and
coordination between UNMIK, the European Union
Rule of Law Mission and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe aimed at implementing
resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I am grateful
to Special Representative Tanin for his briefing and
I welcome First Deputy Prime Minister Dačić and
Ambassador Çitaku back to the Security Council.
As this is the first Council meeting on Kosovo this
year, I would like to begin by looking forward to what
2016 holds in store. It will be a year of firsts: Kosovo’s
first Olympic games, its first film nomination at the
Oscars — I am sorry that Kosovo did not win — and,
perhaps more importantly still, its first contractual
relationship with the European Union in the form of
the Stabilization and Association Agreement — all
this for country that only celebrated its eighth year
of independence earlier this month. But if Kosovo is
to fulfil the promise of 2016, the start of the year also
16-05416

29/02/2016

UNMIK

shows us that there are significant steps still ahead. I
want to focus on three of these today.
First, like others in this Chamber, the United
Kingdom shares the Secretary-General’s concern
over continued violence and the use of inflammatory
rhetoric. Everyone has the right to protest peacefully,
but disrupting the work of the Assembly and bringing
violence to the streets of Pristina serves no purpose.
It only damages Kosovo’s development, its image and
its people.
Last Friday saw an important moment for Kosovo
when its Assembly elected Deputy Prime Minister
Thaçi as Kosovo’s next president. But it also saw
further deeply worrying scenes of violence inside and
outside the Assembly, which we condemn. Dialogue,
not disruption, is the only way forward. I would like to
take this opportunity to reiterate the United Kingdom’s
fullest support for President Jahjaga’s mediation efforts
to resolve the political crisis. As a long-standing and
close friend of Kosovo, the United Kingdom will offer
our support Kosovo’s new President to continue these
important efforts. It is of course for Kosovo’s political
leaders to reach a solution, not for the international
community. Every politician in Kosovo must take
responsibility for his or her own actions and for the
impact of those actions on Kosovo and its people.
My second point relates to the signature and
ratification of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement, which is a clear milestone in Kosovo’s
European journey. It was fitting recognition of Kosovo’s
progress and achievements over the past years. Kosovo
now needs to capitalize on this progress. So we regret the
delays in the implementation of the agreements reached
between Kosovo and Serbia. I encourage both sides
to focus on delivering on promises, to concentrate on
implementation of agreements reached and to continue
to demonstrate political courage and leadership.
We have seen the results of such leadership during
the latest reporting period. A successful application
to the International Telecommunication Union and a
renewed commitment from Kosovo’s Prime Minister
on the association of Serb-majority municipalities
and, as the Secretary-General’s report highlights,
there has been welcome progress on the integration of
former Serbian civil protection personnel into Kosovo’s
institutions (S/2016/99).
That leads into my third point. To really seize
the potential of 2016, Kosovo needs to continue such

S/PV.7637

cooperation at all levels of society, including politics
and business. There have been some great examples
already this year benefiting all communities, continuing
cooperation between mayors of Mitrovica North and
Mitrovica South, and in the links being forged between
business leaders in the Pristina and Belgrade chambers
of commerce. The international community should
play its part and help. The United Kingdom helped to
fund the business forum convened by the two chambers
of commerce in December. The success of that event
shows the progress can be made in areas of mutual
benefit without mediation if there is a will to do so.
Serious underlying challenges remain, not
least in the rule of law, corruption and, of course,
in the political crisis. Kosovo’s leaders must take
responsibility for addressing these challenges in the
interests of all Kosovo citizens. That said, eight years
after independence, the overall trend is clearly positive
and the progress is undeniable. In the light of that, it
is the United Kingdom’s long-standing view that we
should reduce the frequency of these Council meetings
in order to reflect this progress.
Yes, challenges remain, but the reality on the
ground does not warrant this level of Council attention,
especially when we have so many other far graver
challenges confronting the Council. It long past time to
acknowledge that it is the European Union and not the
Security Council that will bring momentum to further
progress. Our efforts must therefore focus on supporting
dialogue in Brussels and on the normalization of
relations, not on these briefings here in New York.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the comprehensive briefing on the situation he gave us
from Pristina. I also thank the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica
Dačić, and the Ambassador of Kosovo, Ms. Vlora
Çitaku, for their statements to the Security Council.
I would like to address three points: our support
for the continuation of dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, conducted under the auspices of the European
Union; our firm condemnation of the violent methods
of some opposition parliamentarians; and our ongoing
commitment to the strengthening of the rule of law
in Kosovo.
France welcomes the continuation of the political
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo under the auspices
of the European Union. The recently holding of a new

16-0541615/25

S/PV.7637

UNMIK

meeting of Serbian and Kosovar Prime Ministers in the
presence of the High Representative of the European
Union is a further demonstration of the commitment
of Belgrade and Pristina for the process of bilateral
rapprochement. Further progress has been made on this
front in recent months. Integration of nearly 400 Serbian
civil protection agents in various Kosovo institutions
is a significant and symbolic step forward likely to
strengthen the integration of the various communities
in the country. Progress under way with respect to
harmonizing diplomas, freedom of movement, air and
rail integration will also have concrete positive impact
on the everyday lives of Kosovar and Serbian citizens.
We welcome this.
We expect, however, that all commitments
undertaken in the framework of agreements concluded
under the auspices of the European Union to be
implemented without delay, including on the creation
of the association of Serb-majority municipalities,
which recently received a favourable opinion from
the Constitutional Court of Pristina. This is a key
element of the dialogue. The normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina remains generally a
prerequisite for their respective progress on the path of
European integration.
The political situation in Kosovo is worrying. The
current disruptions of the functioning of the Assembly
are absolutely unacceptable, as are violence and other
acts of intimidation against politicians. France calls on
those responsible for these unacceptable acts to play the
game of democracy and press their claims within the
framework of existing institutions and in compliance
with the provisions of the Constitution.
Violence and hate rhetoric have no place in the
society to which the overwhelming majority of Kosovo
citizens aspires. They jeopardize the progress achieved
by Kosovo patiently for over 10 years on the path of
building an independent, modern and democratic
State. We salute the professionalism and restraint by
the Kosovo Security Forces and the mediation efforts
carried out by the authorities in Pristina. We assure
them once again of our full support.
The election of the new President was an important
and necessary step in the proper functioning of
institutions. We regret the behaviour of some members
of the opposition on this occasion. Despite tensions,
Kosovo authorities should seek to maintain dialogue
and continue to listen to the people. Internal reforms are
16/25

29/02/2016

essential if citizens’ prospects for the future are to be
restored. The implementation of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement should lead in this direction by
creating favourable conditions for necessary changes.
Continuing wholehearted efforts to consolidate
the rule of law in Kosovo must more than ever remain
a priority. This pertains first and foremost to the
combat against impunity. The ratification last week
by Kosovo of the headquarters agreement signed
with the Government of the Netherlands to set up
the Kosovo Specialist Chambers in The Hague is
a bold step forward that we welcome. This is a clear
reflection of the determination of Kosovo to implement
its commitments in the area of the rule of law. It is
now important that all components of these Specialist
Chambers begin operating according to the planned
timetable and that the Kosovar authorities cooperate
fully, so that prosecution of those responsible for the
crimes denounced in the Marty report can begin.
Continued work on the question of disappeared
persons is also of great importance. The signing of a
cooperation agreement on the exchange of information
between Kosovo and Montenegro is a step in the
right direction. Relaunching the dynamic of the SerbKosovar joint Working Group on this topic, however,
is urgent. We hope that this work will benefit from
the recent appointment by Pristina of the head of its
delegation, which we welcome.
The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) also has an important
role to play in this area. I would be grateful to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General if
he could tell us about the measures planned for the
implementation of recommendations in this area by
the UNMIK International Human Rights Working
Group, in particular regarding the prosecution of those
responsible for violations and compensation for victims.
Consolidating the rule of law also means combating
radicalization in all of its forms. France welcomes the
unconditional commitment of Kosovo in this area both
at the local level and in the context of the international
coalition against Da’esh.
Finally, I take this opportunity to reiterate our
support for the European Union Rule of Law Mission,
which provides daily support for the rule of law and
security in Kosovo.
16-05416

29/02/2016

UNMIK

I should like to conclude by recalling once again, as
our colleague from the United Kingdom has just done,
our wish that the Council finally review its timetable
for consideration of this issue given the continued
progress on the ground, particularly concerning the
consolidation of Kosovar institutions and the bilateral
dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I, too, thank
Special Representative Tanin for his briefing, and we
also welcome First Deputy Prime Minister Dačić and
Ambassador Çitaku to this discussion.
The European Union-facilitated dialogue continues
to play an important role in normalizing relations
between Belgrade and Pristina. New Zealand is
pleased to see continued constructive engagement in
this dialogue by the leadership of Serbia and Kosovo,
including the recent high-level meeting in January.
Under the auspices of this dialogue, both sides have
made a number of commitments to each other, as we
have heard today. While many practical steps have
been taken to fulfil these agreements, important
work remains. This includes the ongoing process
of establishing an Association/Community of Serb
majority municipalities in Kosovo. We urge both sides
to engage constructively to deliver on the commitments
without delay.
While the overall security situation in Kosovo has
continued to be generally stable, we are concerned,
as others have noted, about the recent incidents of
politically motivated violence. There is no place for
this in a democracy. All parties should reject the use
of violence and intimidation to achieve political aims.
Disagreement can be resolved only through dialogue.
In this regard, it is most unfortunate that some
members of opposition parties are not setting a better
example through their own actions. The physical
disruption of the Kosovo Assembly, including the use of
tear gas, serves only to encourage those who wish to use
force to achieve political goals. Political leaders must
reject all acts that undermine the proper functioning of
democratic institutions. Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Tanin has given us some useful food
for thought today in his call to shift the focus away from
political battles and towards more fundamental issues.
We continue to follow the progress towards
establishing a special court to address serious allegations
arising from the work of the European Union Special
Investigative Task Force. In this regard, we welcome

S/PV.7637

the recent agreement by the Netherlands to host this
court. Like others, we hope that the court will be in a
position to commence its work as soon as possible.
While there are ongoing challenges, the security
situation in Kosovo is generally stable, as we have
said. Sadly, the same cannot be same for many of the
other pressing issues requiring the Council’s time and
attention. On this basis, we reiterate our view that the
Council should adopt a more flexible approach as to
how and when it considers this agenda item.
I should also like to take this opportunity, as I did
not this morning, to thank you, Mr. President, for your
stewardship of the Council this month, and we look
forward to working with Angolan colleagues, who will
be presiding over the Council in March.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow me to
begin by welcoming the holding of this meeting. I wish
also to thank the Special Representative, Mr. Tanin, for
the clarity of his briefing. I should also like to welcome
among us His Excellency Mr. Dačić, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
My delegation would like at the outset to welcome
the election on 26 February by the Kosovo Assembly
of Mr. Hashim Thaçi as President of the Republic of
Kosovo. My delegation takes the opportunity presented
by this important event to call on all political players in
Kosovo to follow the rules of democracy and respect the
choice that the Assembly has just made, in particular
by refraining from any acts of violence, which harm
individuals and public property.
I hardly need to stress the negative effects that
recent events such as the ones I have referred to,
especially violent demonstrations, could have on the
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade. Senegal
welcomes this dialogue, which is being held under the
auspices of the European Union. Senegal therefore
calls on both parties to continue talks at a very high
level, also under the auspices of the European Union.
At the same time, we wish to encourage countries and
partners with influence to continue to bring it to bear in
order to support the talks.
Furthermore, I am pleased to note the two
agreements signed in August 2015 by the Government
of Kosovo, one with Serbia, including the establishment
of an association of Serb municipalities; and one with
Montenegro, on territorial delineation between the

16-0541617/25

S/PV.7637

UNMIK

two countries. The agreement on a three-stage plan
between the Chambers of Commerce of Belgrade
and Pristina to harmonize veterinary certificates and
to overcome technical obstacles to cross-boundary
commerce also deserves our approval, as does the
signing by representatives of the Serbian Armed Forces
and the Kosovo Force of an agreement to fully relax
the air safety zone. We strongly encourage the parties
to continue along this path and to strengthen dialogue
in order to comprehensively manage border crossings.
These advances will not be in vain. We call on the
international community to support and encourage
them. The confirmation of Kosovo’s eligibility to
develop a Millennium Challenge Corporation compact
is good news; this should translate into the mobilization
of financing for development amounting to $60 million
to $100 million over a five-year period. We should
encourage the stakeholders to take further steps
towards peacebuilding and development, especially by
implementing the agreements of 25 August 2015 in the
north of Kosovo.
With regard to promoting the rule of law, my
delegation is pleased with the imminent start of the work
of the specialist court, a Kosovar institution, which will
have its headquarters in the Netherlands and will be
made up of international judges responsible for trying
serious crimes committed during, or immediately after,
the Kosovo conflict.

29/02/2016

and Cooperation in Europe, all of which are working
for peace and progress in Kosovo.
Mr. Klein (United States of America): I would like
to welcome Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Tanin back to the Council, even if only by
video. I would also like to welcome Foreign Minister
Dačić and Ambassador Çitaku back to the Council. The
United States commends both of their Governments
for their ongoing efforts to normalize relations through
the European Union-led dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade.
Since 1999, the United Nations has worked hand in
hand with the people of Kosovo to develop multi-ethnic
democratic institutions of Government. Kosovo has
established institutions that uphold the rule of law
and respect human rights. The people of Kosovo
have made important strides, and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
has fulfilled its mandate. We strongly believe that the
time is right to downsize the mission further, given the
acute needs for United Nations personnel elsewhere in
the world. We would welcome hearing from Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin at our
next briefing on progress towards such downsizing.

In the same vein, continued cooperation and
coordination efforts between parties is essential to
facilitate, with the support of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the return
of over 16,502 displaced people or, if not, seek lasting
solutions for them.

During this reporting period, we welcomed the
27 January meeting between the Prime Ministers of
Kosovo and Serbia in Brussels in the context of the
European Union-facilitated dialogue to normalize
relations between Pristina and Belgrade. We look to both
countries to continue their work and implement their
agreements, even as elections proceed in both Kosovo
and Serbia. As always, we commend and fully support
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy Mogherini for her personal
engagement in advancing the normalization efforts.

Senegal also supports without reservation the
joint European Union-United Nations programme
aimed at building confidence among communities
by protecting cultural heritage and recommends the
strengthening of synergies, especially the cooperation
to exchange information on resolving the situation of
disappeared persons.

Kosovo has also made important advances in
the rule of law, in particular the establishment of the
specialist court to address serious crimes alleged in the
Council of Europe’s 2011 Marty report. We encourage
the Governments of the Netherlands and Kosovo to
expedite the completion of all the necessary steps to
establish the specialist court as soon as possible.

In conclusion, we would like to pay tribute once
again to Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his wise leadership of
UNMIK. We would also like to recognize the efforts
of the Kosovo Force, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo and the Organization for Security

The political crisis in Kosovo, in particular the
continued violent obstruction of Kosovo’s Assembly, is
a real cause for concern. The use of violence and tear gas
inside the parliamentary chamber and on the streets of
Pristina is reckless and irresponsible. It is incompatible
with a modern democracy and it must end. Peaceful

18/25

16-05416

29/02/2016

UNMIK

protest is a fundamental right in every democracy,
but there is no room for violence. Kosovo’s turbulent
politics reflect the continued struggle that small nation
is in the midst of to improve its economic situation in
a transparent and fair marketplace, undergirded by the
equal application of the rule of law. Dialogue is integral
to overcoming the political impasses. We commend
the Kosovo police for their professionalism, during the
tumultuous days of large-scale protests, in handling the
minority who chose a violent path.
Let me take a moment to congratulate Kosovo on
the successful election of a new President in accordance
with Kosovo’s Constitution and laws. We praise outgoing
President Jahjaga for her courageous and successful
tenure as President of Kosovo. A tremendous advocate
for her country and its people, President Jahjaga ably
represented and advanced Kosovo’s interests at home
and on the world stage.
Kosovo continues to contribute to global efforts
to counter terrorism and the threat posed by foreign
terrorist fighters. Kosovo has taken strong steps
to deter violent extremism, develop effective
preventive mechanisms and reduce the flow of foreign
fighters from Kosovo to Syria and Iraq. We support
comprehensive efforts to address those problems,
such as Kosovo’s national strategy to counter violent
extremism and the law criminalizing foreign terrorist
fighters. International law enforcement cooperation,
especially against terrorism and organized crime, is
critical to regional security in the Balkans and beyond.
Kosovo’s efforts to cooperate with its neighbours and
the international law enforcement community should
be welcomed, not blocked. We believe Kosovo has the
technical capability and legislative framework in place
to fully contribute to the international community’s
law enforcement efforts. It serves no one’s interests,
other than those of the criminals and the terrorists, to
exclude Kosovo from our collective efforts to counter
those common threats.
In that vein, we look forward to a day — and we
hope it will be in the near future — when Kosovo will
participate in all United Nations activities as a full
Member, thereby contributing to development, peace
and security for all nations. In the meantime, the
Security Council’s time is better spent elsewhere. We
repeat our request that Council members agree to extend
the reporting period for the Secretary-General to report
on UNMIK from every three to every six months.

S/PV.7637

Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): My delegation welcomes
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia Ivica Dačić and
Ambassador Vlora Çitaku of Kosovo back to New York
and thanks them both for their statements. We are also
grateful to Special Representative Zahir Tanin for his
comprehensive briefing.
Listening to the statements today, I wish to call on
both sides to focus on the way forward. Priority should
be given to implementing outstanding commitments
in a spirit of dialogue, cooperation and constructive
engagement and in securing a promising future for
Kosovo. An end should be put to the negative politics of
division and exclusivity, which are counter-productive
and will not help to build confidence and trust between
the two sides. We appreciate the assurances given
by Belgrade and Pristina to remain committed to the
European Union-facilitated dialogue and we hope to
see an intensification of efforts towards implementing
existing agreements.
I share the concerns, as elaborated by Mr. Tanin
today and the Secretary-General in his latest report
(S/2016/99), about the violent protests by the opposition
and their supporters in Kosovo who are against the
August 2015 package of agreements between Belgrade
and Pristina and the territorial delineation agreement
with Montenegro. We call on the relevant parties to
refrain from adversarial politics in Kosovo, to cease
the use of violence and inflammatory rhetoric and to
resolve their differences through legitimate channels
via dialogue and engagement.
The Kosovo Parliament and the rule of law must
be respected. Resorting to violence and intimidation
will not bring the parties any closer to their political
aims. Instead, it may de-legitimize their struggle and
derail the democratic progress painstakingly built by
Kosovo over the years. The politics of division serve
only to hold the progress towards nation-building
and development ransom. Hence, we commend the
commitment and efforts made by Kosovo leaders to
engage in an inclusive dialogue to resolve the issues,
and we applaud the competence and restraint shown by
the Kosovo police in responding to the violent protests.
The people of Kosovo would benefit from more traction
in these areas.
Malaysia is pleased with the progress made by
Kosovo during the reporting period, including the
signing and subsequent ratification of the Stabilization

16-0541619/25

S/PV.7637

UNMIK

and Association Agreement with the European Union
(EU). We believe that this is a key step towards peace,
stability and prosperity for Kosovo and the region.
We call on the leaders of Kosovo to remain steadfast
in implementating the Stabilization and Association
Agreement and the socioeconomic reforms necessary
for regional integration.
We also take note of the developments in the
implementation of the 2014 Brussels Agreement,
including the integration of former Serbian civil
protection personnel in northern Kosovo into various
Kosovo institutions. We hope to see more progress
made in the implementation of that landmark
Agreement, including the integration of the judiciary
and the creation of an association of Serb-majority
municipalities in Kosovo. The advances made by
Kosovo relating to the establishment of the specialist
court is yet another step in the right direction. Malaysia
reiterates the need to ensure accountability and to
promote closure and reconciliation for the people of
Kosovo. In that regard, we commend the decision of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands to host the specialist court.
On the economic front, Malaysia applauds the
cooperation between the Belgrade and Pristina
Chambers of Commerce during the reporting period.
Such collaboration deserves our strong support,
as it could open the doors to further commercial
opportunities to the benefit both sides.
Malaysia is gravely concerned about the creeping
influence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
in the region. We commend the steps taken by the
authorities in Kosovo to combat terrorist threats and to
address the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.
We simply cannot afford to have terrorist groups
manipulating the religious, racial and cultural divide
in the region, and in Kosovo in particular, to serve
their twisted and violent agenda. We therefore wish
to see continued high priority accorded by the Kosovo
authorities to combating that global menace. In that
regard, Malaysia stands ready to support Kosovo in its
fight to combat radicalization and violent extremism.
In conclusion, I join other colleagues in reaffirming
support for the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, which continues to play a key role
in promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo. We also commend the leadership of the
Special Representative and the important roles played
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
20/25

29/02/2016

Europe, the Kosovo Force and the EU towards peace
and stability in Kosovo.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): Let me first express
my gratitude to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his
comprehensive and insightful briefing. I also welcome
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and Ambassador
Vlora Çitaku to the Security Council.
Immediately after the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) was
established in June 1999, I personally served the
Mission in Pristina. My office was next to that of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Bernard Kouchner — perhaps Mr. Tanin is now using
the same office in Pristina. It was a very difficult time,
and we were almost at a loss in the face of numerous
challenges. Moreover, at the time UNMIK did not
have a clear prospective on Kosovo’s future. The major
concerns were, first, whether democracy would be
restored in Kosovo and, second, whether reconciliation
among the Kosovar people could be achieved.
In October 2000, after many challenges had been
overcome, the first local election in Kosovo was
conducted with the assistance of the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. I was so encouraged to see people waiting over
half a day in the rain — due to the poor organization
of the election — to cast their votes. I was very much
struck by the strength of the Kosovo people’s aspiration
to democracy. They wore traditional clothing in
celebration of the democratic process.
Sixteen years have passed since then, and I am
glad that democracy has been taking root in Kosovo.
I congratulate Mr. Hashim Thaçi on being elected
President. However, the proceedings of the Kosovo
Assembly have recently been subject to a series of violent
disruptions by opposition parties. The fact that tear
gas was sprayed inside the Assembly chamber during
the presidential election is a cause of grave concern.
My delegation urges those responsible to refrain from
using violence. They should realize that any violence
runs counter to the Kosovar people’s determination
to achieve democracy. We have strong hopes that the
Assembly will be normalized expeditiously.
Reconciliation between the two major ethnic groups
in Kosovo is critical to its future as well as that of the
Western Balkans region. In that regard, I welcome the
16-05416

29/02/2016

UNMIK

continued dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade.
We welcome the most recent meeting between Prime
Ministers Isa Mustafa and Aleksandar Vučić. That
meeting, facilitated by the European Union, took place
on 7 February. When I served in Kosovo, there was no
such dialogue. At that time, it was almost impossible to
travel between Belgrade and Pristina by car. I hear that
people now cross the border freely.
I encourage both the Serbian and Kosovar authorities
to redouble their efforts to sort out their differences and
normalize their relations through continued dialogue.
I recall being on the bridge in Mitrovica crossing the
Ibar River on New Year’s Eve in 1999. UNMIK was
organizing the millennium ceremony on the bridge, and
representatives of the different ethnic groups — Kosovar
Albanians, Kosovar Serbs — were all together. In that
ceremony, everybody promised that they would walk
together for the future of Kosovo. I earnestly invite all
political leaders in Kosovo to remember that speech. I
have faith in the people of Kosovo, their readiness and
strong determination for democracy, and their belief in
a better future.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his
briefing. I also thank Mr. Ivica Dačić and Ms. Vlora
Çitaku for their statements.
Like my Japanese colleague, I have my own
memories of Pristina. I had the privilege to visit it 16
years ago as a member of a Security Council delegation.
Since then the Security Council and UNMIK have
continued to play an important role in supporting
Kosovo’s institutions to tackle the many challenges
that lie ahead. Ukraine strongly supports the work of
Mr. Tanin and UNMIK in promoting security, stability
and respect for human rights in Kosovo and in the
region, as well as in its constructive engagement with
Pristina and Belgrade. We also commend the UNMIK
partners on the ground, including the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Kosovo Force
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission and the
European Union for their cooperation and continuing
contributions to peace and progress in Kosovo.
Ukraine takes note of the latest report (S/2016/99) of
the Secretary-General on UNMIK, submitted pursuant
to resolution 1244 (1999). We agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s analysis and observations on the situation in

S/PV.7637

Kosovo and urge all related parties to take measures
to stabilize the situation and reach the necessary
consensus on the implementation of previously reached
agreements. I would like to focus on four main points
that we consider important for further stabilization.
First, Ukraine welcomes the continuation of the
negotiation process between Belgrade and Pristina
and the achieved agreements under the auspices of the
European Union last year. We welcome the signing
and ratification of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement between the European Union and Kosovo
and support its European integration. At the same
time, we are deeply concerned about the latest acts
of violence by Kosovo opposition parties. Those
actions have a negative impact not only on the security
situation in Kosovo, but also on the whole process of
implementation of the package of the Belgrade-Pristina
agreements. Such actions are unacceptable, and we call
on all political actors in Kosovo to abstain from all forms
of violence. We reiterate the calls for respect for the rule
of law, democratic procedures and international norms.
Secondly, Ukraine welcomes the agreement on
the establishment of the association of Serb majority
municipalities in Kosovo and supports the commitment
by the Kosovo institutions to continue this process.
This agreement is an important mechanism for further
stabilization; delaying its implementation would be a
step in the wrong direction and would erode the mutual
trust that is necessary in any dialogue process.
Thirdly, Ukraine commends the establishment of
the specialist court and the agreement of the Government
of the Netherlands announced on 15 January to host
that institution in The Hague.
Fourthly, we fully share the view of the SecretaryGeneral that it is important to continue the progress
made in the integration into Kosovo of institutions
of former Serbian civil protection personnel. We also
commend the initiatives by business leaders within the
Chamber of Commerce in both Belgrad and Pristina
to put aside political problems and to build new
cooperation within the business community.
Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would first like to express my appreciation
for briefing of the Special Representative, Ambassador
Tanin, on the text of the most report (S/2016/99) of the
Secretary-General. I also like welcome the presence of
the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and of Ms. Vlora Çitaku.

16-0541621/25

S/PV.7637

UNMIK

Ambassador Tanin has provided us with an
interesting analysis of the current situation in the
territory of Kosovo. It is interesting and at the same time
worrisome. From what he described, and given the text of
the report of the Secretary-General that we have before
us, it seems that the situation in Kosovo continues to be
unstable. A peaceful development of political activity
that is in keeping with the law is increasingly replaced
by violent demonstrations and aggressive actions, even
within the Parliament, that are entirely unacceptable.
Spain notes with great concern that the climate of
political tension that the Secretary-General highlighted
in his report (S/2015/833) in October has not improved.
To the contrary, it is becoming a recurrent standard in
the political life of Pristina. Spain is also worried by
the recurrent use of incendiary rhetoric, which is once
again reflected in the report of the Secretary-General.
This is clear evidence that we are far from being able
to speak of true and lasting reconciliation between the
various communities that share the territory of Kosovo.
Everything that I have just said once again
demonstrates the fact that the presence of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), and possibly of other international missions
in Kosovo, continues to be essential. This also clearly
underscores that the Security Council must remain
attentive to this topic, working on it regularly and
assiduously, as we have in the past.
As is well known, Spain strongly supports the
high-level dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
facilitated by the European Union. We take note of the
most recent meeting held in that context on 27 January.
We view that as a step in the right direction, following
the total absence of high-level meetings during the
three-month reporting period covered by the report of
the Secretary-General. However, we regret that at that
last meeting there was no significant progress made or
progress on new agreements or, which perhaps is worse
and more worrisome, progress on the implementation
of the agreements already reached. The Brussels
dialogue must continue to have a central and priority
nature. Abandonment of this key aspect, which appears
to be reflected in the report of the Secretary-General,
runs the risk of progressive deterioration of trust, and
that inevitably would have negative repercussions on
the European perspective regarding the many efforts
the European Union is making at this time. It is not
realistic to consider making new demands without
22/25

29/02/2016

showing beforehand the readiness to implement what
has already been agreed to.
In that context, we would like once again to call
attention to the need to implement, without delay, the
agreement reached on the association/community of
Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo. That agrement
was reached in good faith, and it should be followed
up by the efforts of all to make it a reality, including
active and committed work for its implementation with
the various political and social actors, as well as at the
legislative level.
Finally, I would like to comment on something
mentioned in paragraph 3 of the report of the
Secretary-General — a comment on the Stabilization
and Association Agreement with the European Union.
As is known, the content of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement of Kosovo affects only the
exclusive competencies of the European Union, which
preserves the position of those member States of the
European Union that do not recognize the validity
of the unilateral declaration of independence. For
Spain and the other countries that do not recognize
it, the Agreement is an end in itself. It incorporates
the territory of Kosovo into the stabilization and
association process, but it does not establish precedents
nor does it imply the inclusion of this territory in the
process of the expansion of the European Union. This
is in keeping with the constructive position of Spain,
which we have repeatedly expressed in the Council.
It is a constructive position, without detriment, that
respects positions of principle. Along those lines, and
as long as that position is respected, we are more than
ready to support measures that could benefit the entire
population of the territory of Kosovo.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
We express our appreciation for the briefing of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin. We also
welcome the participation in this meeting of the First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
Venezuela wishes to reiterate its full support for
international law represented in the peaceful settlement
of disputes, non-intervention and respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
16-05416

29/02/2016

UNMIK

independence of Serbia. In that regard, we believe that
resolution 1244 (1999) continues to be the applicable
international legal basis to reach a general solution in
the framework of a political negotiation on the issue
of Kosovo. We recognize that the United Nations has
been playing a key role in Kosovo, especially through
UNMIK, through the promotion of security, stability
and respect for human rights. That work has been
complemented by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX).
UNMIK, KFOR and EULEX, based on their
respective mandates, must continue to play a
proactive, balanced, neutral and complementary role
in direct dialogue with a view to promoting a lasting,
sustainable, fair and mutually acceptable solution to
the issue of Kosovo. That is especially so at present,
since the last time that the Council met to study this
issue (see S/PV.7563), the opposition has continued its
activities and made it impossible to continue discussing
important aspects of the implementation of the First
Agreement on Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013. That fills us with concern.
For Venezuela, dialogue among the various Kosovar
political sectors is a necessity to prevent continued
acts of violence, which may affect efforts to fulfil the
2013 agreements.
Venezuela supports dialogue in Brussels between
Serbia and the local authorities of the province
of Kosovo in order to reach a mutually agreeable
solution between the parties. We deplore the fact
that high-level meetings have not been held recently.
However, progress in certain technical areas, such
as telecommunications and relations between the
Chambers of Commerce, are positive. We suggest that
the parties continue conversations and their efforts,
aimed at rapprochement. We believe that is essential
for the parties to continue their work to establish the
association of Serb-majority municipalities in northern
Kosovo. We call on the authorities of that province to
pursue that process over the short term, as agreed at the
highest level in Brussels.
As on previous occasions, we are once again struck
by the what the report refers to as the low number of
voluntary returns of Serbs who had been displaced from
their homes in Kosovo. We believe that, in follow up to
the Brussels Agreement of 2013, no effort should be
spared at the State and local levels to ensure security,
religious tolerance, property and economic rights and
the freedom of movement of Kosovo Serbs. Only in that

S/PV.7637

way will real national reconciliation be obtained on the
basis of the promotion and respect for human rights
and the full application of international standards in
this area to prevent discrimination against displaced
persons and minorities.
With regard to cultural and religious heritage,
we stress the need for the parties to work together to
effectively protect the important heritage of the various
Kosovar communities. We also call on the parties to
step up their joint work to clarify the situation of those
who disappeared during the war, and we commend
the efforts that have been made going forward in that
area. Moreover, we welcome the work carried out by
UN-Women with survivors of acts of sexual violence
committed during the war and the awareness campaigns
on gender violence.
With regard to the fight against impunity, we
welcome the offer of the Government of the Netherlands
to host the specialist court to investigate accusations
of war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
during the armed conflict in Kosovo. We will call
on all the parties concerned to continue their work
so that the court can begin its work as soon possible.
The enforcement of justice in respect to those cases,
within the framework of due process, will facilitate
reconciliation and peace between all parties.
We recognize the efforts of the authorities of the
province of Kosovo to continue implementing measures
to combat the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters
with a view to preventing the recruitment of the
citizens of the province by terrorist organizations.
The fight against terrorism must be bolstered by
effective strategies directed against social exclusion,
poverty, violence and intolerant ideologies in order
to prevent radicalization, especially among young
people. Furthermore, work must be done to effectively
implement the Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions prohibiting the funding, training and
transferring of weapons to those groups.
To conclude, once again we encourage the parties
to redouble their efforts in the search for a peaceful,
fair and lasting political solution within the framework
of international law, including full compliance with
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Brussels Agreement
of 2013.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

16-0541623/25

S/PV.7637

UNMIK

Mr. Dačić has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation
provided by the delegation): I wish to react to statement
made by the representative of the provisional institutions
of Kosovo and Metohija.
Before every Security Council meeting, the
representatives of the European Union, the United
Kingdom and the United States give us suggestions
on how to act in the spirit of reconciliation so as to
comport ourselves more calmly. Do they offer the same
recommendations to the representatives of Pristina that
they give to us? Do they expect us to sit here and listen
to the most ferocious accusations directed against us
and events of the 1950s and 1960s, when the former
Yugoslavia and Tito were paragons of democracy
compared to Enver Hoxha. We could go back even
further in time to the fourteenth century. We are not
competing for an Oscar for our performance in the
Security Council.
I should therefore like to point out to the
representative of Kosovo that no matter how many
often we extend our hand, there is no one on the other
side to accept that gesture of reconciliation. There has
been no mention of the topic before us today — the
current situation in Kosovo. What does Serbia have
to do with Kosovo’s problems in Pristina? What does
Serbia have to do with Kosovo’s inability to hold a
session of Parliament without having to resort to tear
gas? I have to say that the representatives of Serbia are
the most active in Kosovo’s Parliament. Serbia has no
role and does not participate in Kosovo’s political life.
The representative of Kosovo cannot lecture us
with regard to witnesses. She knows what happened
in the Haradinaj case — all participants were either
killed or are inactive. Whoever perpetrated the crime
should be brought to justice. When we listen to the
representative of Kosovo, we might conclude that there
were no Serbs living in Kosovo and that only police
and military officers are present there. However, she
knows only too well that the Serbs were once a majority
in Kosovo. Those are historical facts. She knows how
many religious and cultural sites remain in Kosovo. I
would ask her not to say that 200,000 Serbs are forbidden
to return to Kosovo when she has no right to say so.
Kosovo is not hers, and Kosovo is not mine. Kosovo
is not Albanian, nor does it belong to Serbia. Kosovo
is in the hands of the people who live there — Serbs
24/25

29/02/2016

and Albanians — and depends on their votes. One
cannot conclude an agreement and then say “we need
to consult our constitutional court”; if so, then we can
consult our own court in Belgrade. A criminal charge
was brought against me for that.
When Ms. Çitaku speaks about national minorities
in Serbia, she cannot say that there are Albanian or
Kosovar national minorities in Serbia. She cannot have
the Albanian national minority on her behalf as well as
on behalf of Albanians living in Albania.
Ms. Çitaku spoke of the right to self-determination,
which she has already used: there is a State where
Albanians live, and it is called Albania. She does not
have that right, because she was a national minority in
the former Yugoslavia and in Serbia and, without any
agreement from the country from which she seceded,
they unilaterally declared independence. I must
warn that happened to us could tomorrow happen to
any country. Please do not say that principles do not
count. That is why we do not recognize the unilateral
declaration of independence. If Kosovo were sovereign
and independent, she would not be sitting here under
this format as “Ms. Vlora Çitaku”, but would be “the
representative of the Republic of Kosovo”. If Kosovo
were independent, it would sign an association and
stabilization agreement with the European Union as a
country, not as a territory.
I did not want to raise this issue, instead I wanted
to talk about what we have been able to achieve thus far
and to look towards the future. However, Ms. Çitaku
has chosen not to do that and uses each and every
opportunity and meeting of the Security Council to call
on others to recognize the independence of Kosovo. I
should therefore like to take this opportunity to thank all
the countries that have not recognize the independence
of Kosovo — not because they did so as a favour to
Serbia, but because that is in line with international
law. I cannot wait to see the day when another country
faces this problem. I have said that it is easy to speak of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of other States.
But this is not something on which this organ should be
founded and based upon.
I would therefore ask the representatives of the
European Union, the United Kingdom and the United
States, when speaking to us in these meetings, to take
into consideration one fact: Serbia cannot be a punching
bag for the representatives of Kosovo’s institutions. If
they think that we are afraid of these meetings, they
16-05416

29/02/2016

S/PV.7637

UNMIK

should know that our strength is not our weakness.
Participating in this dialogue is something we are
determined to continue to do.
I have had to intervene to react to the statements
of Ms. Çitaku, for they were not conducive to
reconciliation; in fact, they were a step backwards.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Ms. Çitaku has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give her the floor.
Ms. Çitaku: I apologize for taking up more of the
Council’s time. We have said several times today that
the world has much more pressing issues to discuss.
Nevertheless, I must reiterate several things.
The time when Kosovo sought permission and
cleared its speeches with Belgrade is over. We are not
afraid to tell our story. We are not afraid to deal with
our own past. There was a terrible war, and in war
terrible things happen. But one should never try to put
a question mark between State-sponsored crime and
individual actions. There is a difference. Again, we are
ready to deal with our past. We hope that Serbia will
soon be able to deal with its past.
When it comes to international law, again, I must
reiterate that the International Court of Justice, as the
highest and most professional body, issued an opinion
about Kosovo’s declaration of independence and its
legality. The opinion was clear and unambiguous:
Kosovo was within its rights when it declared its
independence and we are sui generis and unlike any
other ongoing or future dispute.
I was in fact happy to hear my colleague from
Belgrade refer to our agreement as an international
agreement. But we were not the only ones to request
an opinion from the constitutional court. Serbia did the

same some months ago with the agreement on diplomas.
I want to reassure the Council that we will implement
every agreement that we reached in Brussels — every
single one — but not at the cost of the functionality of
our State. That is what the ruling of the constitutional
court suggested.
I also want to say that we are for reconciliation. But
reconciliation cannot be built on denial. Reconciliation
can be built only if we can stand tall and look at the
past without fearing it — although for some that might
be quite shameful.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before we
adjourn, given that this is the last scheduled meeting of
the Council for this month, I would like to express the
sincere appreciation of the delegation of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to the members of the Security
Council, especially my colleagues the permanent
representatives and their respective colleagues, as
well as to the Council’s secretariat, for all the support
afforded to us. This has undoubtedly been a month of
great activity, during which we reached consensus on
several important issues before us. We would not have
been able to face everything we managed to address
alone or without the hard work, support and positive
contributions of every delegation and the staff of the
Secretariat, including conference servicing personnel.
Nor would the success achieved have been possible
without the professionalism of our team, for which I
thank them. Any failure is strictly my own.
As we conclude our presidency, I know I speak on
behalf of the entire Council in wishing good luck to the
delegation of Angola in the month of March. They have
our full support.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

16-0541625/25
