UNITED NATIONS

I/ ,_(,
,‘,“:,,‘,I:<.-;

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1966

th

MEETING: 1 NOVEMBER 1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l966) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . , , , . , ,

1

Adoption of the agenda , . , . , . . . , . . . . . . , , , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 20 October 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12218) . . , . . . , , . . . . , . , . , . . . , . . , . . , , , . . . . , . . , . . . . . . , , . . . . , . . . . . . .

1 : ,‘:.

S/PV. 1966

_I

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplcme~lt,s of the Official Racotds of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolt~tiom NM/
Decisions of’ the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1966th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
President:

Mr. ,Jorge Enrique ILLUECA

(Panama).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l966)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 20 October 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12218)

Expressionof thanks to the retiring President

1I The PRESIDENT
(interpretrrtim
from
SjwrrBefore the Council begins the work before it
today, I wish to pay tribute of appreciation
and
gratitude to Mr. Iqbal A. Akhund, representative of
Pakistan, who presided over our work during October
with ‘his habitual skill. During his presidency,
Mr. Akhund maintained a rhythm in the Security
Council’s work comparable to that achieved by all
his predecessors this year. Thanks to his diplomatic
skill and thorough knowledge of United Nations procedures and usage, we can safely say that he carried
out extremely constructive work. Among his many
accomplishments, Mr. Akhund can count a knowledge
of Spanish, and therefore I can tell him that he acted
with great sciio&~-as to the manner born-in every
sense of the expression. I believe that I am speaking
on behalf of all members of the Council in paying this
tribute to Mr. Akhund, and I trust that he will accept
these expressions of appreciation and gratitude.
ish):

1 November

1976, at 3 p.m.

2. The PRESIDENT
(irtterpretatiort
Jkm
Spanish):
The representatives
of Egypt, Israel and Jordan
have addressed letters to the President of the Security
Council in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item which has just been
included in the Council’s agenda, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter. In accordance,
therefore, with the usual practice and with the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Council, and if
there is no objection, I propose that we invite the
representatives I have just mentioned to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote.
3. The Security Council has before it a letter dated
20 October 1976 [S//2220] from the representative of
Egypt requesting that the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) be permitted to participate in the debate,
This proposal is not made pursuant to rule 37 or
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council, but if approved, the invitation to participate in
the debate would confer on the PLO the same rights
of participation.as
those conferred on Member States
when invited to participate pursuant to rule 37. Does
any member of the Security Council wish to speak
on this proposal?
4. Mr. BENNETT
{United
States of ‘America):
Mr. President, I might say at the outset that we look
forward to the month under your leadership and we
appreciate the diligence with which the representative
of Pakistan conducted the Council’s affairs during
the preceding month.
5. The United States delegation is not able to agree
to your proposal, Mr. President, to invite representatives of the PLO to take part in the debate of the
Security Council with the same rights of participation
as a Member State would have under rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure. We realize that the
Council has adopted this procedure on four occasions
this’ year, but we continue to believe that it is not
consistent with the rules of procedure.

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 20 October 1976 from the Permanent
representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressedto the President of the Security Council
(S/12218)

6. The United States would not object to the Council’s granting the PLO a hearing under rule 39; that
would, in our view, be the correct procedure and is the
procedure that has been used for over 30 years on
similar occasions.
7. For these reasons the United States requests that
the proposal be put to the vote.

8. The PRESIDENT (interpretation j?om Spcrnish):
If no other member of the Council wishes to speak
at this stage, I shall take it that the Council is ready
to vote.

“The Swedish Government holds that a settlement [of the Middle East question] must be based
on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). Israel and all other States in the area
have the right to national existence and integrity
within secure and recognized boundaries. The
principle of the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of
territory by force must be respected. Moreover,
it must be firmly established that the legitimate
national interests of the Palestinian Arabs must be
satisfied. This includes their right to create their
own State in peaceful coexistence with Israel.
Above all, it is essential that contacts be established
without delay for the purpose of achieving an agreed
settlement.“*

111fir~lorrr: Benin, China, Guyana, Japan, Libyan
Arab Re.public, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Republic
of Tanzania
A,qrriust: United States of America
Ahstc~ntions: France, Italy, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.

From that statement it follows that the interests of
the Palestinian Arabs must not be satisfied in such a
way as to infringe upon the existence and territorial
integrity of Israel or on its right to secure and recognized boundaries.

9. The PRESIDENT (interpwtcltim
ficm Spclnish):
I shall now call on representatives who wish to explain
their vote.

15. My delegation also wants to make it clear that
the Swedish Government condemns terrorist acts
wherever they take place. My delegation further
wants to point out that Sweden firmly objects to
all attempts to equate Zionism with racism and
colonialism.

IO. Mr. RYDBECK (Sweden): Mr. President, first
of all, I want to tell you how pleased we are to see
you in the Chair, that my delegation will give you its
full co-operation and support in carrying out your very
difficult task and that we are looking forward to this
month under your presidency.

16. Finally, we should like to stress also that a decision by the Council to let one party to a conflict
which is not a State participate in the Council’s
debates implies an expectation that that party accepts
the same responsibilities as a member State, that is,
to respect the sovereignty and integrity of member
States and to refrain from the threat or use of force
in international relations.

I I. I should also like, on behalf of my delegation,
to express our warm appreciation to Mr. Akhund,
last month’s President, for the way in which he
conducted our deliberations, in both open session
and consultations. I have noticed, as our membership
of the Council draws to an end, that every month the
problems and difficulties increase and every month the
demands on the President increase. We are extremely
happy to express our appreciation of the way in which
Mr. Akhund conducted very delicate and very difficult
negotiations during the past month.

17. The Swedish delegation finds it appropriate to
make these observations in view of certain passages
in the programmes and declarations made by the PLO
in the past.

12. As my delegation stated in the Security Council
on I4 January of this year [1872trd tueetittg], the
Swedish Government is of the opinion that a recognition of the legitimate national interests of the
Palestinian Arabs, including their right to create their
own State, also means a recognition of their right to
put forward their views in international debates where
their interests are involved. This debate gives such an
opportunity.

18. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (inrerprctcrtiotr fionr Rtasicrn): First of alI,
I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the important post of President of
the Security Council and to wish you success in the
performance of your responsible tasks. I should like
to take this opportunity to express my gratitude tb
your predecessor, Mr. Akhund, representative of.
Pakistan, for the skill and tact with which he conducted
the proceedings of the Council last month.

13. Sweden sees the PLO as the most authoritative
representative of the Palestinian Arabs, and the
Swedish delegation has therefore voied for the
proposal to let that organization present its views
before the Coun.cil.

19. The vote that the Council had to take today, on
the insistence of the representative of the United
States, on the question of inviting the representative of
the PLO is really without any sense, either practically
or politically.

14. The Swedish delegation wishes to stress what our
Foreign Minister, Mrs. Slider, said in the general
debate in the General Assembly some time ago:

20. From the practical standpoint, the United Nations
has recognized the PLO as the representative of the
2

Arab. People of Palestine. The Security Council has
already on four occasions invited representatives of
the PLO to speak at its meetings. Therefore, this
vote was meaningless in a practical sense,

to quote a few paragmphs of it because they have a
great bearing on our deliberations
today. The
President’s statement said:
“@dVe
anxiety was expressed over the present
situation in the occupied Arab territories; concern
was also expressed about the well-being of the
population of those territories.

21. From the political standpoint, the stubbornness
and persistence with which the United States insisted
on a vote on this matter was negative persistence.
It is well known that a Middle East settlement is
impossible without the Arab people of Palestine,
which is one of the principal parties to such a settlement. The sooner the United States understands this
truth the better it will be.

“The Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949,2 is applicable to the Arab territories occupied
by Israel since
1967. The occupying Power was
therefore called upon to comply strictly with the
provisions of that Convention and to refrain from
and rescind any measure which would violate them.
In this regard, the measures taken by Israel in
the occupied Arab territories which alter their
demographic composition orgeographical character,
and in particular the establishment of settlements,
were deplored. Such measures, which cannot
prejudge the outcome of the efforts to achieve
peace, constitute an obstacle to peace,” [/922nd
mwtilzg, para. 2.1

22. The PRESIDENT
(intoprettrtion.fi.om ,Sptlni,sh):
In accordance with the decisions just adopted by the
Council and pursuant to previous practice, I shall now
invite the representatives of Israel and the PLO to take
seats at the Council table, and the other representatives who wish to participate in the debate to take
the seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, on the usual understanding that they will
be invited to take a place at the Council table whenever
they wish to address the Council.

27. The Council also decided on 26 May that it should
continue to follow the situation closely. In accordance
with that decision, Egypt has called for this meeting
of the Council to discuss the explosive situation in
the occupied Arab territories resulting from the continuing acts of repression perpetrated by the Israeli
authorities against the inhabitants of those territories,
23. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntionfi’0172 Spmish):
This meeting of the Council was convened in response
to a request made to the President of the Council
in a letter dated 20 October 1976 by the representative of Egypt. The Security Council will now begin
consideration of the item on its agenda.

28. What has happened since the Council meetings
last May and the statement of its President? Has
Israel applied the provisions of the Geneva Convention? The answer is no. Has Israel refrained from and
rescinded any measure that would violate them? The
answer is no. Has Israel heeded the opinion of the
majority of the Council’s members that deplored the
measures taken by Israel in the occupied Arab territories that alter their demographic composition or
geographical nature and in particular the establishment
of settlements? The answer is no. Has Israel heeded
the verdict of the majority that such measures cannot
prejudge the outcome of the efforts to achieve peace
and that they constitute an obstacle to peace? Emphatically no. Instead the Israeli Government continues to work methodically and persistently against all
the points referred to in this statement-more
violations of the Geneva Convention, more settlements in
the occupied territories, more arrests and deportations
of innocent people, confiscation of land, demolition
of houses and so forth. The record goes on and on.

24. I invite the representative of Egypt to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
2.5. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Mr. President,
I should like first of all to convey to you, the representative of Panama, the warmest congratulations of my
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We are sure that with
your competence and wise leadership you will bring to
a successful conclusion the deliberations of the Council. I should like also to express our warm appreciation
and sincere thanks to Mr. Akhund of Pakistan.
26. Only a few months have passed since the Council
met in May 1976 at the request of Egypt [s/r2o6@
to discuss the deteriorating situation in the occupied
Arab territories which was a result of the expansionist,
aggressive and barbaric measures taken by the Israeli
occupying forces against the inhabitants of those
territories. The majority of the Council’s members
were very clear in deploring those Israeli measures. On
26 May, the President of the Council read out a
statement on behalf of that majority, and I should like

29, Before the May meetings, the Council also held
several meetings in March 1976 to discuss the same
Israeli practices and measures. All the members of the
Council except one agreed on a draft resolution
noting this persistent Israeli policy aimed at changing
the physical, cultural, demographic and religious
character of the occupied territories and calling upon
3

transactions for the acquisition of land involving the
Israeli authorities, institutions or nationals on the
one hand, and the inhabitants or institutions of the
occupied territories on the other;

Israel to desist from the expropriation of or encroachment upon Arab lands and property and the establishment of Israeli settlements. In that draft resolution 14
of the members of the Council agreed also to keep
the situation under constant attention with a view to
meeting again should circumstances so require.

“(e) The evacuation, deportation,
expulsion,
displacement and transfer of Arab inhabitants of
the occupied territories, and the denial of their right
to return;

30. The Council itself has on several occasions
demonstrated its interest and anxiety regarding the
situation in the Middle East and has many times
condemned Israeli attacks against its neighbours.

“(f, Mass arrests, administrative
treatment of the Arab population;

31. The Council also, in its resolution 298 (1971),
deplored the failure of Israel to respect the previous
resolutions adopted by the United Nations concerning
measures and actions by Israel purporting to affect
the status of the City of Jerusalem and confirmed

“or) The pillaging of archaeological
property;

“(i) The illegal exploitation of the natural wealth,
resources and population of the occupied territories.“’
34. One can only say that to this very day the
practice of these policies by the Israeli authorities
continues unabated. The Israeli representative may
deny all or some of these policies but the best answer
to that is contained in the same General Assembly
resolution when, in paragraph 2, it deplores the continued refusal of Israel to allow the Special Committee
of the United Nations to have access to the occupied
territories and to report to the Assembly on its findings.
This is of course consistent with the Israeli policy of
trying to hide its crimes in these areas.

32. The Council deplored Israeli policy in occupied
Jerusalem not only in that resolution but also on a
previous occasion in its resolution 271 (1969), concerning the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque, when it condemned
Israel’s failure to comply with previous Council resolutions and called upon Israel to implement forthwith
the provisions of those resolutions.
33. I could go on and on referring to Security Council resolutions and the innumerable
resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly and the Commission
on Human Rights condemning and censuring Israeli
actions in the occupied Arab territories. What I want
to make clear is that Israel, persistently and as a
matter of policy, disregards, and shows its contempt
for, the Organization to which it owes its very
existence. Can anybody now have the slightest doubt
as to its persistent policy of disregard and contempt?
I hardly think so, even among Israel’s best friends, if
it still has any friends. Suffice it to mention here some
of the Israeli policies and practices which the General
Assembly condemned in its resolution 3.525 A (XXX),
of 15 December 1975. The Assembly referred specifically to the following Israeli practices:

35. Allow me to dwell in some detail on different
aspects of the aggressive Israeli policy in the occupied
territories and the latest developments in these territories which prompted Egypt to ask for the convening
of this meeting. These different aspects can be
summarized as follows, There are four: the first is its
total disregard of human rights and the Geneva Conventions; the second is the establishment of Israeli
settlements on Arab lands; the third is the illegal
exploitation and plundering of the natural resources
of the occupied territories; and the fourth is the
incitement to and condoning of religious hatred against
the Christian and Moslem inhabitants.
36. I should like to give some details regarding these
different aspects. The first aspect of this policy, the
total disregard of human rights and the Geneva Conventions, is an integral part of Israeli behaviour; it is
continuous and persistent. The Security Council
itself has for several years been preoccupied by this
particular aspect and as long ago as June 1967 made
its anxiety clear. In its unanimously adopted resolution 237 (1967), the Council called upon the Government of Israel “to ensure the safety, welfare and
security of the inhabitants of the areas where military
operations have taken place and to facilitate the
return of those inhabitants who have fled the areas

“((I) The annexation of parts of the occupied
territories;
“(h) The establishment of Israeli settlements
therein and the transfer of an alien population
thereto;
and demolition

and cultural

“(12) The interference with religious freedoms and
practices, as well as family rights and customs;

“in the clearest possible terms that all legislative
and administrative actions taken by Israel to change
the status of the City of Jerusalem, including
expropriation of land and properties, transfer of
populations and legislation aimed at the incorporation of the occupied section, are totally invalid and
cannot change that status.”

“(c) The destruction

detention and ill-

of Arab

houses;

“(I/) The confiscation and expropriation of Arab
property in the occupied territories and all other
4

since the outbreak of hostilities.”
Needless to say,
Israel did not live up to this obligation. It is a fact
that the record of Israel in violating basic human rights
is very well known, but this record has reached its
zenith in recent years.

village of Masha, a site sought for settlements by
Gush Emunim members. The plan was presented
to the Prime Minister and to members of the
Ministerial Committee for Settlement Affairs.”
42. This dangerous Israeli policy of expansion, which
was rightly described by The Wnshirzgtorl Post of
17 May as a time bomb, is not a new one. In fact,
immediately
after the 1967 aggression the Israeli
authorities started their plan of sprinkling the occupied
territories with Israeli settlements. Mrs. Meir, the
former Israeli Prime Minister, stated in October 1971
that “Our borders are fixed by the people who live
along them. If we retreat, the borders will retreat
with us”.

37. The Geneva Conventions, which represent a landmark in mankind’s slow progress towards harmonization of relations between nations, have not only
been ignored by Israel but, worse still, have been used
as a protective shield in the name of national security
and sovereignty. This was reflected in the report,
circulated on 5 October 1971, of the Special Committee
to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories,
when it stated that:

43. But, curiously, this outright policy of landgrabbing which could hardly be disguised or misinterpreted in the light of the previous history of Zionist
colonization in Palestine, excited little comment at the
time or during the six years that were to intervene
before the October 1973 war. There were those who
raised their voices-like
Bertrand Russell, who
protested before his death in 1970 against the dispossession of the innocent people of Palestine and asked,
“How much longer is the world willing to allow this
spectacle of wanton cruelty?“. And Professor Arnold
Toynbee observed that there was no reason why the
Arabs’ cause should be ignored or why the Israelis’
conduct should be condoned.

“The evidence that the Special Committee has
received reflects a policy on the part of the Government of Israel designed to effect radical changes in
the physical character and demographic composition of several areas of the territory under occupation by the progressive and systematic elimination
of every vestige of Palestinian presence in these
areas.“3
38. Article 27 of the fourth Geneva Convention2
states that protected persons are entitled in all circumstances to respect for their persons, their honour,
their family rights, their religious convictions and
practices and their manners and customs, and that they
shall at all times be humanely treated and shall be
protected especially against all acts of violence or
threats thereof and against insults and public curiosity.

44. For a while the Israelis cloaked their activities in
a degree of careful obscurity, but now they do not even
pretend to conceal their aims in establishing these
Israeli settlements and expelling a large part of the
inhabitants of the occupied territories. The latest
statement on the Israeli Government Television is
proof added to other statements by Israeli politicians.

39. I am afraid that the scores arrested in the last
few weeks in Gaza and the West Bank are going to
face the same grim fate as was suffered by the other
thousands of persons arrested by Israel since 1967,
unless, of course, the codscience of the world
expresses its abhorrence‘of such inhuman treatment
and forces the Israeli authorities to stop such practices.

45. One of the new settlements the Israeli Government has decided to establish in Sinai will be reserved,
as 7%~ .IPI’II.Y&III
Post recently reported, for immigrants from South Africa, and the Jewish Agency
immigration
emissaries in South Africa are prepared
now to register persons interested in settling there.
As if the Israeli authorities are not content with theil
racist doctrines and policies, they want also to import
into the occupied territories, in Sinai, the doctrines of
the racist rCgime of South Africa. But one should not
wonder about these close relations between the two
Itgimes. It is sufficient to mention that Mr. Vorster
chose, when he was invited to Israel to declare the
alliance of the Pretoria-Tel Aviv axis, to visit Sinai to
express his admiration for the developing ties between
the two regimes.

40. The second aspect of the Israeli policy in the
occupied territories is the expropriation of Arab lands
in those territories and the establishment
of Israeli
settlements on them.
41. Allow me in this connexion to refer here to the
very revealing report by the Israeli Government
Television on 19 October 1976-that is, around two
weeks ago. The report says:
“Released for publication today were the main
points of the settlement plan for the next five years
prepared by the Zionist Organization’s
Settlement
Division in anticipation of the Zionist World Congress. The plan includes the establishment
of
55 settlements, half of them beyond the Green Line.
The plan proposes, among other things, to establish
three new settlements on the slopes of Samaria,
among them a Jewish settlement near the Arab

46. I have informed the Council before about the
Israeli policy of settlements in Sinai, and especially
its plan to establish a big town ‘deep inside the Egyptian
territory near El-Arish, comprising a deep water port
and an industrial complex. In spite of the warnings by
the United Nations, by many international organiza5

tions, and even by some of its friends who consider
such a policy an obstacle in the path of peace, Israel
is still continuing this expansionist policy. This town
that Israel is erecting inside Sinai is going from the
planning stage to the construction stage. The Jewish
Week magazine reported on 17 October:

ments. Among them is Mr. Yeshiyahu Leibovitz, who
wrote in the October 1976 issue of the Israeli periodical
NeM) Outlook that continued occupation of the territories occupied in 1967 was turning Israel into a
colonial ruler, intolerable in the twentieth century,
and corrupting Israeli society from inside.

“Of the 350 apartments to be built in accordance
with the first phase of the construction programme,
185 have been finished and await further occupants.
Planning and financing the Yamit”-that
is the name
of the town-“project
is the Ministry of Housing,
working in co-operation with the Jewish National
Fund, which is preparing the initial infrastructure
for the town.”

50. He says the existing situation is one of the selfdestruction of the Jewish people in the State of Israel
and of relations with the Arabs based on perpetual
terror. Then he advises his Government to withdraw
-the sooner the better-to rectify these developments
and to make peace possible. How ironic it is, when
we compare this wise advice with the arrogant statements of Israeli leaders.

The writer went on to say:

51. Here are a few examples
made this year alone.

“Yamit, i must add, was very interesting to me
since it is the only full-fledged town I ever saw where
everybody knows his neighbour. This is due to the
close co-operation of the Zionist-inspired
immigrants already there and working together in the
common cause of what they call, in their own words,
‘the real realizing of the Zionist dream’. In accordance with a Government decision, 1,000 housing
units are to be built at Yamit in addition to the
existing 550. At this very moment the Jewish
National Fund is preparing the initial infrastructure
for these future houses, whose actual construction
will take place in the coming budgetary year.”

of those statements

52. First, there is the statement by the Defence
Minister, reported on 11 March last in 7%~ Jerusc//o~
Post and Hn’aretz,
that Israelis have the right to
settle everywhere in the West Bank so long as they
do not deprive the Arabs.
53. Secondly, we have the statement by Mr. Rabin
on 22 April in The Jerrrsaler17
Past
that, “No settlement has been set up in order to be taken down”.
In that speech Mr. Rabin promised that his Government would make a special effort during the coming
years to strengthen and to extend Israeli settlements
along the Jordan River.

47. Those are only some of the measures which the
Israeli Government is undertaking to fulfil its plans.
Accordingly, it expropriated 40,000 dunums in Sinai
and expelled the Arab inhabitants in order to bring the
new settlers there. It also expropriated vast areas of
land in the Shiekh Zoyid and Abou Tawila areas and
expelled their 25,000 inhabitants in order to establish
a chain of settlements between Gaza and Sinai. The
President of the Jewish Agency has already stated
that the Agency, in co-operation with the Israeli
army, will be able to establish new settlements sufficient to absorb the new immigrants, and that it plans
to expel the Bedouin inhabitants of Rafah and northern
Sinai and expropriate 130,000 dunums to establish the
new settlements there.

54. Thirdly, there is the statement by Mr. Peres,
reported in The Jerusnlem
Post of 26 October, that ;I
new Israeli settlement would be built at an oasis in
the Sinai and that that settlement would be part of a
new Israeli development area in the Sinai.
55. Fourthly, there is the report, which appeared in
Ha’clretz on 27 April, of the plan approved by the SOcalled Ministerial Committee for the Settlement of
the Occupied Territories, whose chairman is Minislcrwithout-portfolio for the establishment of settlements,
Israel Galilee, and drawn up by an inter-kibbutz COIW
mission. The plan envisages the establishment of
29 settlements in the next two years, 13 of them by
the end of 1976 and 16 by the end of 1977, some
of them as follows: nine settlements in the Golan
Heights; three settlements in the Jordan Valley; two
settlements south of Jerusalem and west of Bethlehem.
two on the road to Jerusalem; four in the Gaza Strip
and Sinai.

48. The Israeli Defence Minister declared last May
that it was necessary to double the number of Israeli
settlements in accordance with the plan approved
by the Israeli Cabinet. The Israeli Housing Minister
declared in February 1976 that the Israeli Government
had decided to concentrate its efforts in the Sharm
El-Sheikh area and it had already built a railway
station near the Saint Catherine Monastery in Sinai
and started a project to build a pipeline between
El-Tor and Sharm El-Sheikh.

56. Fifthly, on 13 June, the Foreign Minister,
Mr. Allon, stated that the settlements were not established in order to be abandoned. He added, “I suggest
we stop talking about places we are not moved from
and instead establish settlements in vital areas to nulkc
it impossible to move us from them.”

49. Even more Israelis are expressing doubts about
the wisdom of the policy their Government is pursuing
in the occupied territories by establishing new settle-

57. Sixthly, on 7 May Mr. Admoni, Director-Genenil
of the Zionist Federation’s Settlement Division, stated
6

that 64 settlements had been established
in the occupied territories,

since 1967

usually minors, were arrested and summarily tried at
night without being given the opportunity of having
legal defence, and in many cases without the parents
being notified. Children from families in the low
income bracket were heavily fined and were not given
the option of going to prison, so that the fines cpnstituted a heavy burden on their parents. In cases
where families did not have the money, the parents
themselves were imprisoned.

58. Seventhly, there is the report of 14 October
in n/lo’a/Yr that the Ministry of the Interior was
considering granting municipal status to the Israeli
settlements at Sharm El-Sheikh, and another report
by the same newspaper about the establishment
of
a settlement near El-Arish known as Nahal Haruvit.
59. These are only a few statements by the Israeli
leaders and reports published by Israeli newspapers
themselves. These statements were, of course,
accompanied by acts of violence, repression, arrests,
the demolition of houses, tortures, and so on, as also
reported by the Israeli press itself.

63. The third aspect of Israeli policy in the occupied
territories is the illegal exploitation
of the natural
resources of the territories, a matter which deeply
concerns the General Assembly. Sheer greed and
disregard of any environmental or economic considerations has led the Israeli authorities to implement
a plan of depriving the occupied territories of any
natural resources they possess.

60. When the Israeli authorities discovered that the
use of force did not lead to any lessening of the level
of resistance of the Arab inhabitants, they tried to
use economic pressure and blackmail by imposing in
July 1976 the so-called value added tax in the West
Bank and Gaza to force business people into submission. This, of course, led to business strikes,
demonstrations and clashes with the police and the
army. Many demonstrators were arrested, curfews
were imposed and the Israeli army arbitrarily closed
many Arab businesses. Another example of this
economic pressure and blackmail is the suspension
from herjob of an El-Bireh secondary-school teacher,
Florinda Laham, and the reduction of her salary by
90 per cent after she had been sentenced to four months
probation for merely taking part in a “sit-in” at the
school.

64. The fourth aspect of this policy and the most
dangerous is the incitement
of extremist
Israeli
elements to religious hatred against the Christian and
Moslem inhabitants of these territories. The Council
has dealth with this problem before on several
occasions, but in the last few weeks the Israeli
authorities have gone too far in condoning if not
encouraging the acts of those fanatic and extremist
groups, specially those now settling in the city of
Al-Khalil.
Those groups deliberately provoked the
feelings of Moslems in the occupied territories and, in
fact, the whole Islamic world, by going on a rampage
of vandalism, tearing and burning the sacred book,
the Koran. They also try to deny the Moslems’ right
to perform their religious rites in the Al-Ibrahimi’
Mosque of Al-KhaliI. For these tragic incidents the
Israeli authorities have only themselves to blame as
they are the outcome of Israel’s determination
to
establish Israeli settlements in the city of Al-Khalil
itself and its surroundings and its allowing fanatic
and extremist groups to occupy them under the protection of the Israeli army.

61. In many cases, severe beating and brutality by
the Israeli army and police have led to the deaths of
some prisoners. Some of these cases are revealed and
known, and some others are still kept secret by the
Israeli authorities. In March ofthis year Medan Hassan
Abumile, aged 34, was severely beaten and later died
in hospital of compound fractures and internal
haemorrhage. Ahmed Dadhoul, aged 40, from Salfit,
was beaten by the security forces while being taken to
Tulkarm for interrogation. The death of a former
administrative
detainee from Nablus after being
brutalized by Israeli troops’ was reported by The
J~rmtrlc~n~ Post and Hc~‘aretz on 24 March of this
year. Israeli settlers also take part in these brutalities.
For instance, some Palestinian youths were kidnapped
by Israeli settlers from the settlement of Kiryat Arba,
near AI-Khalil. They were locked in an enclosure,
stripped of their clothes and left to wild dogs, which
attacked them.

65. The Moslems of the city, of course, could not
stay idle and see their religious sites desecrated. They
demonstrated and protested, but without any result.
The Israeli authorities as usual answered only by
arresting many people, as reported recently in Tile
New York Times and other papers, and imposing a
curfew on the city and on many other cities in the
West Bank. Even the Isr,aeli authorities
were
compelled to admit that the acts of these fanatic
elements under the leadership of Rabbi Moshe
Levinger from the Israeli settlement of Kiryat Arba
were responsible for these tragic incidents. In spite
of this Israeli curfew over the city, .the occupying
authorities did not hesitate to allow Rabbi Moshe
Levinger to stage a demonstration
of his fanatic
followers in the city, during which he addressed them
in the presence of the Israeli Defence Minister himself,
saying: “Hebron is ours; Nablus is ours: Jericho is
ours”. Even The Jerusalem Post found the activities
of Rabbi Levinger too much, and harmful to Israel’s

62. I have already mentioned the massive arrests by
the Israeli army that have taken place in Gaza during
the last few months. According to a Red Cross report
published by Ncr’~retz on 16 July, the number of
Arabs in Israeli prisons then stood at 3,200, although
the real number must be much higher. In some cases
there was a wave of night trials when demonstrators,
7

interests, when it said in an editorial
1976:

“First, with the establishment of the State, the
remnants of the Arab population in the country
were left without leadership. A minority was created
which had to adapt itself to the reality of a Jewish
State waging a war against its neighbouring countries and proving its strength against them.

on 6 October

“The fact must be acknowledged that tension has
been building up between Jews and Arabs in Hebron
for over a month now and that it was largely,due to
what Defence Minister Shimon Peres himself termed
outright provocation on the part of Kiryat Arba
settlers under the unfortunate leadership of Rabbi
Moshe Levinger.”

“Secondly, one of the most worrying phenomena
is the loss of patience of the average Jew towards
the Arab citizen; in certain cases a hostility can be
felt, and any provocation might cause an unaccountable explosion whose results might have negative
consequences in Israel and, especially, abroad.

66. Ha’aretz,
of 5 October, stated that Rabbi
Levinger and his colleagues had succeeded in converting Hebron from a relatively quiet town into a
centre of riots, and had turned the Arab-Jewish conflict
into a war between faiths focused on clashes ovel
ritual.

“Thirdly,
thi natural increase of the Arab
population in Israel is 5.9 per cent annually against
a natural increase of 1.5 per cent annually for the
Jews. The problem is particularly acute in the
northern district. According to this rate, by 1978
Arabs will constitute over 51 per cent of the total
population of that district.

67. The Ne12 York Times of 10 October 1976 explained
why, despite calls from newspapers and politicians
to crack down on Rabbi Levinger because he was
acting as if he were above the law, Mr. Rabin had
proceeded slowly. The paper concludes that the
reason, according to politicians in Israel, is that the
Prime Minister does not wish to lose the votes of the
national religious party-a very dangerous policy,
indeed. It is really sad and disturbing to find that
religious chiefs, who are supposed to preach peace,
love and tolerance, are the ones who instead are
preaching hatred and intolerance.

“Fotirthly, the Israeli Arab is no longer passive
and has turned to nationalistic
demonstrations
which have occurred on a number of occasions.
“Fifthly,
forward:

the following

suggestions

are put

-To expand and deepen Jewish settlements in
areas where the contiguity of the Arab population
is prominent and where they number considerably
more than the Jewish population; to examine the
possibility of diluting existing Arab population
concentrations; to enforce the State law so as to
limit “breaking of new ground’ by Arab settlements in various areas of the country:

68. Why do we Arabs express our indignation and
abhorrence over these acts? Because, as a matter of
principle and belief, we are against any intolerance
towards any religion, be it Islam, Christianity
or
Judaism. We do not condone any kind of behaviour
by extremist elements in whatever quarter they belong
because we have deep respect for all three religions.

-To introduce a policy of reward and punishment for leaders and settlers who express hostility
in any way towards the State or towards Zionism;

69. This distressing policy of Israel in the occupied
territories in its different aspects does not work in
a vacuum or without a blueprint or a well-studied plan
and governmental guidelines. The aims of the Israeli
Government are well known, but recently one of
these official plans came to the notice of public
opinion: it is a secret document, known as the Koenig
memorandum, presented to the Office of the Prime
Minister by Mr. Koenig, who is a high official in the
Israeli Interior Ministry and is responsible for the
treatment of Arabs in Israel. The Israeli Government
is somewhat embarrassed-or so it says-not because
of the contents of this memorandum, but only because
it was brought to the attention of world public
opinion.

-To bend every possible effort to bringing all
Zionist parties towards a national consensus
regarding the issue of Israel’s Arabs in order to
disentangle them from th&r internal political
squabbles;
-To make appropriate arrangements with the
management of a concern bearing the ‘approved
investment’ label in crucial areas as noted above,
the number of Arab employees not to exceed
20 per cent;

70. Many of the recommendations
of Mr. Koenig
are already standard Israeli policy, as regards either
the Arabs in Israel or the inhabitants of the occupied
territories. Nevertheless, it is worth while here to
elaborate on some of the points contained in this
secret memorandum, and I shall quote verbatim from
its text. Mr. Koenig wrote to Prime Minister Rabin,
among other things, that:

-To have the tax authorities adopt immediate
steps to intensify tax collection, performing it with
firmness and without deviations; ’
-To reach a settlement with central marketing
factors of various consumer goods that would
neutralize and hamper Arab agents, particularly
in the northern areas, in order to avoid dependence
8

of the Jewish population
on those agents,
especially in times of emergency;
-To
have the Government find a way to
neutralize the payment of ‘big family’ grants to
the Arab population, either by linking them to
the economic situation or by taking this responsibility from the national insurance system and
transferring it to the Jewish agency or to the.
Zionist organization so that the grant is paid to
Jews only;
-To endeavour to have central institutions pay
more attention to giving preferential treatment
to Jewish groups or individuals as compared to
Arabs;
-To
have the reception criteria for Arab
university students be the same as for Jewish
students, and to have this apply also to the
granting of scholarships. A meticulous implementation of these rules will produce a natural
selection and will considerably reduce the number
of Arab students;
-To
make trips abroad for studies easier,
while making return and employment
more
difficult; this policy is apt to encourage their
emigration;
-To increase the presence of various police
and security forces in the Arab streets to deter
extremist circles and those who are sitting on
the fence and are likely to be drawn into uprisings
and demonstrations.”
This is the outline of the memorandum presented by
Mr. Koenig to the Prime Minister of Israel. He
followed this memorandum up with another one in
which he stressed the importalice of his suggestions
and recommended some others.
71. A glance at the memorandum would lead one to
think that it was written by Goering or Goebbels
during the Nazi rigime, but unfortunately it is one of
the blueprints on which the Israeli machinery is
working. The Israeli newspaper, Ydiot Akktrrnnot,
of 7 September, said that senior elements close to the
Prime Minister attach importance to the Koenig report.
The Israeli radio said on 8 September in Hebrew that
the Interior Minister, Mr. Joseph Burg, reacted to the
document by saying that he had complete faith in
Mr. Koenig. The most honest comment was produced
by DL~\Y/v, which said in its issue of 9 September:
“The Koenig report can be summarized in one
sentence. It predicts what will happen should we
annex the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Take
out of the document the word ‘Galilee’, replace it
with ‘Gaza’, ‘Judea’ or ‘Samaria’ and everything
will become clear.”

The paper, Davar, went on to say that:
“The Education Ministry. should reprint the
memorandum and make it compulsory reading in all
schools. The Foreign Minister must furnish Ambassador Herzog with a copy as soon as possible
so that he can present it at the United Nations,”
There is no need for me to comment here on this
memorandum because it speaks for itself and allows
everybody to understand clearly the different aspects
of the Israeli policies in the occupied territories.
72. If I have taken up so much of the Council’s
time-and
I apologize for it-it is actually in order to
convey a very concrete and serious message. Israeli
practices in the occupied territories are only a symptom
of several facts. The first one is the continued occupation by Israel of Arab territories since 1967 and its
adamant refusal to comply with the calls of the international community for its immediate withdrawal from
all the occupied territories.
73. The second fact is Israel’s refusal to recognize
that, without satisfying the Palestinians’ inalienable
rights to self-determination and the establishment of
their own independent State of which they have been
deprived for so long and the acceptance of the PLO
as the sole representative of the Palestinian people,
there will be no peace in the area.
74. The third aspect is the laxity of the international
community notwithstanding the lip-service to the cause
of peace in the Middle East, in putting into effect
the relevant provisions of the Charter.
75. I am sure that members of the Council now have
a detailed picture of the magnitude of the Israeli
policies against the Palestinian people and of the
repressive and aggressive measures being undertaken
to implement those policies. Egypt’s position is very
clear. Allow me here to quote what the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt
said before the General Assembly on 14 October. He
declared:
“Israel must be made to understand that there will
be no peace in the Middle East unless the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people are recognized and
unless the occupied Arab territories are returned.
Israel is deluding itself if it believes that time is in
its favour and that it can convince some people that
the Palestinians do not exist or, that it is capable
of containing or eliminating them. The events in
Al-Khalil
and the West Bank, the innocent
Palestinians’ blood shed at the hands of the Israeli
occupation forces, affirm to the people of the world
the unflinching stand of the Palestinian people and
their determination
to return to their homeland,
to enjoy independence and national sovereignty in
Palestine. Recognition of the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people is one of the princifial touch-

stones to test Israel’s seriousness when it claims
that it desires to exist in peace among its
neighbours.“4

people, I have the honour to extend and affirm to you,
the representative of the Panamanian people, our
solidarity with the struggle of your people for the
complete and unconditional liberation of Panama from
all and any form of alien domination. This is but a
reflection of the solidarity of the Panamanian people
with the cause of Palestine.

76. Egypt also considers that Israel must be held
responsible for whatever changes it introduces in the
occupied territories and for the illegal exploitation
of the natural wealth and resources of those territories.
While those changes and measures are null and void,
they nevertheless constitute obstacles in the path of
achievitig a peaceful settlement. They endanger peace
and security not only in the area, but in the whole
world. That is why Egypt has asked for this meeting
of the Council. One must consider that these are not
mere words or speeches but a reflection of the reality
‘in the occupied territories and an invitation to Israel
to take a lesson from the past. It is also an invitation
to the friends of Israel to put pressure on it to stop
such policies before the whole situation in the area
explodes.

82. In March of this year, the Council convened to
consider the serious situation arising from recent
developments in the occupied Arab territories. It
convened again in May for the same reason; and once
again this year the Council meets today to consider the
dangerous and explosive situation in the occupied Arab
territories as a result of continuing Israeli repressive
measures against the inhabitants of these territories.
83. On both previous occasions, the PLO asserted
that it was
“confident that the Council, in fulfilling its responsibility as the organ entrusted with the maintenance
of international peace and security, will not satisfy
itself with the expression of grave concern but will
utilize the powers conferred upon it by the Charter,
powers to deal with such a situation. The Council,
we are certain, will deal with the roots, with the
cause of the incidents, and not only with the existing
situation and its consequences.” [1917th meeting,

77. The world is in a race with time. There will
either be peace or a generalized liberation war to
recover the rights provided for in the Charter and
supported by the majority of States Members of the
United Nations.
78. The Security Council must shoulder its responsibility as the highest organ of the United Nations and
the guardian of peace and security in the world. It
must show Israel its condemnation of such policies,
and its belief that they are endangering peace and
security and that the world will not stand still while
Israel continues along this dangerous course.

pa/w. 4.1
84. In March the representative of the Government
of the United States, Mr. Scranton, said: “For the
events that have brought us together today are a
corollary and a consequence of the tragic dispute
that has occupied the Council with such regularity
over the years.” [189&h meeting, pm-n. 591. He then
went on to say: “So long as the situation persists,
we can expect continuing tension and occasional
violence” [ibid., prrrrr. 601. To our regret, nothing has
been done as yet to prevent the recurrence of violence,
nothing has been done to deal with the cause and roots
of the evil, and the situation persists.

79. The PRESIDENT (int~~~rpl.(‘f~lti~/lfi~jnl Sptrnish):
I wish to inform the Council that I have received a
letter from the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic in which, in accordance with the relevant
articles of the Charter, he requests to be invited to
participate in the debate without the right to vote. In
accordance with rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure and the established practice of the Council, and if there is no objection, I invite the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber,
on the usual understanding that he will be invited to
take a place at the Council table whenever he wishes
to address the Council.

85. The forces of occupation are still persisting in
the application of a barbaric policy of discrimination
and suppression against the Palestinian people in its
homeland. It is a fact that occupation and repression engender resistance. It is the right and duty of
people under foreign rule and alien domination to
resist, including armed resistance. It is a right upheld
by the Genera1 Assembly of the United Nations; it is
a right to be exercised by the people in Soweto, as
well as in Hebron.

80. The PRESIDENT (i/ltL’l.pl.Pt(ltiO/? Jiv/rl Sptrni.~h):
The next speaker is the representative of the PLO.

86. In March 1976 the representative of the Government of the United States highly praised “Israel’s
punctilious administration
of the Holy Places in
Jerusalem” and considered such administration
as
having “greatly minimized
the tensions” [ikid.,
pn~~r. 651. I am certain that Mr. Scranton-and
I am
sure he will get to know about this-is now in a pOSi-

81. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Mr. President, may I express my gratitude to you and
to the representatives who voted in favour of inviting
the PLO to participate in the current debate of the
Council. As the representative of the Palestinian
10

tion to reconsider his statement. I must hasten to say
that I am thinking of the same standards to be followed
in administering the Holy Sites, this time in Hebron.
I am referring to article 27 of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of Wars2 Article 27 of that Convention prescribes,
i/ltcr c//itr , that:

Mr. Menahem Hacohen, speaking for
ment-which
is a group in the Knesset:

the Align-

“Suggested that the Hebron incident may have
been the result of the [Israeli] Government’s
soft
handling of Kiryat Arba and Gush Emunim SUPporters who violate law and order.”
92. On 22 October, the Jewish Press, under the
heading “Israeli news digest”, published a report by
its correspondent which reads:

“Protected persons are entitled, in all circumstances, to respect for their persons, their honour,
their family rights, their religious convictions and
practices, and their manners and customs,”

“Torah scrolls and other objects in the Tomb
of the Patriarchs in Hebron were destroyed on Erev
Yom Kippur by local Arabs allegedly retaliating the
desecration of the Koran in the Moslem section Of
the shrine a day earlier.”

87. The Zionist forces of occupation have acted in
Hebron-and
we are citing Hehron just as an example
here-in complete disregard of the Convention. But
have the Fascists ever respected any conventions?
88. Let us review the situation together but, before
that, let us pause a moment and consider resolution
3525 D (XXX), adopted by the General Assembly on
I5 December 1975, which reads in part:

93. Rabbi Dr. Jonathan Majoret wrote in theJewi.vl?
Chronic/e of London on 22 October, that “Hebron
zealots spell danger” and affirmed that “a Jewish Holy
Place has been desecrated because Jews desecrated a
Moslem one”.

“1. Decltrres all measures taken by the Israeli
authorities with a view to changing the institutional
structure and established religious practices in the
sanctuary of AI-Ibrahimi
Mosque in the City of
AI-Khalil null and void;

94. One stops to wonder. A few months ago the
Council was seized of a grave situation arising from the
desecration of the Al-Haram Al-Sharif in Jerusalem.
Now the Council is seized of an explosive situation
arising from the desecration of Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi
in Hebron.
Are these “incidents”
spontaneous?
Certainly not.

“2. C~1l.s upo/z Israel to rescind and to desist
forthwith from all such measures.”
89. In this connexion, I wish to refer to the resolution
on the Middle East adopted by the Fifth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries meeting at Colombo from 16 to I9 August
1976. In paragraph 10 of that resolution, the Conference:

95. Despite article 27 of the Geneva Conventiori
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War2 and despite the repeated assertions of the
Government of the United States-be
it in 1968, 1969
or March 1976-the Zionist forces of occupation are
still persisting in their policy of expropriation,
annexation of land, and repressive measures against
the Palestinian people.

“Reaffirms that the Geneva Convention on the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Times of War
applies to the situation prevailing in the occupied
Arab territories and calls upon the parties to the
Convention to implement it by forcing Israel to put
it into effect and stop all acts that are a violation
of the Convention.“S

96. On 23 August, War Minister
Shimon Peres
affirmed his Government’s
decision that: “in the
Mount Hebron area there was room for two large
urban settlements-one
Arab, in Hebron, and one
Jewish, in Kiryat Arba, just north of Hebron”.

90. The Zionist forces of occupation have completely
disregarded world public opinion and the concern of
the international community. A state of tension has
persisted in the areas under occupation, and culminated
in the recent situation and events. But what ignited
the present situation? Mr. Ben Azai asserted in The
Jewish Chronicle of 15 October 1976 that:

97.’ Two days later, on 25 August,
The New York Times of 26 August:

according

to

“Twenty militant Jews, most of them waving
American”-that
is, United States--“passports,
were arrested in Hebron by Israeli military authorities.. . after they had demonstrated
at’ an
abandoned former Jewish hospital that had been
declared off limits.”

“The Hebron desecrations, dreadful though they
were, took place only after prolonged provocation
by settlers from Kiryat Arba who regard the Iocal
Arabs as a species of untemzensche~~ “-a subhuman
element-”
and who are anything but innocent.”

But what action was taken
knowledge, none.

91. On 12 October, Asher Wallfish, the Knesset
reporter for The Jerusalem Post, reported that

against

98. The establishment of a settlement
territories
is in itself a violation-but
11

them?

To 01.11

in the occupied
when it is

coupled with the behaviour of the settlers it becomes
volatile.
99. 7’he Christian
26 October:

Science

Monitor

reported

gate of the mosque, and three days later, demolition
forces blew up the winter wall and other elements
built by Saladino adjacent to the mosque.

on
104. It was in.December 1967 that Jews forced their
way into the sanctuary, placed Torah scrolls there
and conducted their religious rites. Later on the
Zionist military authorities established a military
post there and expelled Moslem worshippers from a
part of the sanctuary, converting it into a synagogue.
In May 1969, the Zionists seized the section known as
Al-Ibrahimi
and converted it into a synagogue. In
September 1972, under the command of the military
Governor of the’ West Bank, Jews entered the
sanctuary, blew the horn and celebrated religious rites.
Moslem worshippers were expelled from the area.
Step by step the Zionists seized the areas known
as Al-Ibrahimi,
AI-Ya’Aqubiyah
and Alsahn-and
Moslem worshippers were forbidden entry into this
already large part of the sanctuary. Under the guise
of security measures, barriers were erected to separate
the part iequisitioned, and systematically the share of
the new partners in the sanctuary became larger every
day. These developments, by necessity, brought the
situation to its present grave state.

“A Jewish professor was indicted Sunday on
charges of forcing a Moslem religious judge at gunpoint to dismantle a stone barricade erected by
rioting Arabs in the West Bank town of Hebron.
It was the first indictment of Jews accused by
Israeli leaders of fomenting Jewish-Moslem strife in
Hebron.”
And it was high time that some action should be taken,
at least by way of make-believe, to put an end to
provocative
acts by the new settlers against the
Palestinian people under alien Zionist domination and
foreign occupation.
100. In its daily bulletin of 22 October, the Jewish
Telegraphic
Agency reported: “Seventy-four
Arabs
charged with desecration”. The Agency reported that
the special ‘police team stressed that it was possible
the riots that followed were planned. Followed what?
And planned by whom?

105. I have mentioned but a few reports to show that
the situation in the Palestinian territories under Zionist
occupation is a direct result of occupation per se
and also of the behaviour of the Zionists towards the
Palestinian people.

101. The same report stated that three Kiryat Arba
settlers had been detained for questioning regarding the
events preceding the desecration. of the Tomb, and the
result of the preceding events was described thus: “A
Koran was fourid destroyed lying on the floor of the
Tomb”.

i:

106. We have noted the silken treatment accorded
the perpetrators of evil, those who violated peace
and provoked the peaceful inhabitants at gun point.
But what action did the authorities of occupation take
towards the victims of such violations and provocation? One would immediately think of compensation.
But in what form? Immediately after the desecration
of the Moslem sanctuary was discovered, there was
an impulsive reaction that took the form of retaliation
by the Palestinians in Hebron, and the town of Hebron
was severely punished. Curfew was imposed. Is it
possible that such measures were imposed to protect
the inhabitants against further Zionist attacks?

102. The events were definitely planned and were
not spontaneous. On 2f September, Jewish Zionist
settlers opened fire in the centre of Hebron. The
Kiryat Arba settlers had been holding a demonstration
near the Hebron municipality. When Arab inhabitants
of Hebron tried to prevent the demonstration,
the
Zionist settlers responded by firing shots. Settlers
have been encouraged to move into the heart of the
town of Hebron. On 13 September, a few days before
this “incident”,
the Zionist Religious Affairs Minister,
Yitzhak Rafael, demanded that Jews be permitted to
settle in Hebron-and
not just in the neighbouring
Kiryat Arba. Was this demand the green light to the
settlers of Kiryat Arba to move into Hebron? And
what action did the so-called authorities take? It has
been reported that the leader Levinger, from Kiryat
Arba, stayed at home and the army could not, or rather
would not, arrest him.

107. The New York Times of 3 October reported the
following:
“On the Arab side the military’s mild response
to Rabbi Levinger’s actions”-Rabbi
Levinger is
the leader of the Zionist settlers in Kiryat Arba“and his flouting of the prohibition
order are
considered as proof that a double standard exists:
one for West Bank Arabs”-meaning
Palestinians“and another for illegal Jewish setllers.”

103. Let me remind the Council that this latest
“desecration”
of the Moslem mosque was only the
latest in a long series of “desecrations”
by the
Zionist forces of occupation dating back to an attack
on the mosque on 22 September 1968. General Dayan
at that time refused to acknowledge the objections
of the city’s inhabitants and threatened to expel the
Mayor and other leaders from the country. On 15 October 1968, Zionist occupation troops destroyed the east

108. Fifty Arabs from Hebron were arrested and
held in custody. A special police task force was set UP
to investigate the so-called incident, and 60 Arabs
were injured when Israeli troops intervened, four of
the 60 requiring hospitalization. The Mayor of Hebron,
12

.,” ..,_“.

b

Mr. Fahed Qawasma, is quoted in The New York
Tins as having said that:

essentially Jewish character, and of helping safeguard its internal security. To that end he advocates
several measures. These include a reduction in subsidies to large Arab families, the encouragement
of young Arabs to go abroad for study and to stay
there, and restrictions on the number of Arab
employees in Jewish enterprises.”

“The problem of equal treatment rests largely with
the court system. Members of Gush Emunim, many
of whom walk about armed, have demonstrated
in an Arab market quarter of Hebron for about
three months, making the population nervous with
their guns and knives... the punishment is not the
same for the Arabs and the Jews.”

114. The Jerlrsnlon Post asserts that the plan was
drawn up with the assistance of some Labour Party
officials in Galilee. I wonder what sort of “labour
doctrines” they have.

109. Mayor Qawasma referred to a practice followed
by the Zionist settlers, namely, dancing while demonstrating in Arab Hebron, and said, “In court a member of the sect will say, ‘I was dancing’ and the judge
says: ‘Dancing is not a crime’ “.

115. The Council convened in June to consider the
cause and roots of the situation that has brought us
together today and the tragic dispute that has occupied
this Council with such regularity over the years. The
Council met to consider the item entitled “The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its
inalienable rights”, an item transmitted to the Security
Council in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 8 of General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX).
After a lengthy discussion, in which a considerable
number of Member States participated, the Council
failed to adopt a draft resolution [S/112/19 of29 JUIZP
19761 whose operative paragraphs read as follows:

110. The Mayor of Halhoul,
Mohamed Hasan
Milhem, referred to the deeds of Zionist settlers and
the reaction of Tel Aviv officials and said: “Israeli
officials keep telling us they are against such deeds.
Let us see words put into action to see if they are
truthful about it.” And the deeds are that seven young
Arabs were wounded by shots fired by an Israeli
civilian speeding through the village of Halhoul.
According to The New York Times:

“ 1. Ttrk~s note of the report of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People [S/12090];

“One of the victims, Hatem Milhem, 17, who was
shot in the leg, s&d he did not know who fired on
him as he was delivering milk to his father’s store.
Another of the victims said he was taking grapes to
the market-place when a pick-up truck with an
Israeli licence plate stopped alongside the road. One
of the three men inside the van opened fire and the
truck took off.”

“2. ,4ffiw7.s
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
including the
right of return and the right to national independence
and sovereignty in Palestine, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations.”

Ill.
The attacks on Hebron by Zionist settlers
triggered riots in many other Palestinian cities and
towns-in Jerusalem, Ramallah, Nablus. ‘The sad and
grave and explosive situation is but an inevitable
result of prolonged occupation and denial of the rights
of the Palestinian people.

The Council failed to act because of the tyranny of
the veto of one Member State, the United States of
America. This same veto tyranny had previously
obstructed the work of the Council in March 1976.
116. Mr. President, the PLO wishes, on behalf of the
Palestinian people, to extend to you once again its
gratitude for having manifested deep concern fo1
the fate of the Palestinian people, the Fate of justice,
the fate of the principles and Charter of the United
Nations and the fate of peace and security in the world.

112. The fears and apprehensions of our people were
heightened when they learned that the worst was yet
to come. They are aware of a project designed
systematically
to disperse the presence of the
Palestinians in Palestine-a
dispersal that will inevitably lead to their elimination-some
sort of a final
solution.

117. In conclusion, the PLO wishes to reiterate the
view already expressed on 5 May in the Council:

113. This project was planned by the Northern
District Commissioner of the Ministry of the Interior,
Israel Koenig, who submitted a secret document
known as the Koenig plan which seeks to suggest
ways
to handle the Arabs of Palestine. The plan was
commented upon in The ./~l~/.so/~~n?Post of 9 September 1976 as follows:

“No appraisal of the events I have described can
be adequate unless it takes into account the following
fundamentals of the situation. First, the root of the
problems in the occupied territories is the occupation
itself. Secondly, aggravating the fact of occupation
is the nature of the occupying rCgime-its racist
character and its expansionist aims. Thirdly, the
occupation strives to perpetuate itself by the establishment, of settlements in the occupied territories
and by the eviction of the settled indigenous

“Briefly, Mr. Koenig is in favdur of minimizing
the share of the Arabs in the population of Israel
as the only certain way of maintaining the State’s
13

-a-.

,,,,”

m

population-in
other words, by the creation of
physical and demographic changes accompanied by
consequential purported politico-juridical
changes
whose aim and import is to entrench and perpetuate
the occupation. Fourthly, in the process of subjugating the inhabitants of the occupied territories,
the occupation forces perpetrate gross violations of
their fundamental human rights. Fifthly, the
population of the occupied territories is not the
sole victim of the occupation and its practices. The
very purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, as well as the principle of the
sanctity of international treaties such as the Geneva
Conventions, are also principal casualties of the
occupation and of the policies and practices of the
occupying authorities.” [19/7rh meeting, pow. 17.1

gradual but systematic conversion into preponderantly
a synagogue, leaving tiny and constricted corners
to Moslem worshippers, and the trampling up@
and tearing up of the Holy Koran are apparently 110
longer shocking and disgraceful acts of vandalisfl
which evoke spontaneous and universal condemnation
regardless of one’s faith, creed or philosophy.
122. It is perhaps most revealing that in the statemellt
issued by the Ministry in charge of religious sites and
charitable foundations in Jordan the emphasis was 00
the disrespect shown by the trespassers on the site
which is supposedly sacred to Moslems and Jetis
alike.
123. The statement relates, i/zter o/in, that in the
course of their trespassing they had indulged in
immoral acts. They had resorted to molesting the
Moslems as they were saying their prayers and to
making derogatory, insulting and provocative remarks
and shouting at the top of their voices, to inconvenience the worshippers. That is not the way one
would expect an ancient and revered sanctuary such
as the Ibrahimi Mosque to be treated by those who
claim to find sustenance in its eternal spiritual message.
It is not a place for picnicking or touring like a
museum. It is very much today, as it has been fOI’
countless centuries, a place for worship and meditzltion, and its sacredness should under no circumstances,
including military
occupation,
be infringed and
compromised.

1 18. The PRESIDENT
(i/ltopr’efrrfion
f,wn Spn~is/l): The next name on the list of speakers is that of
the representative of Jordan. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

I’

.;
“/,.,: /:
: ‘1
1/ :i

119. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): Mr. President, allow
me to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November and to wish you all success. I want also
to pay tribute to my colleague, Mr. Iqbal Akhund,
for the exemplary manner in which he presided over
the meetings of the Security Council during the month
of October.
120. The Security Council normally meets in conditions of war, impending war or traumatic events such
as air or overland raids resulting in heavy losses
of life and property and the like. As the guardian of
international peace and security, its criterion of contern is directly proportional to the magnitude of the
danger to which such international peace and security
are actually or potentially sensed to be exposed.

124. The admonition which I have just cited is not
without qualification.
There are tuly religious
worshippers of the Jewish faith who do revere the
sacred place. The complaint against the Israeli occupation authorities-as
far as this group, with the support
of their authorities of course, is concerned-is
that
they have gone far beyond the old, established siatrrs
q/lo, which assigns to each faith its rightful place iu
the sanctuary, as is the case, or should be the case,
in other meticulously maintained strrtlls yr/os in other
Holy Places, which have been painstakingly workecl
out over countless centuries. I am sure that such
slrrt/rs qrros are described in the archives in Jerusalem
and in the United Nations, and in the archives of the
British Government, which exercised the Mantlatc
over Palestine for almost 30 years.

121. The item on our agenda, namely, Israeli practices in the occupied Arab territories, having created
a dangerous and explosive situation, only imperceptibly meets this awesome and dramatic yardstick.
After all, familiarity
breeds complacency,
and,
without being in any way disrespectful, I suspect
that some may have dragged their feet in discussing
such things as the imprisonment of a whole city of
60,000 people, the city of Hebron, for 16 days ori end
without even the judicial process of a warrant from a
judge, or for that matter, an Israeli civilian with a
machine-gun in a moving car killing in cold blood
seven innocent Palestinian Arab bystanders in nearby
Halhoul. We seem to have grown numb and insensitive
to such atrocious behaviour because it occurs daily
throughout the length and breadth of the West Bank
and Gaza. Some of us may have seen bits and pieces
of such events on our television screens, thanks to
a few wily and diligent correspondents who managed
to circumvent the ubiquitous Israeli censor. The
seizure of one of the holiest Moslem sanctuaries,
Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi Ash-Sharif in Hebron, and its

125. But the unruly behavior to which the Ministry
made reference is the endless stream of visitors, in
groups of roughly 50 to 70 individuals, guided ‘by
boisterous tourist salesmen, who are very muckI
oblivious to the fact that a place of live worship
is a place for respectful prayer and meditation, ancl
not for disrespectful and vociferous sightseeing rind
curiosity.
126. I have dealt briefly with the events in Hehror,
not with any intention to give a sermon on mclr;,l
behaviour. I have referred to them because the,,
triggered the recent events in the occupied territoric,;
14

and creuted, as my colleague from Egypt has stated,
iI dangerous and explosive situation.

by these daily efforts, the conclusion is inescapable
that the only limitation on the ,impIementation
of
their “final solution” is the limitation of time and the
ability to absorb without .contracting indigestion, 01
waiving altogether, some considerations of prudence
both within and outside the occupied territories.

127. But there is a more overwhelming consideration
which has prompted me to request to be allowed to
participate in the deliberations of the,Security Council,
notwithstanding
the fact that we shall take up the
ilem of Israeli practices at a subsequent date elsewhere
in the United Nations.

131. My delegation stated in the General Assembly’s
general debate our commitment to the pursuit of ajust,
equitable and lasting peace. Meaningful peace can be
sought only within this context. Otherwise, it becomes
abject and hollow resignation to a situation with which
one cannot be expected to live, a situation which one
will therefore wait out until the opportune moment.
arrives to undo it. That has been the fate of all unjust
status yuo.s, andfirits ucco1np1i.simposed by force, and
the Middle East is certainly no exception. That is a
prospect which we hope the Israelis, and above all the
Security Council, will not view with complacency,
since we are living in an age that is unprecedentedly
perilous and becoming increasingly so as the years go
by. Should a struggle of a few decades be allowed to
fester and dig ever-deeper roots until it becomes a
struggle of generations? Should we miss a precious
opportunity, which seems to exist and which may not
exist in the future, to seek an equitable solution, or
should we continue a blind and inexorable dril‘t
towards an inevitable cataclysm? The answer to that
depends largely upon what we do or fail to do in the
Council today.

128. The overriding consideration which must haunt
us all and which, in my Government’s considered
opinion, is of immediate and imperative concern to
the Security Council, as the ultimate guardian of
international peace and security, is that Israeli practices in the occupied territories are pre-empting and
even torpedoing all prospects for an equitable and
.just peace in the Middle East. The Israeli authorities
are certainly not unmindful of the implications of their
present policies. One can only assume, then, that this
is a deliberate and calculated act of policy.
129. I am not referring to the appalling suffering
and sacrifices-terrible
as they are-which our people
under occupation have had to endure for almost, a
decade. My reference is to something more than
transient and tragic. My point of departure is the policy
of annexation and colonization
which has already
devoured and continues td devour the occupied Arab
territories, and particularly the West Bank and Gaza.
The Israeli representative, at the close of the general
debate in the General Assembly, complained in all
seriousness that the Arab speakers, for the most part,
had not even mentioned Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338( 1973). Apart from the fact that the
resolutions to which he made reference are not the
only sacrosanct resolutions adopted over the years by
the United Nations, and apart from the fact that eyery
Arab delegation without exception had urged, in one
form or another, the imperative need to implement
United Nations resolutions-apart
from all that,
I should like to ask the representative of Israel the
following question: What has remained, in fact, of
resolution 242 (1967), apart from the text itself-which
is, I am confident, well preserved in the archives of
the United Nations? Has not Israel alretidy made of
that resolution an empty shell, a squeezed lemon, with
very little meaning or substance left? Who is fooling
whom, I wonder. Has anyone ever heard of military
occupation lasting for a whole decade? We are familiar
with conquests and colonizations which have lasted
for decades and even centuries. How does Israel view
its decade of occupation ? Is it occupation or is it
annexation? Perhaps the Council should ask Israel
for a clarification of its real intentions, SO that at
least each side kriows where it stands and can
reappraise its policies accordingly.

132. There are people-and many among them are
well-meaning-who think that, since there is a situation
of apparent stalemate in the Middle East, action can
be postponed to a later date. To the Palestinians in
the occupied territories the situation is far from a
stalemate. Action is going on all the time, and before
their eyes, and they are becoming ever more convinced
that they are surviving on borrowed time. That is why
our people have sustained a valiant and unabating
resistance in the face of great odds and at great
sacrifice.
133. As we have stated on previous occasions, the
Israelis have practically devoured the heartland of
the West Bank. In spite of the categorical will and
the decisions of the world community, Jerusalem has
been emasculated beyond recognition, leaving a few
Arab quarters, like ghettos, almost totally cut off
from their traditional surroundings and from the rest
of the West Bank. Jerusalem’s newly built Israeli
settlements reach out as far as Bethlehem and Beit Jala
to the east, the outskirts of Ramallah to the north,
the western mountain ranges to the west, including
the many Arab villages which have always constituted
the hinterland of the Jerusalem district, and, latterly.
beginning a year ago, the Khan El-Ahmar to the
east, where a sizable industrial city is under active
construction a mere 10 miles from the River Jordan,
presumably effectively to cut off access to the East
Bank from the West Bank and beyond except through
a region of massive Israeli presence.

130. The Israeli authorities,
during a decade of
occupation, have already delineated on the ground and
are systematically continuing to delineate their own
interpretation of United Nations resolutions. Judging
15

134. The greater part of the fertile Jordan Valley
west of the River Jordan has largely been confiscated
from its rightful owners and has been colonized by
Israeli settlers. Even a philanthropic
agricultural
project-the
famed Musa El-Alami project in Jericho,
on whose Board of Trustees I served for many yearshas been largely sequestrated. It was established to
provide homes, vocational training and a livelihood for
the children orphaned in the conflicts of 1948 and
beyond-and
the Council knows how numerous those
orphans are.
135. Has the remaining hinterland, have even the
barren hills been spared? It was, I believe, the
Minister of Defence, who only two months ago went
to the Mukhtar of El-Jsawiyah village, which is contiguous to Jerusalem, if not a part of it, and told him,
“We want one thousand dunuams of land from your
village.” Now, the head of the local council said, “We
shall not give up the territory. We are not willing to
sell it or to give it up.” So the Minister of Defence
sequestered the land-one million square metres of
land.
,136. Arab quarters and lands in Jerusalem, Nablus,
Hebron, Jericho, Kofr-Qaddum and countless other
locations are being assiduously and lustily confiscated.
The same old story again. When, in 1948, it was
practically impossible to wipe out or evict the Arab
inhabitants of Nazareth, the Israelis built Nazareth
Alit, meaning Upper Nazareth. After 1967, they built
upon the hills of Hebrop, directly overlooking that
Arab city, Kiryat Arba, a Hebron Alit, to make
doubly certain that the Big Brother of Orwell’s 1984
is ever present and watchful and to strangulate Hebron
psychologically and turn it into another ghetto.
137. The Israelis have done all this and more in the
West Bank and Gaza, which together form a mere one
fifth of geographic Palestine under the British Mandate,
and the least fertile part of it. I have deliberately
emphasized what they have done, without for a
moment being oblivious to similar feats in the Golan
Heights and Sinai. We have already heard our colleague
from Egypt describe the feats of Israel in Sinai, and
I am sure we shall be hearing from our colleague from
Syria as to what Israel has done and is doing in the
Golan Heights.
138. The reason is that it is widely suggested in
international circles-I do not know how credible this
is, but I am merely quoting what is widely suggested
in international circles-that
it is imperative to meet
even minimally
the legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinians for a national homeland in the West
Bank and Gaza. If, in the meantime, those lands are
being lustily devoured, then what is there left to talk
about at a Geneva Conference or elsewhere? A fifth
of Palestine, the least fertile part of it, is being subjected to continual and unabated dwarfing and
shrinking, and that can hardly provide an equitable
solution to the Palestine problem. Of course, it is for

the Palestinians to decide what the solution should be.
I am merely citing what is being talked about in
international circles.
139. A few decades ago one of the major concerns in
many quarters of the world was to find a haven and a
homeland for Jews who had suffered persecution,
terrible massacres and alienation in some parts of the
world. I am glad to state that that happened outside
the Arab world. Today’s concern, a concern which
must weigh heavily upon the conscience of mankind,
is the redemption of the Palestinian’ people who, in
the process of the solution of the firs1 problem, have
fallen victims to uprooting, dispersal, homelessness,
persecution and alienation.
140. At present there are well over 3 million Palestinians whose only abode throughout thousands of years
of recorded history has been the land of Palestine.
Indeed, Jewish history would be incomprehensible,
as any reader of the Old Testament will agree, without
reference to them as Canaanites, Jebusites-the
people who built Jerusalem-Philistines,
who inhabited
the coast of Palestine, Nabateans and a multitude of
other forefathers of the Semitic Arabs, not to mention
the 1,400 years of uninterrupted
Palestinian-Arab
existence from the seventh century up to the present
day. There was never at any period of history, even
during the brief period of Israeli hegemony in some
parts of Palestine, an exclusive or monolithic Israeli
presence. The Palestinians were always there, and
their presence was very weighty. If present-day
Israelis are inspired by the past, as they claim to be,
are they not distorting the past and trying to be more
royalist than the king?
141. Today, the Palestinians are divided into roughly
two categories. Half have the status of refugees and
displaced persons, and the other half is suffering the
appalling fate of a people livingunder Israeli occupation
for almost a decade, with all the persecution,
disabilities and despair which inevitably accompany
every occupation. As I said earlier, and I have talked
with and seen many of them, they literally feel
they are living on borrowed time.
142. It is no exaggeration to state that the 3 million
Palestinians and their offspring are now confronted
with the agonizing but all too real questions, “What
is our future? Where is our homeland? Where shall
we make our abode and pursue our careers?” Tens of
thousands of young boys and girls leave the occupied
West Bank and Gaza every year in pursuit of higher
education. But when they have completed their studies
they cannot return to their homes because they find
no careers to pursue under a rCgime of occupation.
143. In the meantime, the elderly and the aged remain
in the occupied territories, separated from their sons
and daughters and their offspring, except for the rare
occasional visits which those people make at the
pleasure or displeasure of the military governors. This

is hardly a natural situation for any people to endure
or for decent humanity to accept.

territory from foreign occupation and to recover
freedom, independence and national identity.

144. Jordan believes that there are two unavoidable
prerequisites for an equitable solution: first, the prompt
Israeli withdrawal from all Arab territories occupied
in 1967; secondly, the start of serious dialogue thereafter to restore the legitimate national rights and meet
the aspirations of the Palestinians, it being understood
that Jordan flcognizes the PLO-as
do all the other
Arab States, as well as the United Nations-as
the
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people in
carrying out the international responsibilities entailed
in this ultimate and, I may add, fateful task.

150. The struggle of peoples for liberation, justice and
sovereignty over their national territory is indivisible;
it is the same cause wherever there exists a usurper,
a foreign occupier or an alien racist oppressor. Our
support for the struggle of the Panamanian people to
recover full and effective sovereignty over its Canal
Zone is inseparable from our support for the just
struggle of the peoples of Palestine,
Namibia.
Zimbabwe or Azania to get rid of their racist OPpressors and recover sovereignty over their usurped
territories.

145. Jordan, being so intimately,
profoundly and
inextricably concerned about finding a solution to the
twin problems of the Middle East and of the fate of
the Palestinians, pledges its full assistance in every
way possible in the imperative and urgent task of
achieving a just and equitable solution, and thereby
defusing a potentially
dangerous and explosive
situation.

151. As a matter of fact, in recent times the Security
Council has been almost continuously
seized of the
deteriorating
situations both in Palestine
and in
southern Africa. Instead of realizing the extent of the
danger or understanding the distress signals flashing
ceaselessly from those tormented areas, some Council
members have not only failed repeatedly to meet theit
responsibilities as supposed guardians of international
peace and security but, what is even more tragic
and hypocritical, they have unashamedly and openly
manifested
their apathy and boredom
at these
recurrent appeals to the Council by the oppressed and
suffering peoples of Palestine and southern Africa.

146. I realize that our discussions today are being
carried on in the shadow of the more immediate and
momentous events that will take place here within
the next 48 hours, but my hope is that some of my
colleagues around this table will remember some of
what I have said as, although at the moment of far
lesser significance, potentially momentous later on.
For international peace and security are intimately
related to present Israeli practices in the occupied
lands within the broad framework to which I have
referred.

theil

152. What is then the justification
for having a
Security Council at-all if its members-especially
some
of those which occupy permanent seats-are annoyed
by the mere convening of the Council in order to
consider a tense situation which endangers world
peace and security, let alone by any action by the
Council to resolve the problem or handle the situation?
Even without the complications
of the dangerous
events and developments which are taking place in
the occupied Arab territories, does not the mere fact
that they continue to be under foreign occupation fol
the tenth year cause any concern or inquietude on
the part of the so-called guardians of international
peace and security?

147. The PRESIDENT
(iuterpwtrrtiorr
,fi*om S~UIIis/z): The next speaker is the’ representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic, whom I invite to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
148. Mr. ALLAF (Syrian Arab Republic): Whenevel
the cause of a struggling people is discussed under
the leadership of the representative of a free and
sovereign country of the third world I cannot but
entertain a sentiment of hope and expectation, for in
my mind the vision is already clear: one day, however
distant, the struggle of that heroic people will also
triumph, and-who knows?-its representative may in
his turn, lead the discussions for the salvation of yet
another subjugated and oppressed nation.

153. Less than three months ago, the non-aligned
countries, which constitute nearly two thirds of the
whole membership of the United Nations, warned, in
the Political Declaration of the Fifth Conference of
Heads of State or Government of the Non-Aligned
Countries Colombo:
“The Middle East situation continues to pose a
grave threat to international
peace and security.
About nine years following its 1967 aggression,
Israel continues to occupy Arab territories
and
violate the inalienable
national
rights of the
Palestinian people. The Israeli aggressors persist
in their policy of expansion, annexation,
mass
expulsion and repression of the Arab population,
in violation of the United Nations Charter and resolutions, and the principles of humanitarian and international law, particularly the fourth Geneva Con-

149. This is my sentiment today, Mr. President, as
the plight of our captive Palestinian people in the
occupied territories comes once more to the attention
of the Security Council at the very moment when
YOU have assumed its presidency.
Since you come
from a country which is courageously struggling to
regain control and jurisdiction over an important part
of its national territory, no one can appreciate better
than you, I am sure, the right and just nature of the
struggle of the Palestinian people to liberate thei]
17

vention. Moreover, Israel continues to establish
settlements in the occupied Arab territories and take
measures aiming at the alteration of the political,
demographic and cultural features, and religious
character of Jerusalem and other occupied Arab
territories, “&

the restoration of their national rights to the Palestinian
people, for a just and lasting peace to be established
in the region.
158. Why is it, then, that everybody is aware of the
dangers to international peace and security from the
present situation in the Middle East except the very
organ designated by the Charter of the United Nations
to maintain peace and security?

l54. More recently, the Special Committee
to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories
stated in the conclusions of its eighth report to the ‘“159. In accordance with Article 24 of the Charter,
General Assembly the following:
the States Members of the United Nations, as a whole,
“confer on the Security Council primary responsi“uaving regard to the fact that military occupation
bility for the maintenance of international peace and
is in its tenth year, the Special Committee, has apart
security”.
from the analytical presentation appearing in [previous paragraphs] examined real causes which, in
160. With respect to any situation that constitutes a
addition to the continuation of the occupation and
threat to the peace, a breach of the peace, or an act
its inevitable consequences, are responsible for
of aggression, such as the Middle East situation
the serious deterioration of the situation in the
clearly is, the Council is under the obligation, in conoccupied territories. These causes are found in:
formity with the provisions of Article 39, to make
recommendations after determining the existence of
“((I) The Government of Israel’s policy of
such a situation or to decide what measures shall be
annexation and settlement;
taken in accordance with Articles 41 and 42, to
maintain or restore international peace and security.
“(h) The practices followed in the treatment
of civilian detainees;
161. According to Article 41, the Security Council
may decide what measures not involving the use of
“(c) The resistance of the civilian population
armed force are to be employed to give effect-and
to the measures adopted to implement
this
I stress this-to ils decisions. If such measures prove
policy.“’
to be inadequate, the Council may resort to military
155. The Special Committee, after analysing in detail
enforcement action, in accordance with Article 42.
the information available to it in the light of the aforeWhat are the measures that the Security Council has
mentioned aspects of Israeli policies and practices,
recommended or taken in order to give effect to its own
stated in its report that:
decisions on the question of the Middle East during
the last nine years, or most particularly during the
“The Special Committee
has, since its first
last three years, let alone to the scores of decisions
report, urged the General Assembly to assume its
and resolutions of the United Nations General
responsibilities and to bring the state of occupation
Assembjy over the last three decades?
to an end. The Special Committee has maintained
that this would be the only way in which the human
162. What is happening in the occupied Arab terrirights of the civilian population of the occupied
tories could not be described any more even in terms
territories could best be ensured.“x
as bad as “creeping annexation”. Now, a more truthful description would be “plain
and galloping
156. A few days ago, our Secretary-General observed
annexation”.
The Zionist establishment no longer
the following in his report on the United Nations
hides its expansionist designs. Everywhere in the
Emergency Force:
occupied territories the Zionists are feverishly expropriating Arab lands, establishing Jewish settlements
“If there is a continuing lack of prpgress in
and bulldozing Arab houses and dwellings.
efforts to implement Security Council resolution 338
(1973), the situation in the Middle East will inevitably
163. The Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
remain unstable in spite of peace-keeping and other
Practices describes what is really happening in its
arrangements.” [S/122/2, parvr. 43.1
previously mentioned report as follows:
157. The Majority of the Member
States that
participated in the gerleral debate in the General Assembly which ended a couple of weeks ago pointed
out the dangers of the present situation in the Middle
East and in the occupied Arab territories. Nearly all
of them called for renewed efforts to reach a comprehensive settlement ensuring the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from the occupied Arab territories and

“the main problem affecting the human rights of the
population of the occupied territories had its roots
in a policy followed by the Government of Israel
directed towards a process of annexation of these
territories. This process was shown to be the result
of a number of direct or indirect measures or practices. The most serious of the direct measures has
been the establishment of Israeli settlements in
18

./

accordance with previously approved plans of the
Government and the transfer of Israeli citizens to
these settlements.
The information
before the
Special Committee
indicates that 61 settlements
have so far been established in the occupied territories. A second direct measure is continued refusal
by the Government of Israel of the recognition of
the right to return of those persons who had fled
the occupied territories during and as a result of the
hostilities of June 1967. Examples of indirect
measures are the excessively severe measures
adopted by the occupying Power to repress all
manifestations or protest against the occupation,
including reprisals such as the demolition of houses
and prohibition of exports of produce. In each of
its reports, the Special Committee has given ample
and uncontradicted illustrations of the existence of
these measures and of the fact that they form an
integral part of the policies and practices followed
by the Government of Israel in the occupied territories. The Government
of Israel has continued
to follow these policies and especially that of
annexation and settlement which is in contravention
of the letter and spirit of the fourth Geneva Convention. “g
f64. The Zionists find themselves, however, in front
of a very thorny problem. In order to put into execution
their premeditated designs for the annexation of all
or most of the occupied territories, they have to solve
the problem arising out of the fact that those territories are still heavily populated by Arabs in spite of
the countless Jewish settlements hurriedly implanted
in their midst.
165. They do not want a “State” whose “Jewish”
character is eroded or “marred”
by the inclusion of
about 2 million Arabs. What then is the Zionist
solution for such a problem? Purely and simply: get
rid of as many Arabs as you can through expulsion,
harassment and persecution. The report of the Special
Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices is full of
examples concerning
the Israeli
Government’s
inhuman and barbarous treatment
of the Arab
population. Examples of premeditated Israeli plans for
the usurpation and annexation of Arab territories
abound in this report, as well as in the world press
and in many reports coming out of the occupied territories, including news items and reports published in
the Israeli press itself.
166. Israel is following a policy of oppression and
racial discrimination
with the clear aim of terrorizing
the Arab population inside both the newly and formerly
occupied Arab territories.
167. A top-secret document, which was referred to
previous speakers and which was
published by the Israeli newspaper AI-Hnmishmar,
organ of Israel’s Mapam Party, on 7 September 1976,
reveals the true ugly and racist nature of the Zionist
establishment. In that secret document, which has
bY the three

become known as the “Koenig plan”, Israel Koenig,
the Northern
District Commissioner
of the Israeli
Ministry
of Interior, presents various proposals to
the Prime Minister of Israel to “handle the Arabs of
Israel”, because of the dangers, among other things,
of their natural population
increase which in Israel
is 5.9 per cent annually, as compared to 1.5 per cent
for the Jewish population
and because of Israel’s
economic dependence on Arab labour, Arab workers,
especially in the northern district of Israel.
168. Koenig’s
sqlution for the problem of Arab
population increase is to “expand and deepen Jewish
settlements in areas where the contiguity of the Arab
population is prominent and to examine the possibility
Of’ -1
stress-“ diluting
existing Arab population
concentrations”.
His recommendations
include also
encouraging
Arab students to emigrate by making
“trips abroad for studies easier while making the
return and employment
of those Arab students more
difficult”.
That policy, as he says, is apt to encourage
their emigration.
169. Koenig suggests also the introduction of a policy
of “reward and punishment”
for leaders and settlements that express hostility in any way towards the
State and Zionism. His proposals include the appointment of a special team “to examine the personal habits
of leftists and nationalist leaders and other negative
people and to make this information available to the
electorate”.
170. In the economic field, the Koenig plan calls
for an increase in taxes imposed on the Arab population, a decrease in the number of Arab employees,
neutralizing
the payment of the so-called big-family
grants to the Arab population by linking them to the
economic situation or by transferring that responsibility to the Jewish Agency or to the Zionist organization “so that the grant is paid to Jews only”, and
an endeavour to have central institutions pay more
attention “to giving preferential treatment to Jewish
groups or individuals, rather than to Arabs”.
171. On the educational level, Koenig proposes to
raise the admission criteria in the universities for
Arab students and to encourage the channelling of
those students into technical professions and physical
and natural sciences since “these studies leave less
time for dabbling in nationalism
and the drop-out
rate is higher”.
172. Mr. Koenig suggests that the Israeli Government tighten security measures against the Arab
population
and says “one has to remember and to
learn from the experience of other States with national
minority
populations
that exaggerated and uncontrolled liberalism does not achieve the intended end,
but rather the opposite. And this rule applies particularly to the specific Arab minority in Israel.” He
proposes, among other things, to increase the presence
of various police and security forces in the Arab

streets to deter extremist circles and those who are
“sitting on the fence and are likely to be drawn into
uprisings and demonstrations”.
173. Naturally, the Israeli Government has tried to
minimize the dangerous implications of the Koenig
report, but it has been unable to deny its existence.
The Israeli Prime Minister, Mr. Rabin, urged the
Israeli
Arab leaders-according
to the Jewish
Telegraphic Agency-to
“forget the controversial
Koenig report and get on with the job of developing
and improving their towns”.

178. The tragedy which is taking place in the
occupied territories is not merely that of such repeated.
incidents and violations of the rights of the Arab
population.. Such incidents are the natural outcome of
the Zionist policy of colonization and usurpation of
the Arab territories. Israel has become the latest
colonial Power in an era in which decolonization is
the nearly achieved ideal of humanity. The Israeli
magazine Neul O~lrlook in its September-October
1976 issue described the Israeli occupation of the Arab
territories in the following terms:
“Continued occupation of the territories conquered in 1967 is turning Israel into a colonial ruler,
intolerable in the twentieth century and corrupting
Israeli society from the inside. Withdrawal, the
sooner the better, is necessary to rectify this
development and to make peace of any sort
possible.”

174. In addition to the shocking facts referred to in
my statement and in those of my colleagues concerning
the Koenig report, there is an even more shocking
element in that report: the way in which that report
refers to the Arab population living in what is now
called Israel. In that report they refer to that Arab
population in an insulting manner, using a racist expression, as people who have a “Levantinistic
Arab
tends to exceed
character, whose imagination
rationality”.
In another part of that report also, that
racist reference to the Arabs who are living in Israel
is used again.

The magazine article continued:
“The existing situation is one of &If-destruction
of the Jewish people in the State of Israel and of
basing its relations with the Arabs on perpetual
terror. There is no way out of this situation except
withdrawal from the territories
inhabited
by
1.25 million Arabs.”

175. The treatment ,of the Arab population in the
West Bank, in Gaza and the rest of the occupied Arab
territories, is naturally much worse than that reserved
to their brothers living in what is now known as
Israel. The Security Council has repeatedly been called
upon during recent times to consider inhuman Israeli
practices in the occupied Arab territories. The debate
on this issue during the months of March and May
of this year was not conclusive because of the negative
attitude and the policy of conspiratorial silence maintained by certain permanent members of the Security
Council and others concerning Israel’s policy of
constant violation of the human and national rights of
the Arab population in the occupied territories.

179. That is the heart and the root of the problem.
Israel’s occupation of the Arab territories must be
ended. Military
occupation, however, temporary,
is an act of aggression. The occupation of the Arab
territories is in its tenth year. How long does the
international community, as represented by the highest
organ responsible for international peace and security,
namely, the Security Council, intend to keep silent in
the face of this continuing act of aggression and the
interminable suffering of 3 million human beings?
180. The Security Council is called upon once more
to meet its responsibility under the Charter of the
United Nations. If it fails to meet that responsibility,
the only result will be to discredit this body and to
encourage the aggressor to persist in the crimes which
it has been committing in the region for three decades.

176. During recent weeks, the Arab population, in
various parts of the West Bank has once more been
subjected to new Israeli oppressive practices. The
Israeli authorities have conspired with fanatical
Jewish extremists by keeping their eyes closed to
the repeated acts of provocation and aggression
committed by those fanatical groups against Moslem
shrines, religious articles and sacred books. The
desecration of the holiest Moslem book, the Koran,
in the Al-Ibrahimi Mosque has triggered a series of
incidents and confrontations between the Jews of
Kiryat Arba, a settlement which was implanted near
the Arab City of Hebron (Al-Khalil) and the Arab
population.

181. What is requested of the Council is not a mere
condemnation
of Israel’s policy of expansion,
annexation and oppression, What is requested of the
Council is not yet another resolution which would be
added to the already huge pile of unimplemented
resolutions and which would remain a dead letter.
What is requested is that the Council act in accordance with its prerogatives and’responsibilities
under
the Charter in order to defuse a situation which
endangers peace and security not only in the region
but throughout the world. It is sincerely hoped that
the Council will be able to meet the challenge this
time.

177. As usual, the Israeli Government
blamed
irresponsible elements for those incidents but failed
to take any effective measures to protect Arab and
Moslem shrines from the aggression of fanatical Jewish
groups, such as Gush Emunim.

The meeting rose at 6.25 pm.
20

Notes
1 Official
Records
ctf the General Assettthly, Thirty$trst
Session,
.P/et&y
Meetings,
29ih meet)ing, par a.110..
2 United Nations, Treafy Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.
3 OfJicial,Rqords
of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth Session,

document Al8389,para.72.
4 Ibid.;

para. 31.

Thirty-first

Session,

Plenary

Meetings,

31st meeting,

s Ibid.,
Thirty-first
Session,
document A/31/197, annex IV,
resolution NAC/CONF.S/S/RES.E.
6 Ibid., annex I, para. 70.
’ Ibid., Thirty-first
Session, agenda item 55, document A/31/218,
para. 325.
* Ibid., para. 358.
g Ibid., para. 321 q

21

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

UNITED

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
dcs Nations
Units
monde entier.
Informcz-vous
aup&
dcs ventes.
New York ou GenPve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES NATIONS

UNIES

sont en vente dans Its librairies
et les apences
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
ri : Nations

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Nacioncs
to&s
partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva York
o Ginebra,

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations,
Sales Section.
New York or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

COMMENT

NATIONS

DE LAS

NACIONES

depositaires
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS

Unidas estan en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en
a su librero o dirijnse
a: Naciones
Unidas.
Seccidn de Ventas.

00400

83-60801-April

1985~2,200
