UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
15 February 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SIXTH MEETING (Resumption 2)
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Tuesday, 15 February 1994, at 10 a.m.

President:
Members:

Mr. OLHAYE

(Djibouti)

Argentina
Brazil
China
Czech Republic
France
New Zealand
Nigeria
Oman
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. CARDENAS
Mr. SARDENBERG
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. KOVANDA
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. KEATING
Mr. UMAR
Mr. AL-SAMEEN
Mr. KHAN
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. BIZIMANA
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO
Sir David HANNAY
Mrs. ALBRIGHT

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.

94-85185 (E)

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
141

The meeting resumed at 10.45 a.m., Tuesday, 15 February 1994.
The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now continue its

consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document S/1994/173,
which contains the text of a letter dated 14 February 1994 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the report of the Co-Chairmen of the Steering
Committee of the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia.
The next speaker is the representative of Slovenia.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. TÜRK (Slovenia):

May I begin by emphasizing how

pleased we are to see you, Sir, in the presidency of the Security
Council.

We continue to admire your work in the Council and your

diplomatic skill, and we are convinced that under your guidance the
work of the Security Council will be successful, as it was under
the exemplary presidency of Ambassador Karel Kovanda of the Czech
Republic, who presided over the proceedings of the Council in the
month of January.
The war in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
raging unconscionably long and has brought untold suffering to the
civilian population of that country.

Furthermore, it has put in

question the very survival of a United Nations Member State and
has, consequently, given rise to a very serious challenge to the
United Nations system of collective security.

These are only the

most obvious consequences of the war so far, while all its
implications are not yet fully grasped.
The most recent attack against civilians in Sarajevo, on
5 February 1994, has but emphasized the dimensions of the tragedy
and has prompted outrage in world public opinion.

The need for

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
142

(Mr. Türk, Slovenia)
resolute steps and for a renewed effort for peace has been
expressed more strongly than ever.
A careful analyst could draw many lessons from the efforts
made so far for peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

One of those

lessons - perhaps the most important one - is that diplomacy cannot
produce good results if it is not guided by realistic and
well-informed analysis.

In this context, it becomes clear that the

nature of war in Bosnia and Herzegovina must be kept clearly in
mind.

The war in Bosnia and Herzegovina is neither a religious nor

an ethnic conflict, nor is it a "three-way civil war", as some
observers tend to believe.

That war started as a war of aggression

against a United Nations Member State, and it has remained, in
essence, a war for territorial expansion.

The genocidal practice

of "ethnic cleansing" directed against Muslims of Bosnia and
Herzegovina was devised and carried out as an instrument of war for
territorial expansion.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
143

(Mr. Türk, Slovenia)
Another lesson of major importance learned in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is that diplomacy without strength is fruitless when
confronted with forces of aggression.

In Bosnia this has been for

far too long a sad and basic feature of the conflict.
However, a more realistic approach seems to be emerging:

for

almost two years, it has been clear that the removal of heavy
weapons from the vicinity of cities and other places with high
concentrations of civilians is an essential prerequisite for a
genuine cease-fire and, consequently, for a successful search for
peace.

Proposals to that effect were many, but none was heeded.

It is therefore very important that, just recently, the need
for effective action to withdraw heavy weapons from the vicinity of
Sarajevo was recognized.

The pertinent provisions of the

resolutions adopted earlier by the Security Council have started to
gain credibility.

It is commendable that the North Atlantic Treaty

Organization (NATO) has reacted to recent developments promptly and
adequately.
The United Nations and world public opinion are now awaiting
the actual and complete withdrawal of heavy weapons from the
vicinity of Sarajevo and, should the need arise, steps to ensure
that those weapons are effectively removed, and thus that the
initial conditions for a genuine cease-fire are established.
It is our firm opinion that strong support for all the steps
that are being taken or ought to be taken in this context is the
main objective of the present meeting of the Security Council.
While duly focusing on the most urgent aspect of the
situation, the Security Council should not lose sight of the
broader perspective.

There is an urgent need to develop a

realistic framework for peace in the Balkans.

The tragedy of

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
144

(Mr. Türk, Slovenia)
Bosnia and Herzegovina is the most dramatic aspect of the broader
security problem in the area.

Let us not forget that the

concentration of arms and armed personnel in the territories of the
immediate neighbours of Bosnia and Herzegovina represents in itself
a problem for international peace and security.

Hundreds of

thousands of men are under arms, and this growth in armed forces
has confronted the international community with a creeping change
in the balance of power.

It is regrettable indeed that during the

present debate in the Security Council we have not heard assurances
concerning the withdrawal of foreign troops from Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
The efforts for peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina have been
evolving for almost two years.

The need to develop an imaginative

framework for these efforts is ever-present.

My Government has

been aware of this need for a long time, and has made several
proposals in this context.

Let me recall, by way of illustration,

the proposals made by my Government between July 1992 and
April 1993 concerning the establishment of safe areas in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Just recently, on 7 February this year, the Government of the
Republic of Slovenia formulated a four-point appeal containing the
four basic points which, in our view, represent the core elements
of such a framework.

The appeal was also circulated as a document

of the General Assembly and of the Security Council (S/1994/129).
The first point of the appeal contains a demand for the
withdrawal of heavy weapons from the vicinity of Sarajevo and other
areas with a high concentration of civilian population.

This

demand is already being taken up by the international community,
and has already begun to be acted on.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
145

(Mr. Türk, Slovenia)
The second demand in the appeal concerns the unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian assistance to the civilian population in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

This should include unimpeded access by

the civilian population to water, electricity and gas.
Thirdly, my Government considers that the restoration of
private property and the safeguarding of places of worship are
indispensable requirements for the peace process actually to
proceed.
Fourthly, the return of the territories seized by force and
"ethnic cleansing" should begin without delay.
We believe that the present situation and the determination of
the international community make these demands realistic and indeed
achievable - if they are persistently pursued.

We wish to

emphasize especially the need for the return of territories seized
by force to begin without delay.
Deeds are necessary as proof of good faith.

It is never too

ambitious to demand proof of good faith, and in a situation
characterized by so many broken promises it is a must.
The determination of the international community that has been
expressed in the past few days should be translated into a
sustained effort.

Careful reflection on the question of what the

necessary ingredients for real peace are will be necessary, and in
this context wide support from United Nations Member States should
be rallied.

The four-point appeal presented by the Government of

Slovenia represents a contribution in this regard.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
146

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Slovenia for

his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. LAMAMRA (Algeria) (interpretation from French):

It is

a great pleasure for me to extend to you, Sir, my delegation’s
warmest congratulations on your accession to the presidency of the
Council.

I am delighted to see the Permanent Representative of

Djibouti, a friendly, fraternal country, leading the Council’s
deliberations with such skill and effectiveness at a time when the
Council is dealing with the recent developments in one of the most
serious crises that the international community has had to
confront.
I should also like to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Kovanda, on his masterful performance last month.
For almost two years now, the tragic situation being
experienced by the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
constantly and powerfully troubled the world’s conscience.

The

massacre caused by the shelling of Sarajevo’s central market-place
was the climax of the throes of horror in a conflict that
challenges the essential values of the human race at a time when
the qualitative change in international relations could give us
legitimate grounds for hoping that the community of nations would
quite naturally be demanding and ready to help when the rights of
the weakest peoples, those most exposed to forcible attack, request
proper international protection.
The massacre of 5 February, which aroused great indignation
throughout the world, is, however, just one more crime to add to
all the other crimes against humanity that have been overtly

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
147

(Mr. Lamamra, Algeria)
committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and that have so far gone
unpunished.
The frightful tragedies that have been the daily lot and
portion of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina since it was
admitted to membership in the United Nations as a sovereign,
independent and peaceful State; the frenzied efforts to dismember
its territory under the cover of the waves of aggression and
violence that are reducing its population to a sub-human state:
these bear stark witness to the dithering and reluctance that have
doomed the actions and the reactions of our Organization to an
ineffectiveness that does the Organization’s credibility no good at
all.
The extremely difficult conditions that have been imposed on
the activities of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR)
and the humanitarian organizations - whose laudable presence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in fact symbolizes the international
community’s desire not to shirk its responsibilities - have all
demonstrated the need for the United Nations to acquire the means
to implement a policy of firmness capable of deterring,
discouraging and thwarting the attempts at genocide of which the
Bosnian people have been the victims.
If no such policy on the part of a united and determined
international community is forthcoming, the many resolutions of the
Security Council, unfortunately, will not have spared us the
horrors of "ethnic cleansing", or forestalled the acquisition of
territory by force, nor will they have safeguarded Sarajevo or the
five other "safe areas" from armed aggression.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
148

(Mr. Lamamra, Algeria)
The 5 February massacre gave searing relevance to the
objectives and actions set out in resolutions 824 (1993) and
836 (1993).

Using every appropriate means to neutralize the

military force holding Bosnian civilians hostage in Sarajevo and
other parts of the country is now an imperative element of any
effort to bring about conditions for genuine negotiations.
At the same time, it is morally and politically important for
the Council to state its recognition of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s inherent right of self-defence under Article 51 of
the Charter of the United Nations, and the associated right to seek
and obtain assistance in preserving its sovereignty and its
territorial integrity.
The current Security Council debate should put an end to the
tendency to acquiesce in faits accomplis in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It should also demonstrate that the international community has
once more seized the initiative.

Finally, it should give hope to

the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly its Muslim
component, which has been the victim of unspeakable ordeals, by
demonstrating the mobilization of the international community to
safeguard the right of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
exist.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Algeria for

the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Jordan.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. BATAINEH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):

Let

me begin, Sir, by congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.

We are

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
149

(Mr. Bataineh, Jordan)
confident that you will skilfully guide the Council’s deliberations
to the desired success through your wisdom, experience and ability.
I wish also to thank your predecessor, His Excellency
Mr. Karel Kovanda of the Czech Republic, for the skill with which
he guided the Council’s work last month.
It is striking that the Security Council’s current discussion
of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is taking place in a
framework quite different from that surrounding previous debates.
Unfortunately, this meeting was not convened on the initiative of
the Council itself in reaction to the deterioration of the
situation and the ongoing tragedy in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

That

deterioration, which can be charted as a descending curve, is the
result of a lack of determination by the Security Council to
implement its resolutions - perhaps because, as the situation
becomes commonplace, so too does living with it.
This meeting will not culminate in the normal practice of
adopting a resolution reflecting the thinking expressed throughout
the deliberations.

None the less, my delegation appreciates your

efforts, Mr. President, and thanks you for convening the meeting,
which comes in the aftermath of the heinous carnage perpetrated on
5 February 1994 against besieged innocent civilians in Sarajevo - a
city the Security Council has declared a safe area.
We might have wished for the Council to meet on its own
initiative to put an end to the reasons for and consequences of the
moral, political and humanitarian tragedy of the Bosnian Muslims,
which has nearly reached the point of absurdity.

We still hope for

this, and my country, Jordan, continues to wish it.
My country is the second largest troop-contributing State in
the former Yugoslavia.

We call upon the Security Council to work

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
150

(Mr. Bataineh, Jordan)
seriously to take all measures authorized by the Charter of the
United Nations to implement Security Council resolutions adopted
under Chapter VII of the Charter.
In the context of the events that led to this meeting, my
delegation wishes to state, first, that the barbaric attack on the
market-place in Sarajevo and the resulting carnage cannot be
isolated from the other chapters of the tragedy of the Bosnian
Muslims.

Nor can it be isolated from the shortcomings of the

international system.

In terms of the norms of conduct governing

international relations, this terrorist act is a black mark.

It

occurred in the framework of systematic Serb activities that would
have been impossible had the aggressor felt that the international
community was serious about shouldering its responsibilities under
the Charter and with respect to the implementation of even one of
the resolutions the Security Council has adopted on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina under Chapter VII.
As proof, I note that the carnage took place in a locality the
Council, in resolution 824 (1993), had declared a safe area.

The

Council, indeed, went on in a subsequent resolution - resolution
836 (1993) - to specify the machinery by which its safety would be
guaranteed.

That resolution also laid down a clear framework for

using all necessary means, including air strikes, to guarantee the
safety and security of the area and the security of the personnel
of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) stationed there.
What is the significance of the choice of that area for the
carnage, and of the earlier bombardments of the same area as
attested to by UNPROFOR?

I would have liked to think that the

answer was connected to the short-sightedness of the aggressor and
to its past flouting of Security Council resolutions.

That

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
151

(Mr. Bataineh, Jordan)
explanation would be the lesser of two evils, for the other
interpretation is that the aggressor is fully convinced that the
Security Council adopted its resolutions on Bosnia and Herzegovina
and on the safe areas not with a view to implementing them, but
with a view only to marketing them.
If that is true, the failure to redress the situation will
involve moral, legal and political repercussions for the political
and peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and will have dire
consequences for the credibility of the United Nations and the
collective security system in general.
Secondly, in that light, there can logically be no balance or
serious progress in the political negotiations on the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina if the militarily superior Serb party feels
it can achieve its political and military objectives and demands
unilaterally, through military force, with impunity.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
152

(Mr. Bataineh, Jordan)
Thus the Council and all the States concerned, if they truly
want the peace process to be successful, must act accordingly,
sending the correct message to the Serbian party, one that will
serve this purpose and not the contrary one.
Suffice it to say, to prove my point, that the Bosnian
Muslims’ responsiveness in the face of this grim international
scenario, and their acceptance on the negotiating table of various
ideas and difficult solutions, was not enough to curb the appetite
and greed of the Serbian side.

That side unilaterally rejects the

solutions accepted, albeit hesitantly, by the Bosnian Muslims and
all other participants, or accepts and then rejects them, since it
sincerely believes that its atrocities against the Bosnian Muslims
have been met with silence, and interprets this silence as
encouragement of its policy.

It seems to feel that the Council is

determined to maintain the military imbalance between the Serbs and
their victims, and that it will fail to provide protection for the
victims.
How can political negotiations succeed in such a situation?
And if they do succeed, how can the Muslim people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina be guaranteed that the settlement will be just?

How

can they believe that peace will be guaranteed in the region
afterwards?
Thirdly, resolution 713 (1991) of 25 September 1991, which
deprived the Muslim people of Bosnia and Herzegovina of the means
of self-defence, becomes in this context a biased and unjust
resolution.

It also runs counter to the provisions of Article 51

of the Charter, since the embargo provided for in the resolution,
which deprives the Bosnian people of the inalienable right to
self-defence, has not gone hand in hand with the international

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
153

(Mr. Bataineh, Jordan)
community’s defence and protection of the weak Bosnian side.
has any legal explanation been demanded.

Nor

This has widened the

military imbalance between the two parties and enabled the Serbian
side, which has remained in contact with the heirs to the military
might of the six Republics, to achieve success against the
territories and people of Bosnia, who, alone under siege, were in
effect the only subjects of the arms embargo.

Reports indicate

that parties in Serbia are still providing their agents and militia
in Bosnia with all types of weapons.

This has motivated the

international community to call on the Security Council by General
Assembly resolution 48/88, to exclude the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina from the unjust and unbalanced embargo to enable it to
defend itself.
Fourthly, paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 24 of the Charter make
us feel entitled to say that the failure of the Security Council,
which should act as an agent of the international community, to
address the humanitarian, political, security and military
situations that have prevailed for the last two years in Bosnia and
Herzegovina throws into serious question entire Chapters of the
Charter, particularly Chapters VI, VII, VIII and XII.

They are the

ones that define, among other things, the conduct of the Security
Council in discharging its duties in the name of the United Nations
and its principles.

Perhaps Member States should undertake

consultations with the Security Council about the obstacles that
prevented it from implementing its own resolutions and carrying out
the duties entrusted to it to protect the security, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of a small Member State.

That State relied

upon it and had nothing but the will of its people, whose human
rights, including their right to life, have been violated by a

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
154

(Mr. Bataineh, Jordan)
neighbouring aggressor State which has acquired supremacy by all
military means, at a time when the ideals of freedom, democracy and
human rights take priority on the agenda of the international
community.
In the light of what I have already said, I would like to
emphasize the following.
imposed settlements.

First, my Government does not believe in

It believes that permanent and just solutions

leading to the establishment of peace in any conflict, whether
regional or international, can be implemented by negotiated
political settlements that guarantee the legitimate rights of all
sides, and not by resorting to military force.

However, diplomacy

alone cannot always achieve this goal, especially if
miscalculations or wrongful intentions take hold in the minds of
some parties to the conflict.

This has been the situation as far

as the Serbian side is concerned for the last two years.

In this

case, military intervention has become imperative, especially when
the people of Bosnia are deprived of their right to acquire the
means for self-defence, in order to force the Serbian aggressors
seriously to address the peace process in good faith, to force them
to view it as the only way to settle the problem.
The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the circumstances facing the Muslim people, including the recent
carnage and the bombardment on 4 February 1994 of a safe area in
Bosnia, make it incumbent upon the international community to act
immediately, particularly in the light of paragraphs 9 and 10 of
resolution 836 (1993), which provide a legal framework for air
strikes.

We see no need for the Security Council to adopt a new

resolution to implement this task, which we hope will be the first
step to ending the tragedy and to forcing the Serbian side to

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
155

(Mr. Bataineh, Jordan)
accept a peaceful, just settlement.

Air strikes by the North

Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) are compatible with
paragraph 10 of that resolution, which enables Member States to
undertake air strikes through regional organizations or
arrangements should safe areas be bombarded.

NATO might also have

to fulfil obligations delegated to it by the United Nations on
behalf of the international community.

We welcome and encourage

the efforts of the United Nations Secretary-General, and support
the contents of his letter of 6 February 1994 to the SecretaryGeneral of NATO, and the positive response by NATO to that letter.
Secondly, while expressing our condolences to the Government
and people of Bosnia and to the families of the victims of the
marketplace carnage, we would like to reiterate the need to
identify the perpetrators and bring them to justice.

Whoever they

were, they must be tried as terrorists and war criminals.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
156

(Mr. Bataineh, Jordan)
This is a moral and legal obligation that the international
community must meet.
Thirdly, serious measures must be taken immediately to lift
the siege on Sarajevo and other besieged areas and to provide
protection to UNPROFOR personnel in that region, in the other "safe
areas" and in all parts of Bosnia.

Security Council resolution

770 (1992) must be implemented so that the flow of humanitarian and
relief assistance to the various areas is guaranteed.

The Tuzla

airport must also be opened, and this must not be subject to any
political bargaining.
Fourthly, effective steps must be taken immediately to put an
end to the policy of "ethnic cleansing" and to pursue and bring to
justice those who have committed these crimes.

The inadmissibility

of the acquisition of territories by force must be acknowledged and
anything gained thereby must be regarded as null and void.

The

right of all Bosnian refugees to return to their homes must be
guaranteed.

Furthermore, all detention camps must be shut down.

Finally, we hope that NATO will insist on implementing all the
provisions of its ultimatum.

A small window of hope for the peace

process in Bosnia has opened, and NATO should not allow such an
opportunity to be lost.

We also hope that the Council will escape

from the circle of inaction in which it has been caught and will
shoulder its responsibilities under the Charter so that it can work
to put an end to the aggression and the atrocities committed
against the people and Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
bring hope back to that small country which is trying to free
itself of the shackles of the cold war.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
157

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Jordan for

his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Tunisia.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. ABDELLAH (Tunisia) (interpretation from Arabic):

At

the outset, Sir, I would like, on behalf of the Tunisian
delegation, to congratulate you most sincerely on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.

We are

convinced that the Council will be able to discharge its difficult
tasks effectively because of your experience and skill and the
respect and esteem you enjoy.
I would also like to express all my gratitude to your
predecessor, His Excellency Ambassador Karel Kovanda, for having
successfully presided over the work of the Council last month.
The Council is now meeting to consider serious developments in
the crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the wake of the horrendous
massacre in which dozens of powerless and innocent civilians in
Sarajevo were killed.

This is another crime to be added to those

already perpetrated by the Serbs against the Bosnian people during
the last two years - crimes equalled in atrocity only by those
committed by the Nazis during the Second World War.

It is but one

episode in a long series of aggressions and violations perpetrated
against an independent and sovereign Member State of the United
Nations.
It is high time that the international community acted firmly
and imposed implementation of the many resolutions adopted on this
subject by this Council and the General Assembly.

Indeed, the Serb

aggression against Bosnia and Herzegovina has continued and even
grown worse because the impression has been given to the leaders of
Serbia and Montenegro and to the Bosnian Serbs that the world is

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
158

(Mr. Abdellah, Tunisia)
not serious about resisting that aggression and is not determined
to put an end to all these heinous crimes such as "ethnic
cleansing", rape, murder and the displacement of populations.
Despite the Security Council resolutions relating to the "safe
areas", the capital city has been under siege for more than two
years.

Not a day has gone by without the Serb forces launching

attacks against the inhabitants of Sarajevo and other cities of
Bosnia and disrupting the delivery of food and humanitarian aid.
How often have we taken note, here in the United Nations - the most
recent date being 4 February 1994 - that all these attacks have
obviously been carried out by Serbs.
It is not surprising that, while shock was being expressed in
the world at the sight of mutilated bodies swimming in blood in the
Sarajevo market-place, the leader of the Bosnian Serbs maintained
that the attack did not come from the Serb side.

What is amazing,

however, is that there are some who actually believed him - as
though earlier events did not contradict him.

In distorting the

facts, the Serbs are clearly attempting to evade their
responsibility for this heinous act so as not to have to take the
consequences.
The general outcry of international public opinion has had its
effect:

it pushed the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)

into adopting a position rapidly and decisively on 9 February.
This is an important development, long awaited by the international
community, particularly after the serious deterioration of the
situation in a country which lies at the very heart of Europe, and
above all in the very sensitive Balkan region.

The Serbs must

therefore immediately heed this warning and refrain from attacking
the city, withdraw from its vicinity and place their heavy weapons

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
159

(Mr. Abdellah, Tunisia)
under the control of the United Nations.

The slightest failure to

comply on their part should immediately result in air strikes,
without any hesitation.

Security Council resolutions 824 (1993)

and 836 (1993) authorize the Secretary-General to call for such
attacks without having recourse to the Security Council.

These two

resolutions truly provide the legal foundation for confronting any
developments of this kind.
Although the NATO ultimatum requires that the victim surrender
its weapons after the aggressors have done so, the Bosnian party
has nevertheless voluntarily handed over its heavy weapons, the
number of which had, in any event, decreased, along with its
ability to exercise its right to self-defence.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
160

(Mr. Abdellah, Tunisia)
We must reconsider resolution 713 (1991), which imposed the
arms embargo - an embargo which paralysed only the Bosnian side,
whereas the Serb forces have huge quantities of heavy weapons.

The

lifting of the embargo against the Muslims might convince the
Bosnian Serbs that they will not be able to carry out their
expansionist aims and impose a fait accompli by committing
aggression.
The ultimatum by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
represents an important step forward, and its implementation must
be monitored with great determination and seriousness.

In our

view, this ultimatum should apply to all the other "safe areas",
including Bihac, Srebrenica, Gorazde, Tuzla and Zepa, as well as to
Sarajevo.

Otherwise, the Serb forces will take advantage of the

fact that the world is looking only at the capital city and will
launch attacks against other "safe areas".

Therefore, it would be

wise to deal with every aggression in any of these areas with the
same threat of the use of force by NATO.
If we want negotiations to succeed and be productive, NATO’s
ultimatum must apply to all regions in order to ensure that these
acts of aggression cease and to induce the guilty party to accept a
peaceful, just and lasting solution.
No settlement can be peaceful, just and lasting if it is based
on "ethnic cleansing" or the acquisition of territory by force, or
if it leads to the displacement of populations and the murder of
civilians merely because of their identity.

In serious

negotiations, we certainly cannot recognize the results of
aggression as the basis for a settlement.

The real legal basis is

clearly linked to the resolutions adopted by the Security Council
and the General Assembly.

The provisions of the Charter of the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
161

(Mr. Abdellah, Tunisia)
United Nations must also be respected, for this is a framework
which the negotiators must abide by.

Otherwise, they would be

derogating from the norms of international law.
Therefore, we demand that from now on the negotiations take
place in New York, in close proximity to the Security Council.

We

should also bring to justice those responsible for the bloodshed
and for "ethnic cleansing".

They should be brought before the

International Tribunal on war crimes in the former Yugoslavia,
which should pronounce judgement on them and ensure that they will
never again engage in such acts of genocide.

We also demand that

measures be taken quickly to appoint a prosecutor and to begin an
inquiry into the crimes committed against the Bosnian people.
The Security Council has adopted many resolutions concerning
this issue, but none have been implemented.

Today, after the

warning issued by NATO, the international community is
demonstrating a firm will to put an end to the massacres and to
find the ways and means to do so.

The decision taken by the

Secretary-General to allow NATO to launch air strikes can be put
into effect if the Serbs fail to respect the cease-fire or delay in
withdrawing to their assigned positions.

Therefore the matter is

today in the hands of the Secretary-General and the leaders of
NATO, acting on behalf of the Member States of the United Nations.
We hope that the goal of the attacks launched a week ago by
the Serbs against Sarajevo and of the Serbs’ procrastination, aimed
at establishing new conditions that will induce the defenders of
the city to withdraw, is not simply to test the reaction of the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) or that it is just a
prelude to the perpetration of the kind of violations to which we
have become accustomed.

If that were indeed the case, no pretext

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
162

(Mr. Abdellah, Tunisia)
whatsoever would remain for not taking a rapid and firm decision to
launch air strikes before the expiration of the 10-day time-frame
provided for.
The international community is now facing a difficult test.
The credibility of the Security Council is also at stake, and any
hesitation or delay could distort the message sent to the Serbs
and, in the final analysis, lead to new conflicts in the region,
therefore endangering international peace and security and
destabilizing the international order.
The policy of double standards undermines the authority, the
prestige and the influence of the United Nations.

Even if we were

to try to justify all of this, we could not persuade the peoples of
the world that such positions are fair, because they are contrary
to law and the idea of justice.

Consequently, we urge the Security

Council to enhance the confidence of the peoples of the world in
the United Nations as a last resort for States that are victims of
external aggression, so that the United Nations can guarantee the
inviolability of their territories, their national sovereignty and
their political independence and protect them from the threats of
partition or extinction.
What is happening in Bosnia and Herzegovina is quite simply
external aggression against a sovereign State - an act of
aggression perpetrated by a neighbouring State which is trying to
exploit the ethnic factor to prevent the cultural and political
coexistence of the diverse elements of a single society whose
origins are, after all, the same.

We are convinced, after all the

statements we heard yesterday from the representatives of the
permanent members of the Council and the representatives of the
members of NATO, that NATO forces will put the ultimatum into

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
163

(Mr. Abdellah, Tunisia)
effect if the Serb side does not respect the conditions which have
been imposed upon it.
The Tunisian Government has already condemned and deplored the
tragic events of 5 February as well as earlier events of this kind.
We hope that the attitude of the Security Council and of NATO will
represent a decisive turning point and will put an end to the
tragedy in Bosnia and Herzegovina - which has already gone on for
far too long - making possible the restoration of the rule of law
and guaranteeing the existence of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a State
unified on the basis of coexistence, in a climate of security and
stability.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Tunisia for

the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Albania.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
164

Mr. KULLA (Albania) (interpretation from French):

I

should like first of all, Sir, to express my great respect for you
and my congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of February.

I am firmly convinced that

under your guidance the Council will be successful in its work this
month.

I should also like to extend my great appreciation to your

predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Karel Kovanda, who skilfully
presided over the deliberations of the Council last month.
Finally, on behalf of my Government, I should like to extend
warmest congratulations to the new members of the Council and offer
them my best wishes for success.
We have been brought here once again to discuss one of the
most troubling issues of our day:
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

the tragic conflict persisting

What was done to the civilian Muslim

population in the Sarajevo market-place was an assault against all
humanity, a shameful act whose authors must be severely punished.
The Republic of Albania offers its resolute support for the
efforts of the Secretary-General and of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) to defend the civilian population of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to carry out unimpeded all
the operations for the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
It is precisely in this context that the Republic of Albania
welcomed NATO’s decisions regarding action to be taken against
Serbian military positions.

This will contribute significantly to

ending the hostilities and then to achieving the desired peace
agreement.
We still hold to our previously stated opinion that if the
sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro had been backed up by
appropriate military operations the conflict would not have
escalated to anywhere near the present terrible level.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
165

(Mr. Kulla, Albania)
The Republic of Albania cannot but believe that it is now time
to implement and give credibility to the resolutions of this
Council.

Reaffirming our support for those resolutions, we call

for attention to be paid to other regions of the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and particularly to the safe areas.

Resolutions

824 (1993) and 836 (1993) provide the necessary framework for the
protection of the safe areas through, inter alia, cooperation with
regional organizations.
The arms embargo imposed on the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina has deprived the most threatened and weakest party to
the conflict of the possibility of defending itself.

The

continuation of the arms embargo against the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina has encouraged the aggressors, and naturally we have
seen them persist, without fear, in committing more and more acts
of genocide against the Muslim people.
The Republic of Albania continues to support the negotiation
process, mediated in the main by the United Nations and the
European Union.
be reached.

It is reasonable to believe that an agreement can

In this connection, we stress that international

pressure on the aggressor would contribute fundamentally to
stopping the war, while, on the other hand, any form of pressure on
the weaker party would produce only an unstable peace and would
have lasting, dangerous consequences.

At the same time, the

legitimization of gains made through "ethnic cleansing", and
particularly any plan for division of Bosnia and Herzegovina along
ethnic lines created artificially by "ethnic cleansing", would lead
only to a situation that could explode at any time.
The Republic of Albania considers that the implementation of
economic sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro was a key moment

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
166

(Mr. Kulla, Albania)
in the efforts of the United Nations to settle the conflict in the
former Yugoslavia.

The sanctions have already had a great effect

by forcing the Serb party to accept the strict necessity of sitting
down at the negotiating table.

On the other hand, the full effect

of the sanctions in weakening the military machinery of Belgrade,
which for two years has fed the war in the former Yugoslavia, has
yet to be seen.

It is essential that the sanctions be strictly

implemented in order to reach a long-term solution to the conflict
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in other hot spots that,
unfortunately, also make up the Yugoslav crisis.
I think that I express a view that is not solely that of my
Government when I emphasize that in the meantime other measures are
necessary so that this conflict does not spread elsewhere.

I hope

that my delegation will be allowed to draw the Council’s attention
to the worrisome situation in Kosovo, formerly an autonomous
province of the former Yugoslavia, where more than 2 million
Albanians have lived since time immemorial.

The Belgrade regime

pursues a policy of police and military repression there, thus
violating all human rights guaranteed in international documents.
This subject is not out of place in this meeting.
contrary:

Quite the

it has to do with the same tragic question, the same

instigator, "ethnic cleansing" and the same strategy, all of which
herald a war that the Serbs have already started unilaterally, one
in which the Albanians of Kosovo, with admirable forbearance, are
not taking part.
On behalf of my Government, I wish to reiterate that Kosovo
should be put under United Nations observation and protection so
that a new conflict does not break out near Bosnia, a conflict that
would have irreversible consequences for world peace.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
167

(Mr. Kulla, Albania)
Allow me to conclude by expressing my conviction that this
open debate in the Security Council will make an important
contribution to harmonizing the efforts of all to put an end to the
bloodletting in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to achieve peace in the
former Yugoslavia.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Albania for

his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Senegal.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. CISSE (Senegal) (interpretation from French):

Allow

me on behalf of the Senegalese delegation to express to you, Sir,
our joy and pride at seeing you assume the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February.

Well aware of your

virtues, your skill and your vast experience, I am confident of
your ability to lead the work of the Council with wisdom and
effectiveness.

I should also like to express our warmest

congratulations and reiterate that you have our full support in the
exercise of your responsibilities.
I must also express our gratitude to your predecessor,
Ambassador Kovanda, Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic,
for his outstanding work in the month of January.
We are also grateful to all the members of the Council for
having allowed the holding of this important meeting on the tragic
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina to be held.
For almost two years the international community has
helplessly witnessed the slow agony of the people of the Republic
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, who with courage, dignity and faith are
facing aggression whose savagery and barbarity have reached

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
168

(Mr. Cissé, Senegal)
proportions that never cease to shock our collective conscience and
that call into question the fundamental values on which the Charter
of our Organization is based.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
169

(Mr. Cissé, Senegal)
The shelling of Sarajevo on Friday, 4 February, and Saturday,
5 February, which have aroused an unprecedented wave of outrage and
condemnation throughout the world, are indeed proof that,
encouraged by the lethargy of the international community, the
Bosnian Serbs and their allies in their ignoble cause will now stop
at nothing, not even at the unbelievable horror of firing on a
dense crowd of civilians.
For the 22 months that this conflict has now lasted, the
effective solutions that might have avoided the escalation in the
violence have always been ruled out until after their effectiveness
has been voided by the escalating aggression.

This delay in

reacting to the ongoing genocide - a delay we have been trying to
catch up on by taking steps or making threats while the situation
on the ground has gone from bad to worse - is the main reason
behind massacres that we so deeply deplore today.
How often have we heard echoed the Bosnian pleas for the
withdrawal - if necessary, by force - of the Serb heavy weapons
that daily pound Sarajevo and the other Bosnian towns?

What has

not been done to persuade the Security Council that, unless
energetic action is taken - such as air raids against the Serb
positions encircling Sarajevo, control of heavy weapons by the
United Nations Protection Force and, if necessary, the lifting of
the arms embargo on those who are being massacred - we will always
be one war too late?

We are now close to believing that to do

nothing against these massacres is to aid the aggressors.
Fortunately, it is possibly because of that conviction that,
in response to the request by the Secretary-General of our
Organization, the North Atlantic Council, at its meeting of
9 February 1994 in Brussels, took a set of decisions that, if they

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
170

(Mr. Cissé, Senegal)
are implemented, could, we hope, put an end to the siege of
Sarajevo.
In a letter dated 14 February 1994 - yesterday - addressed to
Heads of State or Government of the permanent members of the
Security Council or the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
President Abdou Diouf, as President of the sixth summit meeting of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, after welcoming the
efforts made to settle the Bosnian tragedy, recalled
"the particular importance that our peoples attach to the
implementation by the international community of vigorous
steps to put an end to the Serb aggression and the injustices
imposed on the Bosnian people".
The Head of State of Senegal, in that respect, welcomed
"the courageous steps approved by NATO and, above all, the
ultimatum which that organization has issued to the Bosnian
Serbs to lift the siege of Sarajevo."
The Senegalese delegation therefore welcomes the ultimatum
that has been issued to the forces of aggression, and urges the
Secretary-General of our Organization and those in charge of NATO,
acting on behalf of the entire membership of the United Nations
within the framework of the authority vested in them under the
relevant provisions of resolutions 824 (1993) and 836 (1993), to
take all necessary steps to ensure immediate compliance with
decisions taken in the event that they are violated.
We believe that if peace is to be given a real chance the
aggressors must understand that the international community is
determined to stand in their way and will no longer tolerate any
violation of the norms set out in the Charter of our Organization

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
171

(Mr. Cissé, Senegal)
and in the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions on the issue.
The attitude of the aggressor in the light of NATO’s firmness
and determination strengthens our conviction that the wording of
the 9 February communiqué was the only one capable of helping
establish favourable conditions for finding a negotiated solution
that is acceptable to all the parties to the conflict.

However,

words alone are not enough; experience, unfortunately, pretty much
proves this, and tragically, too:

what we need to do is act, and

act fast.
We are convinced that the leaders of the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, who have on many occasions in the past
demonstrated their good will and their commitment to peace, are of
a mind to continue negotiations and to try to find a solution to
the conflict that is in accordance with the principles set out in
the Charter of the United Nations and in the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
However, as far as the Serb party is concerned, even if it
does continue to talk about negotiations, we can conclude only that
it is doing so merely in order to gain time and carry through its
policy of "ethnic cleansing" and territorial conquest.
As we hold this debate in this Chamber, and while the world’s
attention is fixed on the situation in Sarajevo, in Srebrenica,
Gorazde, Tuzla, Zepa and Bihac and their environs - and although
those towns have been declared "safe areas" - the civilian
population is suffering, far from the eyes of the television
cameras, the same encirclement and the same relentless attacks.
The situation is particularly critical in Bihac, where the
Bosnian defence lines may well collapse at any moment under

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
172

(Mr. Cissé, Senegal)
increased pressure from the Serbs, whose intention it is to occupy
the town and exterminate its populace.
We believe that the threat of the use of force in Sarajevo
should be extended to cover the entire territory, and particularly
the five other "safe areas", where the civilian population
continues to suffer repugnant acts of Serb terrorism.
In the communiqué released on 7 February, the Contact Group of
the member countries of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
(OIC) reaffirmed the OIC’s determination, should the international
community fail in its moral, political and legal responsibilities
to use air strikes against the aggressors, to launch a vigorous
campaign to ensure that the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina can
exercise its inherent right to self-defence, in accordance with
Article 51 of the Charter.
The Senegalese delegation, which firmly supports that
position, believes that the Security Council ought to make it clear
that the arms embargo imposed under resolution 713 (1991) does not
apply to the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and that countries,
either bilaterally or multilaterally, can provide assistance to a
State Member of our Organization that is being attacked, and that
such assistance can include providing defensive weapons.
Those who today are busily seeking to impede the
implementation of NATO’s decisions should demonstrate their
credibility by proving to the international community that they are
truly desirous of and committed to finding a negotiated and
peaceful solution to the conflict.

We believe that those countries

should discharge their international responsibilities and use their
influence with their Serb allies to make them understand that the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
173

(Mr. Cissé, Senegal)
acquisition of territory by force and through "ethnic cleansing"
cannot be condoned or rewarded.
The time has now passed for mouthing good intentions; it is
time now for action to restore peace to Bosnia and Herzegovina and
to restore its people’s rights.

This is our point of view, and we

therefore call upon the international community to continue to show
vigilance and firmness in order to scotch all the campaigns aimed
at breaching the diplomatic and economic isolation of Serbia and
Montenegro.

So long as there is no just and lasting peace, as long

as the policy of contributing to the death throes of Bosnia and
Herzegovina prevails in Belgrade, that isolation will have to be
maintained or even strengthened.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
174

(Mr. Cissé, Senegal)
If NATO’s military threat paves the way for serious peace
negotiations, we think it very important that, unlike previous
talks, these should not stray from the settlement framework
described by the Security Council and the General Assembly in their
resolutions on the subject.

To that end, negotiations should be

moved to New York and placed under the direct supervision of the
Security Council.
The events in Sarajevo and the ongoing attacks in Bihac are
clear proof - if proof were still needed - of the need to bring to
justice all those responsible for the atrocities committed since
the beginning of the tragic conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including those who, under orders from Belgrade, are carrying out
the most ghastly acts of genocide.
In that connection, the activities of the Commission of
Inquiry should continue, and further efforts should be made to name
a new prosecutor determined to bring before the International
Tribunal all war criminals who have committed clearly identified
acts on the territory of the former Yugoslavia.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Senegal for

the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Colombia.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. REY (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish):

Let me

begin, Mr. President, by thanking you for having convened this
meeting.

I am pleased to see you in the Chair when the Council is

gathered on such an important occasion.
The Security Council is meeting today to put an end to the
indifference and silence over the massacre of a defenceless people.
We are nonplussed by the barbarities committed against a nation

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
175

(Mr. Rey, Colombia)
that is a State Member of the United Nations and the inability of
the international community to put an end to the situation.

The

foreign aggression to which Bosnia and Herzegovina is a victim
calls for a decisive United Nations presence.

The tragedy of that

people is of concern to all States Members of the United Nations,
and the Organization cannot remain idle in the face of the
conflict.
In the past we have seen the United Nations take military
action to protect the victims of massacres.

We have also seen the

United Nations impose and maintain sanctions in other areas as a
contribution to resolving conflicts.

So we wonder why it has taken

so long for the international community to find the ways and means
of halting the present massacre of the Bosnian Muslims.
We have seen the Security Council meet on many occasions to
consider the tragedy in Bosnia and Herzegovina and adopt numerous
resolutions and presidential statements in response to the
conflict.

But, regrettably, despite the measures adopted by the

Council, some of them under Chapter VII of the Charter, the United
Nations has been unable properly to protect the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

We recall that Article 24 of the Charter gives

the Security Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
In the case of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Council should
unquestionably and without delay shoulder its responsibility to
prevent further massacres like the one carried out on 5 February
against civilians in a Sarajevo market-place - a demonstration of
Serb barbarism.
The international community has tolerated this terrorism for
too long.

It has the moral obligation and the legal authority,

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
176

(Mr. Rey, Colombia)
granted by Security Council and General Assembly resolutions, to
put an end to the situation and respond vigorously to this dizzying
escalation of crimes against a defenceless people.
In this case, the United Nations has the necessary tools, as
stipulated in Security Council resolutions 824 (1993) and
836 (1993), to act firmly.

We welcome the decision taken by the

North Atlantic Council of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) and we hope that the Serbs will meet the conditions laid
down in that decision.
By supporting General Assembly resolutions 46/242, 47/121 and
48/88, Colombia reiterated its call for a cease-fire, for respect
for the independence and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, for compliance with United Nations
resolutions and for respect for human rights, its condemnation of
the practice of "ethnic cleansing" and its demand for an end to
Serb terrorism.

We agree with paragraphs 17 and 18 of resolution

48/88 of 20 December 1993.
On the basis of respect for the machinery of the Charter and
for the accepted practices of the Organization, we recognize the
efforts and the heroic mission of the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR); we urge the Council to comply with existing
resolutions, and we urge the international community to stand by a
people that has been the victim of an atrocious tragedy.

The

international community cannot remain silent in the face of this
conflict, with its appalling implications for the peaceful
coexistence of peoples.
We call for effective action by the Organization, but we also
call upon the parties to the conflict to begin true rapprochement,
with commitment, to achieve a peaceful, lasting and just solution.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
177

(Mr. Rey, Colombia)
A high priority must be the reconciliation of peoples which
have coexisted for generations, as must respect for life, pluralism
and ethnic, religious and cultural diversity.

It is the

responsibility of those who are now sowing desolation and terror to
think about future generations.
Finding rational ways towards a peaceful, permanent solution
supported by the international community must be the legacy by
which we build a State that can become an exemplar of tolerance,
pluralism and democracy.
Today we call upon the parties to the conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to engage in a process of reconciliation respecting the
interests of the victims, the United Nations, the Security Council
and the international community as a whole, with a view to adopting
effective, concrete measures that will help put an end to the
fighting and to the massacre.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Colombia for

the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Finland.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
178

Mr. BREITENSTEIN (Finland):

Let me first say how grateful

my delegation is for having been granted permission to address the
Council on the very important item now before it.
The Government of Finland has followed the situation in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina with the greatest concern.

The

recent tragic and atrocious shelling of the civilian population in
Sarajevo underlines the necessity finally to end the mindless
carnage that has already been going on for two years.
In our view, the objective of the international efforts in
this crisis still remains unchanged:

a negotiated peace settlement

between the parties, to be achieved with full and active support of
the United Nations and other international bodies.
against civilians has to be stopped.

Violence

Humanitarian assistance must

be allowed to reach the population in all circumstances.

To ensure

that the United Nations can accomplish its mission and retain its
credibility, pressure on the parties, and especially on those
responsible for the violence, has to be increased.
In this situation Finland welcomes the readiness of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to support the efforts of the
United Nations, as requested by the Secretary-General and in
conformity with the objectives set by the Security Council.
However, when military means are resorted to, there is always
the risk that the conflict will spread and hostilities will
intensify.

Militarily this kind of situation could be very

difficult to contain.

It would also increase risks to the safety

of United Nations personnel as well as of the humanitarian relief
personnel and the civilian population.

Therefore, force should be

resorted to only as the last alternative.
The escalation of the crisis can still be avoided.

The

parties involved must now refrain from all acts that might

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
179

(Mr. Breitenstein, Finland)
aggravate the situation.

They should fully respect the cease-fire

agreement that went into effect on 10 February, and without delay
either place all the heavy weapons in and around Sarajevo under the
control of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), or
withdraw them.

We hope that awareness of the determination of the

international community will now lead the parties to the right
conclusions.

Thus the crisis can be solved without the use of

military force.
The PRESIDENT:
Belgium.

The next speaker is the representative of

I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to

make his statement.
Mr. NOTERDAEME (Belgium) (interpretation from French):
Allow me to congratulate you warmly, Sir, on presiding over the
Security Council, and also to thank your predecessor, the
Ambassador of the Czech Republic, for the fine work he did during
the month of January.
On Monday, 7 February 1994, the Ministers of Foreign Affairs
of the European Union expressed their indignation over particularly
brutal bombardments that again struck the civilian population of
Sarajevo, and supported the early convening of a meeting of the
North Atlantic Council to use, in concert with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, all necessary means, including air
power, to achieve the immediate lifting of the siege of Sarajevo.
In response to the letter of the United Nations SecretaryGeneral, the Atlantic Council adopted on 9 February a decision
making it possible for its members, acting in the framework of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and upon the request of
the United Nations, to use air strikes to put an end to
indiscriminate artillery fire and to contribute to the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
180

(Mr. Noterdaeme, Belgium)
demilitarization of Sarajevo.

The legality of this decision under

international law is indisputable.

It is clearly in line with

Security Council resolutions 824 (1993), 836 (1993) and 844 (1993).
Furthermore, it treats all parties equally, because it addresses
all heavy weapons, without distinction.

Finally, it provides the

parties with a certain time for reflection and execution; by
cooperating fully in implementing the measures called for, they can
avoid the use of air force.
However, only complete implementation of these measures will
make it possible to avoid recourse to air power; the mere start of
implementation or partial implementation will be insufficient.
Indeed, it would show a lack of will by the parties definitively to
renounce committing massacres of civilians, such as the one that
occurred 5 February.

We would also like to emphasize the primary

importance we place on the security and freedom of movement of
humanitarian and military personnel deployed by the United Nations
on the territory of the former Yugoslavia.
In the particularly critical situation we are experiencing, we
nevertheless find some reason for hope; based on the essential fact
that negotiations are taking place between the parties with the
support of countries that are eager to contribute to a peaceful
resolution of the crisis.
The international community could no longer remain passive in
the face of repeated massacres of innocent civilians, in flagrant
violation of every decision taken by the United Nations.

The

measures contemplated by the European Union and NATO, in close
cooperation and coordination with our Secretary-General, and under
the authority of relevant resolutions of the Security Council, are
designed to allow the conclusion of a cease-fire, leading to the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
181

(Mr. Noterdaeme, Belgium)
demilitarization of Sarajevo and its being placed under
international administration.

Indeed, we are convinced that

lifting the siege of Sarajevo is a first step towards the political
settlement whose attainment the international community has been
urging on the parties for over two years.
In conclusion, my country supports and reiterates the urgent
appeal to the parties that they should finally conform to the
expectations and injunctions of the international community.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Belgium for

his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia.

I

invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. ALLAGANY (Saudi Arabia) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me at the outset, Sir, to extend to you sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the current month.

I would also like to thank

your predecessor, Ambassador Karel Kovanda, the Permanent
Representative of the Czech Republic, for his efforts during his
presidency of the Council last month.
Once again the Security Council is taking up the
deteriorating, tragic situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, this
time in the light of new, grave developments.

In the Security

Council’s handling of this question today, in the light of these
developments, the credibility of the Security Council is at stake.
In particular, there are at stake the justice of the contemporary
international order, which is supposed to seek international
legitimacy, and the commitment of the entire international

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
182

(Mr. Allagany, Saudi Arabia)
community to use the collective security measures provided for by
this international Organization’s Charter to protect weaker States,
which are the object of liquidation and aggression.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
183

(Mr. Allagany, Saudi Arabia)
We have been profoundly saddened by the failure of this system
so far to stand up to the aggression against Bosnia and
Herzegovina, a Member State of our Organization.

The Kingdom of

Saudi Arabia has already warned that if this crisis is not dealt
with in conformity with the basic principles and objectives of the
new world order, that order will be robbed of its credibility and
effectiveness.

Hence it is incumbent upon us today to develop the

role of the United Nations from that of crisis-management
peace-keeping to positive and effective participation in
peacemaking.
The international community was horrified, shocked and deeply
saddened by the news of the shelling of the central market-place in
Sarajevo, which took the lives of a large number of people, mainly
elderly women and children.

This carnage has been followed by

other attack against cities declared "safe areas" in a Security
Council resolution.

These heinous acts, which in and of themselves

constitute an affront to the conscience of the world, prompted the
Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, to seek the
authorization, under paragraphs 5, 9 and 10 of Security Council
resolution 836 (1993), to prepare for the rapid use of air strikes
with a view to deterring further attacks.
To some extent, NATO has responded, but we are still surprised
that the Serb forces have for the last three days been waging a
vicious campaign against the city of Bihac, one of the regions
declared a "safe area" by Security Council resolution 824 (1993).
Moreover, that city has been under siege for 22 months, and the
Bosnian defence lines are gravely threatened by the great military
advantage enjoyed by the Serbs because of the arms embargo against
the Muslims imposed on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Serb forces

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
184

(Mr. Allagany, Saudi Arabia)
have exploited the fact that world attention is focused on Sarajevo
to attack other parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to pursue there
the policy of "ethnic cleansing" and genocide.

Most of the regions

under attack are covered by Security Council resolutions 824 (1993)
and 836 (1993).
The term "genocide" is a modern term for an ancient crime.

It

means the elimination and destruction of an entire ethnic,
religious, racial or national group.

In the twentieth century, we

have witnessed the practices of the Nazis, and today we are
witnessing the practices of the Serb forces in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The continuation of the genocide unleashed against

the people of this fledgling republic at the hands of the Serb
forces, supported by Serbia and Montenegro, threatens the
international community with dire consequences and constitutes a
very sensitive present and future problem in international
relations.

This ongoing tragedy, which has claimed the lives of

thousands of innocent persons and displaced large numbers of
peaceful citizens in that country, would not have taken place but
for the inaction of the international community, which allowed the
forces of aggression to reap the fruits of their aggression and to
pursue their abominable policy of "ethnic cleansing" with impunity.
This indecision resulted from the position of the European
States, which thwarted the full implementation of the London
Conference resolutions and the Vance-Owen plan.

We are, however,

surprised that when Croatia was the object of Serb aggression the
European States immediately stood by it and assisted it militarily,
which contributed to the success of international endeavours to
reach a peaceful settlement there.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
185

(Mr. Allagany, Saudi Arabia)
The statement that what is happening in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is a civil war is an attempt to mislead world public opinion and to
project the Serbs as parties to an internal dispute.

What is

happening in Bosnia and Herzegovina is a blatant act of aggression
supported by evil forces which have inherited their way of thinking
from the Nazis of Europe.

Today, we call on the NATO States -

especially the European ones - to undertake a new reading of the
new situation.

We interpret the recent NATO decision as an

ultimatum to the Serb forces to halt their aggression, and an
affirmation that negotiations are the only way to achieve a
peaceful settlement.
The war of aggression raging in Bosnia and Herzegovina today
is taking place on European land.

History clearly shows that

European wars have never been limited wars and that any spark in
Europe can cause an unlimited conflagration.
The Security Council has adopted more than 40 resolutions
regarding the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

It is high time

for the Council to review the situation and decide what specific
actions it will now take in order to reach the necessary
settlement, taking into account that as long as there are
hostilities in any part of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as long as there
is an aggressor and a victim of aggression, any possible negotiated
settlement will not be just and therefore will not be lasting.
We hope that the history of European wars will not repeat
itself, and that the solution currently proposed will not give rise
to future conflicts and wars.

We also hope that the international

community will take into serious and rational consideration the
demands of Bosnia and Herzegovina, affirming that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will never again be the object of policies of

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
186

(Mr. Allagany, Saudi Arabia)
aggression and "ethnic cleansing", and responding to the demands of
this fledgling State for an outlet to the sea and for the right to
self-defence provided for by the Charter.
From the very outset, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, its people
and its Government have stood by the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a position of principle.

My country has already

announced its support for the resolutions and recommendations of
the recent London Conference, the United Nations and the Geneva
negotiations.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
187

(Mr. Allagany, Saudi Arabia)
In this position, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia based itself on
strict adherence to international legitimacy and respect for the
principles of international law.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia calls

upon the international community promptly to take all the actions
provided for by the Charter of the United Nations to implement the
Security Council resolutions adopted under Chapter VII, which allow
the use of force to compel the intransigent Serbian party into
observing the rules of international legitimacy.

Saudi Arabia also

calls on the international community to affirm the need for the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions relevant to safe
areas, especially resolution 836 (1993), which grants Member States
the right to use air strikes to protect safe areas, including
Sarajevo, and support the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
the exercise of its legitimate right of self-defence, as provided
for in Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.
The provisions of the Charter are clear, and international
resolutions are forthright.

Hence the Security Council must

shoulder its responsibilities and put an end to the ongoing human
tragedy in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
jeopardizes the credibility of this international Organization and
that of the new international order in general.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Saudi Arabia

for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Sudan.

I invite him

to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. YASSIN (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic):

Allow me

to extend thanks to you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity to
address the Security Council.

I should also like to congratulate

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
188

(Mr. Yassin, Sudan)
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month, which is replete with serious and significant events.

I am

certain that your wise guidance will greatly contribute to the
Council’s achieving just and positive results.

We should also like

to congratulate the President of the Council last month, the
Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic, Ambassador Karel
Kovanda, who also skillfully discharged the duties of the
presidency.
The tragedy of the Muslim people of Bosnia is one of the
challenges which will continue to haunt the conscience of the world
and furnish proof of the inability of the international community
to champion the lofty principles and ethical values represented by
the Charter of this international Organization.

The international

community has continued to deal with a question relevant to the
fate of an entire people on the basis of a double standard.

This

people is threatened by annihilation through the policies of
"ethnic cleansing", concentration camps and humiliation, through
the use of such Nazi and fascist means as systematic rape and other
such shameful acts.
The long silence observed by the international community especially the Security Council - and its slowness in putting an
end to Serbian aggression, allowed the aggressors to implement all
their sinister designs against the Muslim people of Bosnia, whose
wound has been aggravated by the international community, which
deprived it of its most rudimentary right to self-defence and to
life and which penalized it by depriving it of weapons under
resolution 713 (1991).
The outrageous crimes perpetrated by the Serbs on 4 and
5 February against defenceless citizens in Dobrinja and Sarajevo,

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
189

(Mr. Yassin, Sudan)
which claimed the lives of scores of people and inflicted injuries
on hundreds, cruelly shocked the international community, which
forced those who have been silent in the face of the continuing
Serbian crimes to take action, which we had thought would deter the
aggressor.

But now we see that those actions have also become

captive of a narrow discriminatory view and balances of interests,
which has caused them to fall short of the grave event.
Addressing a 10-day ultimatum to the Serbians has enabled them
to resort to manoeuvres and deception.

Thus, they declared a

cease-fire at the outset, but soon began threatening vengeance.
Also, the ultimatum was confined to calling upon the Serbs to
withdraw their heavy weapons while calling upon the Bosnian
Government to give up its weapons in the context of the
demilitarization of Sarajevo.

These actions shield the Serbian

forces with the international forces.

This results in the

continued siege of Sarajevo by the Serbs while they maintain their
military capabilities, shelling Sarajevo and other Muslim cities in
Bosnia with the heavy weapons that no one called on them to give
up.
At the same time, there are some who want to reward the
aggressor by giving up the principle of the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force by calling upon the Bosnian
Government to make those concessions that appease the aggressor.
Sudan has always stood in full sympathy with the Muslim people of
Bosnia, who are the object of conspiracies and annihilation.

We

have declared our stand on the side of that people, which is
undergoing its ordeal because of its religion.

We call upon the

international community and the Security Council to heed the
dictates of conscience and justice and to renounce selectivity and

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
190

(Mr. Yassin, Sudan)
double standards when dealing with the destiny of a people
threatened with annihilation.
In conformity with the responsibilities of Sudan as a Member
of the United Nations and in response to the appeal of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, I am honoured to announce
that Sudan is willing to put Sudanese forces to work in the context
of the United Nations Protection Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I should also like to associate myself with those calling upon the
Security Council to follow the example of the General Assembly in
lifting the arms embargo against Bosnia so that it can exercise its
right to self-defence under Article 51 of the Charter, thus
enabling it to meet its arms requirements and receive assistance
from its brothers to deter Serbian aggression.
Lastly, I cannot but express appreciation to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his long-awaited
and brave initiative.

I hope he will pursue this initiative with a

profound interest in saving the innocents in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Sudan for

the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative of Ireland.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. HAYES (Ireland):

Permit me first of all, Sir, to

congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council.

We look forward to your continued skilful

exercise of the functions of this office throughout the month of
February.

May I also thank your predecessor, the Permanent

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
191

(Mr. Hayes, Ireland)
Representative of the Czech Republic, Ambassador Kovanda, for his
very able performance of the duties of that office in January.
The Irish Government utterly condemns the ruthless and
barbaric acts of violence against the population of Sarajevo, which
have continued for almost two years.

These actions, for which no

justifications can be offered - and none accepted - are designed to
kill, maim and demoralize the civilian population of that
beleaguered city.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
192

(Mr. Hayes, Ireland)
The systematic and callous onslaught directed against
Sarajevo’s population by heavy weapons, mortars and sniper bullets
has clearly been at enormous cost to that city’s population.

It is

difficult to calculate the losses precisely, but some sources
estimate that 10,500 people have been killed and perhaps 58,000
wounded in Sarajevo.
The death and suffering which have been inflicted on Sarajevo
were graphically highlighted once more by the barbaric killings in
the central market on 5 February.

This left 68 people dead and

scores more maimed and seriously injured.
Faced with the continued siege and bombardment of Sarajevo,
the United Nations Secretary-General has concluded that the mortar
attacks against civilian targets in Sarajevo, at least one of which
has been established by the United Nations to be the work of the
Bosnian Serb forces, made it necessary to prepare urgently for the
use of air strikes to deter further attacks.

He therefore asked

the Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) to obtain at the earliest possible date a decision by the
North Atlantic Council to authorize the Commander in Chief of
NATO’s Southern Command to launch air strikes, at the request of
the United Nations, against artillery or mortar positions in or
around Sarajevo which are determined by the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) to be responsible for attacks against
civilian targets in that city.
The Council of Ministers of the European Union, meeting in
Brussels on 7 February, condemned the brutal shelling of civilians
in Sarajevo.

In the light of the relevant resolutions of the

Security Council and the request of the Secretary-General, the
Ministers supported an early meeting of the North Atlantic Council

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
193

(Mr. Hayes, Ireland)
to consider measures to bring about the immediate lifting of the
siege of Sarajevo.
The decisions of the North Atlantic Council taken last
Wednesday make it clear that the international community cannot and
will not tolerate the siege and bombardment of a defenceless city.
The Irish Government calls on all parties to respect the cease-fire
in Sarajevo and to comply fully with the demands for the withdrawal
of heavy weapons or their regrouping under UNPROFOR control.

The

actions by the international community over the past week are
intended to contribute to the basic objectives of establishing a
cease-fire, of demilitarizing Sarajevo and of placing it under
international supervision.

They are an initial step towards

realizing the political settlement supported by the European Union.
In this context, the Irish Government believes that the
international community must intensify its efforts to achieve three
essential aims:

to maintain and develop the search for a peaceful

settlement to the dispute on the basis of the European Union’s
peace plan; to prevent the spread of the conflict; and to ensure
the supply and delivery of humanitarian assistance to the victims.
The Irish Government hopes that even at this late stage the
parties to the conflict - in particular, the Bosnian Serbs - will
realize the futility of continuing the war and that they will
return to the talks determined to find a negotiated solution.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Ireland for

his kind words addressed to me.
In accordance with the decision taken earlier in the meeting,
I now invite Ambassador Dragomir Djokić to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
194

Mr. DJOKIĆ:

The brutality of the 5 February massacre of

innocent civilians in the market-place in Sarajevo has painfully
demonstrated once again the necessity of urgently reaching a
political solution to the civil and ethnic war in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia

received with dismay and horror the news of this massacre and
strongly condemned this terrorist act.

Those who were killed or

wounded in Sarajevo were victims not of war but of war criminals.
Such a cowardly act, which appalled all those who truly seek to
achieve peace in the former Bosnia and Herzegovina, requires a
vigorous and impartial investigation so that the perpetrators of
this horrible act will be brought immediately to justice.
The Yugoslav Government has appealed to all those involved in
the peace process not to allow any political or media manipulations
of this tragic event and to invest vigorous efforts in order to
prevent any obstruction of the peace process and demonstrate
perseverance and resolve while striving to achieve a just and
lasting peace in the former Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Unfortunately,

instead of considering what can be done in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to give a decisive impetus to the peace process, some countries
took advantage of this event to promote their own political and
propaganda goals.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council is taking place at a
time when some important international actors have opted for the
use of force as a method of putting pressure on one of the sides in
the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina instead of encouraging all
three sides to achieve peace through negotiations.

The recent

decision by the Council of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) is politically and militarily unwise and could have serious
consequences on the ground which will undoubtedly aggravate the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
195

(Mr. Djokić)
already complex situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

It is very

unlikely that the decision on the use of air strikes against any I repeat, "against any" - of the three sides to the conflict in
Bosnia and Herzegovina may help bring about a lasting political
settlement.
decision.

Therefore, my country strongly opposes any such
This is yet another in a series of grave mistakes which

have been made by the international community in addressing the
Yugoslav crisis, which, as many are now increasingly aware, started
with the premature recognition of some former Yugoslav republics.
The NATO decision has only made the prospects for the solution
of the crisis more uncertain and bleak.

We believe that the

Security Council should very carefully and cautiously review the
present situation, fully aware of its gravity and complexity.
The decision of the Council of NATO clearly does not fall
within the purview of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council authorizing air strikes.

Therefore, any attempt to carry

out air strikes on the basis of that decision will represent a
direct involvement in the civil war on one side.
If a true objective is peace for Bosnia and Herzegovina, then
the use of force cannot be the instrument to that end.

The use of

force is extremely dangerous in the prevailing circumstances in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Those who advocate it shall bear the

responsibility for the inevitable consequences and the possible
spillover of the conflict.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
196

(Mr. Djokić)
From the very onset of the crisis, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has strongly believed that there is no alternative to an
overall political settlement.

A settlement can be reached only in

negotiations between the three constituent peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina:

the Serbs, Muslims and Croats.

The Yugoslav

Government is ready to accept any political solution reached by
those parties.

In that context, we also believe that the

international community and particularly the United Nations,
including the Security Council, bear primary responsibility, and
that they should do everything in their power to contribute to
finding a political settlement and that they should encourage the
Bosnian parties along the path towards peace.
A Co-Chairman of the International Conference,
Mr. Stoltenberg, just two weeks ago informed the members of the
Council about the present status of the peace negotiations.

He

pointed out that the parties involved are close to a final
agreement and that major parts of the peace package have been
agreed.

He also mentioned some obstacles, but from his statement

it was obvious that two parties were ready to sign the peace
package.

Unfortunately, the third side, namely the Bosnian

Muslims, opted for a continuation of the war, and has repeatedly
been advancing new conditions in order to obstruct the achievement
of a peace agreement.
For months now, the Muslim side has rejected all peace
projects which have been portrayed by the Co-Chairmen as fair and
reasonable.

They have unfortunately been encouraged in this

position by influential elements in the international community
that have been driven by ulterior motives and their own strategic
interests.

It is obvious that this has led the Muslim side to

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
197

(Mr. Djokić)
believe that foreign military intervention in Bosnia and
Herzegovina would be forthcoming.
In contrast, the Bosnian Serbs, who have proved their
readiness to accept a viable compromise by offering numerous
concessions, are constantly being subjected to pressure and
threats.
Yugoslavia expects that, in the light of this situation, the
international community will make it clear to the Muslim side that
it only stands to lose if it persists with the war option.
Unfortunately, instead of convincing the Muslim side to go along
with the peace proposal, we are faced with the fact that some
influential countries are now ready to use force, thus jeopardizing
the results of the negotiations reached so far.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will, as it has done so
far, continue to make its full contribution to the peace process
and to ending the war in the former Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Although not a party to the civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will spare no effort to help
remedy the present situation and find a just and lasting solution
based on the legitimate interests and rights of all peoples in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The members of the Council are aware of the efforts of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia within the International Conference
on the Former Yugoslavia in Geneva and of its firm commitment to
peace, despite the harsh and inhumane sanctions unjustly imposed
against it.
The Yugoslav Government wishes to reiterate its firm support
for the current negotiations in Geneva, and strongly urges the
international community and the United Nations, including the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
198

(Mr. Djokić)
Security Council, to reinforce their support for the only possible
solution to the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina - a solution
achieved through political means.
Therefore, rather than threats and ultimatums, it would be
more useful if we all, particularly those who can exert great
influence on some of the Bosnian parties, helped them put an end to
the nightmare in which they have found themselves.
trigger, it is difficult to stop.

Once you pull a

If that proves to be the case,

the Council will certainly have its share of responsibility.
In connection with some of the statements made during our
debate, my delegation would like to offer the following comments.
We categorically reject the ill-intentioned, biased,
unwarranted and unfounded allegations against the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia that have been put forward by certain delegations.
It is particularly disturbing that some of them have gone so far as
to condemn, without any reservation, the Bosnian Serb side for the
tragic massacre of innocent civilians in the Sarajevo market-place
on 5 February.

It is indeed surprising that they are so sure in

their conclusions while it is well known that United Nations
Protection Force representatives in Sarajevo have been explicit in
their official statements that, so far, it has not been possible to
establish which side was to blame for the tragedy.
contrary:

On the

those statements, and the findings of a number of

foreign and also Yugoslav experts indicate that the Bosnian Serb
side did not commit and could not have committed this tragic and
criminal act.
Those delegations that have chosen to advance uncorroborated
allegations have, by their biased positions, shown their true
intentions, which are not directed towards reaching a just and

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
199

(Mr. Djokić)
lasting peaceful solution in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

They are

clearly attempting to use this tragic event as a pretext for
foreign military intervention against one of the parties in the
civil war.

Such positions do not contribute to ending the ethnic

and civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina:

on the contrary, they

generate a further escalation of the flames of war, whose
consequences are increasingly being felt by the innocent
population.
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot be achieved through
one-sided accusations or irrational demands for the lifting of the
arms embargo for one of the sides, nor through the escalation of
military activities in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The only possible

solution is and must be a political one.
The PRESIDENT:
Ukraine.

The next speaker is the representative of

I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to

make his statement now.
Mr. KHANDOGY (Ukraine):

First of all let me congratulate

you, Sir, upon your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February.

The delegation of Ukraine is

confident that your experience and outstanding diplomatic skills
will help you find a wise and effective solution to the problem we
are discussing now.

Let me convey through you, Mr. President, our

appreciation to your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
the Czech Republic to the United Nations, Ambassador Karel Kovanda,
for the excellent work he did in January.
There is no need to stress the importance of the issue under
consideration or the responsibility of the members of the Council
for the results of this discussion.

They have been amply

illustrated in many statements in this Chamber.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
200

(Mr. Khandogy, Ukraine)
The representative of Ukraine, addressing the Council over six
months ago, took the opportunity to express great concern in
respect of this senseless, fratricidal war which every day brought
new victims, new suffering and new destruction.

Unfortunately, the

situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has deteriorated even further.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
201

(Mr. Khandogy, Ukraine)
The international community learned with indignation and alarm
of the terrorist act in the centre of Sarajevo on 5 February, which
resulted in the death of dozens and the wounding of hundreds of
innocent civilians.

The Government and the people of Ukraine

resolutely condemned this barbaric, inhuman action undertaken at a
moment when the parties concerned were engaged in an intensive
search for ways to settle the bloody conflict.
As a result of this provocation, the situation in the Balkans
has reached a critical point.

A significant part of world public

opinion considers that the only way to secure the safety of the
civilian population of Sarajevo and other regions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is to resort to air strikes against Bosnian Serb
positions.

The recent decision of the North Atlantic Council of

the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) reflects that
position.
We cannot but understand the emotional basis for such an
approach, and we consider the NATO decision as yet another
important element of international efforts aimed at resolving the
Yugoslav crisis that under certain circumstances could bring about
positive results.
However, it is necessary to be fully aware of the possible
negative consequences of such a step.

Undoubtedly, in that

eventuality the situation on all fronts in Bosnia and Herzegovina
would be greatly aggravated.

This would bring about new suffering

and human loss, primarily among the civilian population of this
country.

Moreover, it would effectively jeopardize the delivery of

the international humanitarian aid, which has become the only
source of subsistence for the majority of people.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
202

(Mr. Khandogy, Ukraine)
As the contributor of a military contingent to the Sarajevo
sector of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), Ukraine
cannot but voice its deep concern about the fact that as a result
of air strikes, even limited ones, UNPROFOR could become a target
for retaliatory strikes by radical field commanders of the Serb
forces.

In that event, the United Nations could find itself deeply

involved in fully fledged armed confrontations, with unpredictable
military and political consequences, not only for the region, but
for the whole world.
Ukraine calls upon the Security Council to reiterate to the
warring parties its categorical demand immediately to stop military
actions, intensify negotiations and do everything possible to
prevent the escalation and spread of the armed conflict in the
Balkans as a result of the tragic events of 5 February in Sarajevo.
In that connection, we also appeal to the members of the
Security Council not to yield to emotions and to adopt the only
correct decision, which would show the way out of the present
situation.
My delegation would like to stress that we do not rule out the
possibility of using all necessary means, including force, in a
situation in which we are dealing with deliberate hostile acts
against areas of deployment of United Nations contingents, where we
simply do not have other options for stopping the killing of
innocent people, including elderly people and children.
But such a course of action should be undertaken only in the
event of a clearly expressed decision by the international
community, namely, the Security Council, and not as a result of a
decision by an individual State.

The seriousness of the matter

requires that in this situation all relevant procedures in

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
203

(Mr. Khandogy, Ukraine)
accordance with the United Nations Charter should be employed in
order to reaffirm once again previous resolutions of the Security
Council regarding the complex situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ukraine shares the view that one viable solution to this
crisis might be an effective cease-fire agreement between the
warring parties and the placing of their heavy weapons under
UNPROFOR control, the withdrawal of Serb units from Sarajevo and
the takeover of their positions by the United Nations Protection
Force.

The demilitarization of Sarajevo and the introduction of

United Nations administrative control in the city would stop the
senseless bloodshed and would serve as a starting-point for the
achievement of lasting peace in the region.
We are satisfied with the fact that the majority of Security
Council members regard the continuation and deepening of the peace
process in the Balkans as an indispensable condition for the
settlement of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In the view of my delegation, the time has come to address
seriously the question of the effectiveness of economic sanctions
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the context of an
overall settlement, with the aim of mitigating the adverse
consequences of the sanctions regime on the economies of third
countries, in accordance with Article 50 of the United Nations
Charter.
Finally, the delegation of Ukraine would like to assure
members of the Council and all parties concerned that the Ukrainian
contingent, which is fulfilling the humanitarian mission of
protecting safe areas of Bosnia and Herzegovina, will continue to
contribute to the cessation of the armed confrontation in the
region.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
204

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Ukraine for

the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Portugal.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. CATARINO (Portugal):

Allow me to congratulate you,

Mr. President, on the manner in which you have steered the
deliberations of the Council during the month of February.

I would

like also to extend my compliments to Ambassador Kovanda on his
presidency of the Council in January.
The tragic incident in the market of Sarajevo served to drive
home even further the horror of the war that has for two years
devastated Bosnia and Herzegovina, and of the terrible suffering of
the civilian population.

The absurd cycle of war must be broken,

and the parties to the conflict must understand that the
continuation of war and violence is an unsustainable policy.
Portugal has actively supported the efforts of the
international community to alleviate the consequences of the
fighting and to help the parties reach a negotiated settlement.
Within the European Union, we have given and will continue to give
all our support to the diplomatic efforts that are being pursued by
the Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia.
We believe that the European Plan of Action, which was
presented to the parties in Geneva and whose basic principles have
been accepted by them, constitutes the key to the settlement of the
conflict, and we appeal to the parties to pursue this initial
commitment to peace with vigour, and to show the flexibility
necessary to reach a common position on a final settlement of the
question.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
205

(Mr. Catarino, Portugal)
We believe it is equally vital that humanitarian assistance be
allowed to reach the people in need and that the international
community continue to demonstrate its solidarity.

In that respect,

we cannot fail to emphasize our gratitude to the men and women of
UNPROFOR and of all the other humanitarian agencies and
organizations in Bosnia who work tirelessly day in and day out to
bring food, medicine and other humanitarian supplies to those who
have been caught in the middle of the violence.
But the violence must stop, and the international community
and the United Nations have a responsibility to act, in the face of
the worsening situation, in a joint and coordinated manner within
the context of the resolutions already approved by the Security
Council.

The 9 February decision of the North Atlantic Council,

which we fully support, will surely contribute to the basic
objective of putting an end to the siege of Sarajevo.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
206

(Mr. Catarino, Portugal)
We hope that the decision will lead to the establishment of a
cease-fire, the initiation of the demilitarization of Sarajevo and
the placing of the city under international administration by the
United Nations.

By its decision NATO seeks, with the Secretary-

General of the United Nations, the achievement of these basic
objectives on the way to a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
Peace is, after all, our objective.
While the determination of NATO to act cannot be questioned,
we sincerely hope that it will not be necessary to resort to force
and that the parties to the conflict will respond positively and
immediately to the appeals of the Secretary-General and the
Security Council and put an end to their acts of violence, comply
with what is demanded of them and return to a purposeful and
committed process of negotiation to achieve a lasting settlement to
the question agreeable to all.

Let there be no mistake.

The war

will come to an end only when the parties themselves decide to stop
fighting.
We are fully aware of the very great risks that the
international community’s efforts to bring peace to Bosnia entail.
The lives of the civilian population and of the very brave people
of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), United Nations
and relief agencies are constantly in danger.

For their sake, we

counsel prudence as well as resolve on the part of the
international community in seeing its tasks through.
sake also, we call for peace.

For their

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
207

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Portugal for

his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Luxembourg.

I

invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. WOLZFELD (Luxembourg) (interpretation from French):
First, Sir, may I extend to you my sincerest congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.

I am

convinced that under your distinguished guidance the Council will
be able to conclude its work successfully.

My congratulations are

also extended to your predecessor, Ambassador Kovanda, for the
noteworthy manner in which he conducted the work of the Council
last month.
Allow me at the outset to welcome the occasion today afforded
the Member States of our Organization to speak before the Security
Council in the course of this debate on the tragedy that is
occurring before our very eyes in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
For more than two years now the international community has
witnessed, often helplessly, the worst ordeals being inflicted on
the civilian population of Bosnia and Herzegovina, whether in the
form of "ethnic cleansing" or of the random shelling of cities.
The recent tragic incident in the market-place of Sarajevo
highlighted the urgent need to put an end to the hostilities
immediately and to resolve the conflict around the negotiating
table rather than on the battlefield.
The European Union, of which my country is a member, has been
cooperating very closely with the United Nations in seeking a
peaceful and durable solution through the International Conference
on the Former Yugoslavia, while the United Nations Protection Force

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
208

(Mr. Wolzfeld, Luxembourg)
(UNPROFOR) has been endeavouring in difficult conditions to supply
minimal provisions and health assistance to the population.
In this connection, the European Union has proposed a plan of
action to resolve the Bosnian crisis which would put the conflict
in Bosnia within the broader context of the former Yugoslavia.
That is a necessary condition for ensuring the viability of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

It is true that the agreement,

which has yet to be finalized among the Bosnian parties, is complex
and far from perfect; nevertheless, we continue to believe that
this plan is still pertinent and in keeping with current realities,
and that it is in fact the only feasible way to establish a lasting
peace.
But, whatever efforts are made by the international community,
the success of the negotiations will ultimately depend on the
parties themselves.

As long as one party considers that military

gains remain possible on the ground, the chances of a successful
outcome to the negotiations are compromised.
All the peoples, groups and minorities of the former
Yugoslavia, as well as their leaders must understand that their
respective communities can survive and prosper in a state of
restored peace only by the negotiation of a political settlement
acceptable to all.

Conflicting interests cannot peacefully coexist

unless the protagonists are prepared to reach compromises and to
respect them.
My Government fully supports the efforts being made by
Co-Chairmen Owen and Stoltenberg to bring about a negotiated
settlement.

We also welcome the fact that the Governments of the

United States of America and of the Russian Federation have
indicated that they are now prepared to go further in a process

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
209

(Mr. Wolzfeld, Luxembourg)
intended to convince the parties concerned to pursue compromise and
negotiation in good faith.
At the same time, the Security Council has issued numerous
warnings and decisions to try to convince the belligerents to
respect the principles of international law, to resolve their
differences peacefully and to guarantee the protection of innocent
civilian populations.

These Council decisions have repeatedly been

ignored.
Therefore, the North Atlantic Council, pursuant to decisions
of the Security Council and acting in concert with the United
Nations Secretary-General, decided last Wednesday to send a clear
signal to the parties, and, obviously, particularly to the Bosnian
Serbs, demanding the raising of the siege in Sarajevo.

It

indicated that it was prepared to use force should its conditions
not be met.

The action designed to demilitarize Sarajevo is not a

military end in itself; rather, it represents a stage in the search
for a comprehensive negotiated political solution.
We expect that the international community will support the
decision, which gives the Security Council the means to implement
its decisions.

What is at stake here, after all, is the

credibility of our Organization - and others.
My country is particularly aware of the need to keep the
supply lines open for humanitarian aid, which allows the civilian
populations in Bosnia to survive in the horrifying conditions in
which they find themselves.

Before concluding, I wish to pay a

particular tribute to what is being done for them under extremely
difficult circumstances by UNPROFOR and the international
organizations, which have shown exemplary courage and devotion.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
210

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Luxembourg

for his kind words addressed to me.
The last speaker for this morning is the representative of
Denmark.

I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to

make his statement.
Mr. HAAKONSEN (Denmark):

The tragic situation in the

former Yugoslavia is one of our greatest concerns and an extremely
demanding challenge to all of us.
The latest events in Sarajevo have caused revulsion everywhere
and have led to a series of important meetings:

in the European

Union, the North Atlantic Council and now in the Security Council.
We welcome this.
The international community has already, for more than two
years, done its utmost to deal with the crises in the former
Yugoslavia.
From the outset Denmark has offered a substantial and
increasing contribution to the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) and to the humanitarian aid efforts.
We have steadily maintained that the only acceptable outcome
is a negotiated settlement.

A lasting peace can be reached only by

negotiations, and cannot be imposed by force from the outside.
Unfortunately, the political will to seek such a negotiated
settlement has been lacking among the parties directly concerned.
The European Union action plan remains on the table as a basis
for negotiations.

Progress has been made on the basis of this

plan, but sufficient flexibility and willingness to compromise is
still needed.
We wholeheartedly support the untiring efforts of the
Co-Chairmen of the International Conference on the Former

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 2)
211

(Mr. Haakonsen, Denmark)
Yugoslavia to reach a peaceful settlement.

We urge them to

continue and reinforce their efforts.
Denmark participated in and fully endorses the decision by the
North Atlantic Council on 9 February.

We see this decision as a

very important step towards an urgent peaceful solution in order to
bring the conflict to an end.
At the same time, we direct a strong appeal to the parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to give a positive response to what has been
called for by the North Atlantic Council.
have been achieved.

In that case, much will

Denmark is prepared to continue and intensify

its efforts, especially within the framework of the European Union,
to reach an end to this tragic and appalling chapter in European
history.

In this context, we also stand solidly behind the efforts

of the United Nations and the Secretary-General.
The PRESIDENT:

In view of the lateness of the hour, I

intend to suspend the meeting now.
The meeting was suspended at 1.25 p.m.
