S/2021/226

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 March 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 8 March 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, as well as the
statements delivered by the representatives of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland,
Kenya, Mexico, Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Tunisia the United States of America and Viet Nam in connection with the videoteleconference on “The situation in the Middle East (Syria)” convened on Thursday,
4 March 2021. Statements were also delivered by the representatives of the Syrian
Arab Republic and Turkey.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, this
briefing and these statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Linda Thomas-Greenfield
President of the Security Council

21-03233 (E) 100321 010421

*2103233*

S/2021/226

Annex I
Briefing by the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Izumi Nakamitsu
It is my pleasure to once again brief the Security Council on the implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013), on the elimination of the chemical weapons programme of
the Syrian Arab Republic.
The Office for Disarmament Affairs has continued to maintain regular contact
with its counterparts at the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) on its activities related to this matter. In that context, as per established
practice, I held a monthly call with the OPCW Director-General on Tuesday, 2 March,
to receive an update and ascertain his views. The Office for Disarmament Affairs
also received information from the Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic
concerning chemical issues for this period. That information was studied carefully
and forwarded to the OPCW Technical Secretariat.
I would like to note that, since I last briefed the Council one month ago (see
S/2021/109, annex I), there have been limited developments in the implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013).
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to impact the
OPCW’s ability to deploy to the Syrian Arab Republic. However, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat maintains its readiness to deploy, subject to the evolving pandemic. In
spite of the travel restrictions, the Technical Secretariat has continued its mandated
activities related to the elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme and
its engagement with the Syrian Arab Republic in that regard.
The OPCW Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) deployed to the Syrian Arab
Republic from 7 to 25 February for the twenty-fourth round of consultations. I have
been advised that the OPCW Technical Secretariat will report the results of that
deployment to the OPCW Executive Council in due course.
I would like to reiterate my appreciation for the DAT, which recently returned
to The Hague and is continuing its efforts to clarify all outstanding issues regarding
the Syrian Arab Republic’s initial declaration to the OPCW, despite pandemicrelated challenges.
As reported by the OPCW Director-General, 19 declaration-related issues
remain outstanding. One such issue pertains to a chemical weapons production
facility that was declared by the Syrian National Authority as never having been used
for the production of chemical weapons. However, a review of all the information
and other materials gathered by the DAT since 2014 indicates that production and/
or weaponization of chemical warfare nerve agents did in fact take place at this
facility. Consequently, the Technical Secretariat has requested that the Syrian Arab
Republic declare the exact types and quantities of chemical agents produced and/or
weaponized at this site. I understand from the Technical Secretariat that the Syrian
National Authority has yet to respond to that request.
As a result, the Technical Secretariat continues to assess that, due to the
identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that remain unresolved at this
stage, the declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic cannot be considered
accurate and complete in accordance with the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction.
I would like to remind Council members that efforts to resolve these outstanding
issues have been ongoing since 2014. As it has been noted on many occasions, the
confidence of the international community in the complete elimination of Syria’s
2/26

21-03233

S/2021/226

chemical weapons programme depends upon these issues being finalized. I therefore
reiterate my call to the Syrian Arab Republic to cooperate fully with the Technical
Secretariat in that regard.
The Technical Secretariat conducted the seventh round of inspections at
the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research
Centre from 8 to 13 November. I understand that the samples collected during those
inspections were split at a OPCW laboratory in the presence of a representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic and sent to designated laboratories for analysis. I look
forward to the findings of this round of inspections, which will be reported to the
Executive Council in due course.
I also understand that the Syrian Arab Republic has yet to provide sufficient
technical information or explanations that would enable the Technical Secretariat to
close the issue related to the finding of a Schedule 2 chemical detected at the Barzah
facilities of the Research Centre during the third round of inspections, in 2018.
I note that the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) is still in the process
of studying all available information related to allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, and continues its engagement with the Syrian
Government and other States parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention with
regard to a variety of incidents. As previously reported, further FFM deployments
will be subject to the evolving pandemic.
I have also been advised that the OPCW Investigation and Identification Team
(IIT) is continuing its investigations into incidents in which the FFM has determined
that chemical weapons were used or likely used in the Syrian Arab Republic, and
will issue further reports in due course. I take this opportunity to once again
reiterate my full support for the integrity, professionalism, impartiality, objectivity
and independence of the work of the OPCW.
With regard to the inspections mandated by paragraph 8 of Executive Council
decision EC-94/DEC.2, entitled “Addressing the Possession and Use of Chemical
Weapons by the Syrian Arab Republic”, the Technical Secretariat continues to
monitor the security situation and will inform the Syrian Arab Republic when it is
prepared to deploy for that purpose.
Moving forward, I have been advised that the main focus for future
activities of the OPCW mission in the Syrian Arab Republic will continue to be,
in no particular order of priority: the Fact-Finding Mission; the implementation of
Council decisions EC-83/DEC.5 and EC-81/DEC.4, including declaration-related
issues; the inspections at the Barzah and Jamrayah sites of the Research Centre
and the implementation of Conference decision C-SS-4/DEC.3 and Council decision
EC-94/DEC.2.
The use of chemical weapons is a grave threat to peace and security, as well
as to the disarmament and non-proliferation architecture, which was painstakingly
constructed over past decades. There is no justification for the use of chemical
weapons by anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances. Those who have used
them must be identified and held to account. It is my sincere hope that the members
of the Council will unite on this issue.
Before concluding, I wish to echo the Secretary-General’s remarks at the
Munich Security Conference segment on “Priorities for Global Action”, delivered
on 19 February 2021:
“Now is the time for solidarity and international cooperation to tackle
our even bigger and more complex challenges. I am convinced that, if we are
determined, we can achieve our shared goals”.
21-032333/26

S/2021/226

Annex II
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: Chinese and English]
I would like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
China has always been opposed to the use of chemical weapons by any State,
organization or individual — under any circumstance and for any purpose. China
hopes that the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) can
respect the principles of independence, impartiality and objectivity and act strictly
within the framework of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction
when investigating allegations of chemical-weapons use and when attributing
responsibility for their use. Today I wish to emphasize four points.
First, efforts to resolve the issue of Syrian chemical weapons must proceed
from facts. Investigations regarding the alleged use of chemical weapons should be
science-based and comply with all the relevant rules and standards. The reliability of
the sources of information, the integrity of the chain of evidence and the soundness
of the analysis all affect the credibility and authority of any resulting report. States
parties have the right to challenge the investigation reports. As such, in order to
convince people of its findings, the OPCW Technical Secretariat should present
conclusive evidence.
Secondly, there cannot be double standards if we are to resolve the Syrian
chemical weapons issue. The Technical Secretariat must not selectively gather
intelligence and information on the alleged use of chemical weapons by parties. On
various occasions, the Syrian Government has provided information about terrorist
organizations and armed groups fabricating incidents of chemical-weapons use. The
Technical Secretariat should duly consider such information and include it in its
monthly reports.
Thirdly, political motives must play no part in resolving the Syrian chemical
weapons issue. In the past few years, some countries have repeatedly pushed the
OPCW to take action despite the lack of conclusive evidence, numerous reservations
about its reports and huge differences among parties. Decisions forced through in
this way are often controversial and hard to implement. They have eroded mutual
trust among the States Parties and hampered the resolution of this issue.
Fourthly, we must rely on dialogue and cooperation to resolve the Syrian
chemical weapons issue. For some time, the Syrian Government has actively
collaborated with the OPCW. The two sides have cooperated and communicated
openly and, in principle, agreed to extend their cooperation agreement for an
additional six months. From 7 to 25 February, the two sides held the twenty-fourth
round of technical consultations. The international community should acknowledge
the constructive attitude of the Syrian Government and encourage the OPCW and
the Syrian Government to continue their dialogue and consultations and to work
together to resolve all outstanding issues.

4/26

21-03233

S/2021/226

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
This March marks the tenth anniversary of the Syrian civil war. Ten years
ago, when tens of thousands of Syrians peacefully gathered on the streets to protest
against corruption and demand respect for their basic human rights, there was hope
for political reforms and transformation. The violent crackdown on the peaceful
anti-Government protests by the Al-Assad regime, however, turned it into one of the
most deadly and destructive conflicts in recent history — about half a million people
have been killed and many more injured, maimed or tortured, and millions have been
displaced and their homes destroyed.
One of the defining features of the Syrian conflict has been the repeated and
systematic deployment of chemical weapons against civilian populations — we saw
it in Ghouta, Douma, Sarmin, Khan Shaykhun and elsewhere. The Syrian regime’s
responsibility for the use of chemical weapons has been confirmed, on seven separate
occasions, by independent investigative mechanisms of the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). In addition, the
Joint Investigative Mechanism has confirmed that the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant has also used such weapons on two occasions.
Estonia fully trusts the independent, impartial and professional work of the
OPCW Technical Secretariat and its investigative bodies, as well as the credibility
of their reports.
There is no justification for the use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere
and under any circumstances. It is imperative to hold accountable all those who have
used such arms, often against defenceless men, women and children. We owe it to
each and every one of the victims. We need it to heal the country and build peace
in Syria. We need accountability to preserve the credibility of the norm against
chemical-weapons use.
Regrettably, all attempts in the Security Council to move towards accountability
have thus far been blocked by a veto. It is encouraging to see, however, that the first
criminal inquiries on the use of chemical weapons in Syria have reached courts in
Germany and France. There is still hope for justice.
There are still gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies in the Syrian declaration.
Syria’s persistent lack of cooperation means that we do not have clarity on its chemical
weapons stockpiles and production facilities. The situation continues to pose a threat
to international peace and security. We hope that, once the Conference of the OPCW
States parties resumes in April, it will take appropriate action to address Syria’s
violations of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction.
Estonia continues to stand up for international law and the fundamental
principles of human rights. Three years ago today, Sergei Skripal and his daughter
were poisoned with a Novichok chemical nerve agent in Salisbury, United Kingdom.
The same poison was used again in August last year in an attempt to assassinate
Russian politician Alexei Navalny. We condemn in the strongest terms the targeted
killings of those who dare to speak out against the Government and criticize the
ruling regime.

21-032335/26

S/2021/226

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
We have to look at the situation squarely — no progress has been made. The
Syrian regime is still lying, hiding the truth and evading its international obligations.
The initial declaration is incomplete, as we all know. More than seven years
have passed since the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), and 19 issues are still
pending. Among those is an undeclared production site, for which the regime has
provided no explanation. To claim that the matter is closed is to deny the evidence.
We look forward to the results of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) Declaration Assessment Team’s mission on the ground conducted
in February.
I will not retract our position on the culpability of the Syrian regime. Everyone
knows the despicable acts for which it is responsible and must be brought to account.
That is why France will pay close attention to the conclusions of the forthcoming
reports of the OPCW Investigation and Identification Team.
The regime has not carried out any of the actions expected of it. France,
together with its partners, has drawn the appropriate conclusions. That is why
we submitted a draft decision to the OPCW Technical Secretariat on behalf of
46 delegations in November, specifically to deprive the regime of its voting rights.
That initiative has only one objective — to ensure that Syria finally complies with
its international obligations.
I would like to commend the work that the OPCW is carrying out with
complete rigour and independence. I deplore the unfounded accusations that are
being levelled at it. They are undignified and, above all, they are irresponsible. The
Security Council has a historic responsibility for the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, and the re-emergence of chemical weapons in the world is a major
threat. We cannot allow such weapons to become commonplace. Their use should
remain an absolute taboo. The OPCW remains a pillar of our collective security and
must be preserved.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the need to fight impunity. Earlier
this week, survivors of chemical-weapon attacks filed a complaint in France against
Syrian regime officials for war crimes and crimes against humanity. The complaint
contains a very simple message: criminals will not get away with it. Evidence
continues to be collected and will be used. Those are the messages that we reiterated
in the General Assembly on Tuesday (see A/75/PV.56) and that we defend alongside
our partners within the International Partnership against Impunity for the Use of
Chemical Weapons.

6/26

21-03233

S/2021/226

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative and Political
Coordinator of India to the United Nations, Ravindra Raguttahalli
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing.
We have taken note of the monthly report submitted by the Director General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), entitled
“Progress in the elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme” (see
S/2021/200), which provides information about the activities of the OPCW in
implementing resolution 2118 (2013), as well as the activities of its Fact-Finding
Mission, the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) and the Investigation and
Identification Team.
We are encouraged to learn that the twenty-fourth round of consultations
between the DAT and the relevant Syrian authorities took place from 7 to
25 February. We hope that those consultations will help in addressing the reported
gaps and inconsistencies in the declaration. We have also taken note of the extension
of the tripartite agreement among the OPCW, Syria and the United Nations Office
for Project Services. We hope that the six-month extension agreement will be
signed soon.
India has provided a financial contribution of $1 million to the OPCW trust fund
for activities relating to the destruction of chemical stockpiles and related facilities in
Syria. We believe that the continued engagement and cooperation between Syria and
the OPCW Technical Secretariat is critical to the early resolution of all outstanding
issues. India has consistently underlined the need for an impartial and objective
investigation into any alleged use of chemical weapons, scrupulously following the
provisions and procedures laid down in the Chemical Weapons Convention. Any
concerns or differences should be addressed on the basis of consultations among all
the parties concerned. In our view, politicization of the issue will result in parties
taking extreme positions, jeopardizing ongoing efforts towards resolution.
Whether it be the alleged use of chemical weapons, humanitarian issues or
political processes, we need greater efforts in seeking a congruence of positions,
both within the Security Council and beyond, in order to see meaningful and tangible
progress on the ground in Syria. India is willing to work with other like-minded
delegations towards fostering unity in the Council on all issues concerning Syria.
As one of the worst sufferers of the scourge of terrorism, India continues to
call on the Council to remain cognizant, at all times, of the dangers of weapons of
mass destruction falling into the hands of terrorist groups. We have consistently
underlined the need to prevent terrorist groups from taking advantage of the decadelong conflict in Syria and entrenching themselves, thereby posing a threat to the
entire region. Reports of the resurgence of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Shams
in the region are being heard with increasing frequency. The Secretary-General’s
latest report on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh)
(S/2021/98) alludes to the incubation of the terrorist threat in displacement camps
and detention facilities in north-eastern Syria. Undoubtedly, the role of certain
players in the Syrian conflict has re-energized terrorist activities in the region.
India has consistently called for a comprehensive and peaceful resolution of
the Syrian conflict through a Syrian-led dialogue, taking into account the legitimate
aspirations of the people of Syria. We have also contributed to the return of normalcy
and the rebuilding of Syria through humanitarian assistance and human resource
development, most recently through the delivery of 2,000 metric tons of rice
21-032337/26

S/2021/226

in February. We have also called on all parties not to link the humanitarian and
development work with progress on the political track. We stand ready to work with
humanitarian relief agencies, led by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the United Nations Development Programme, in devising a suitable
vaccination relief programme for the country and West Asia as a whole.
Let me conclude by reiterating our support for efforts towards attaining lasting
sustainable peace in Syria.

8/26

21-03233

S/2021/226

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I would like to thank Under-Secretary General Nakamitsu for her briefing
today. It is good to see her with us.
Once again, Ireland unequivocally condemns any use of chemical weapons at
any time and anywhere. As the instances of their use in Syria and elsewhere make
clear, they have a devastating and indiscriminate impact on their victims and on
communities. We must act together to uphold the established global norm against the
use of those appalling weapons. Today I would like to make three points.
First, Ireland is unwavering in its view that the role of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) is crucial in addressing the possession
and use of chemical weapons. For us, it represents an essential and effective part of
the global disarmament and non-proliferation architecture. It serves to protect all
our interests, including, I would like to underline, those of the people of Syria, in
ensuring the global elimination of chemical weapons.
We are therefore seriously concerned by the ongoing efforts of some members
to question the professionalism and impartiality of the OPCW Technical Secretariat
and its investigation mechanisms. In our view, that risks lasting damage to this vital
organization and undermines the multilateral approach to disarmament and nonproliferation, which is enshrined in the Chemical Weapons Convention.
In the case of Syria, the OPCW, through the Joint Investigative Mechanism
and the Investigation and Identification Team (IIT), has provided factual, evidencebased and impartial conclusions on numerous reported instances of chemicalweapons use in Syria. It has been clear where evidence was insufficient to come to
a conclusion. It has also been clear where evidence points to use by terrorist groups.
On several occasions to date, the OPCW found that the evidence warranted
attribution of use to the Syrian authorities. Given the OPCW’s technical expertise
and experience, as well as its mandate, we do not believe that we should seek to
second-guess those findings. Rather, the international community, and the Council
in particular, should act urgently, in unity, to address the issue of such documented
use of chemical weapons in Syria.
My second point is that we remain deeply concerned by the gaps and
inconsistencies in Syria’s initial declaration. Those are particularly important given
the documented, repeated use of chemical weapons by the Syrian authorities since
2013. Such gaps and inconsistencies by Syria have increased in number and substance
over the past seven years. Overall, that paints an unfortunate picture of evasion by
Syria, with an ongoing effort to avoid its obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC), OPCW Executive Council decisions and resolution 2118 (2013).
We note the recent consultations between the Declaration Assessment Team
and Syria, which took place between 7 and 25 February, and we really hope to
hear of progress having been made in addressing the 19 outstanding issues under
Syria’s declaration. Again, we must be really clear: the Syrian authorities bear the
responsibility to fully address and answer those issues. I would today again urge the
Syrian authorities to cooperate actively, openly and in good faith with the OPCW.
My last point is in response to the findings of the Fact-Finding Mission and
the IIT on the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian Arab Air Force in Ltamenah
in March 2017. The OPCW Executive Council set out clear actions for Syria to take
to return to compliance with the CWC. Ireland deeply regrets that Syria chose not
21-032339/26

S/2021/226

to act on those. We would again today urge Syria to act immediately to comply with
that decision.
Given such circumstances, Ireland has supported the decision put to
the Conference of the States Parties to the CWC for its meeting in April. In the
absence of any action on the part of the Syrian authorities to meet the international
community’s concerns, we believe that the Conference of the States Parties must
take all appropriate actions to address Syria’s non-compliance.

10/26

21-03233

S/2021/226

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
Allow me to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for her updates on the ongoing
activities of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW),
as well as the regular reports on the ongoing investigations on the use of chemical
weapons. Kenya also takes note of the report of the OPCW of 24 February
(see S/2021/200).
Kenya appreciates the fact that, despite the coronavirus disease pandemic
leading to the postponement of planned deployments and missions, the OPCW has
found ways to ensure continuity in the technical consultations with Syria.
We welcome the submission by the Syrian Arab Republic to the Security
Council of its eighty-seventh monthly report regarding activities on its territory
related to the destruction of its chemical weapons and production facilities. We
emphasize the need for coordination between Syria and the OPCW to conclude the
19 identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that remain unresolved in Syria
and ensure a quick conclusion of the investigations. We also welcome the deployment
of the Declaration Assessment Team to the Syrian Arab Republic in February for the
twenty-fourth round of consultations, and we look forward to positive outcomes and
updates on that visit.
Kenya welcomes the extension of the tripartite agreement for a period of six
months and takes note of the importance of the agreement in the facilitation of the
work of the Technical Secretariat. Kenya believes that the use of chemical weapons
anywhere and by anyone constitutes a clear and unacceptable violation of international
law. No cause can ever justify the use of a weapon of mass destruction by any actor,
under any circumstances. We support credible and transparent investigations that
lead to a timely resolution of any accusations of the use of such weapons.
The Security Council should support all efforts to strengthen the OPCW in order
to ensure full transparency and professionalism in its investigations. Its sensitive and
important work is reflected in the expectation of the international community that its
work always remain above reproach. We believe that the expeditious conclusion of
the investigations into the use of chemical weapons in Syria will allow the Council to
more meaningfully help the Syrian people in their quest for a political solution. That
political solution is the only way to bring an end to their suffering, impoverishment
and victimization.
Kenya stands with the people of Syria by calling for an inclusive Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned dialogue, seeking a political resolution reflecting their will. We
urge the States involved in one way or another in the conflicts that are afflicting
Syria to understand that their actions are visible to the global community and that
their conduct there reflects on them. The world expects the Council to offer solutions
regarding Syria and to show that interests can be set aside for the sake of a people
who have suffered too much for too long and multilateralism turned into a tool for
the people and for peace.

21-0323311/26

S/2021/226

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramirez
[Original: Spanish]
Mexico thanks the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mrs. Nakamitsu, for her briefing pursuant to resolution 2118 (2013). Subject to further
comments during the consultations, I would now like to highlight three points.
First, we acknowledge modest progress in Syria’s cooperation. However, given
the existence of incomplete or contradictory information on the use of chemical
weapons, my country believes that the technical and impartial assessment of the
case should be made by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), together with the specific mechanisms that were created to clarify the facts
and identify the perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons in Syria. We believe
that such enquiries should be pursued further.
Secondly, the Chemical Weapons Convention and its monitoring body are
the most robust and effective of all the disarmament treaties and regimes. The
universally applicable international monitoring, obligations and verification system
represent the optimal verification standard, the so-called “golden rule”.
Thirdly, in that same conviction, yesterday in the General Assembly my
delegation voted in favour of resolution 75/265, on cooperation between the United
Nations and the OPCW. We believe that the strong support for that resolution reflects
the relevance and importance of the relationship and cooperation between the two
organizations. That interaction should be strengthened.
My country reiterates its call on Syria to continue to cooperate with the
OPCW and make progress on the tasks ahead. Diplomatic dialogue and the peaceful
resolution of disputes in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
international law are the only way forward.

12/26

21-03233

S/2021/226

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
I would like to thank the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mrs. Nakamitsu, for her briefing. The Security Council meets every month to discuss
this issue of the utmost importance.
However, I regret to note that the lack of progress towards the full disarmament
of Syria’s chemical weapons programme makes us repeat ourselves. This month
marks 10 years since the start of the conflict in Syria. The sheer length of the conflict
does not make the issue any less relevant, or mean that we should stop discussing it.
On the contrary, the lack of accountability and the deterioration of trust remind us of
the importance and the urgency of the issue.
Yet the monthly report of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) on progress in the elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons
programme (see S/2021/200) once again clearly states that there is no progress.
Again, 19 of the 22 issues from Syria’s initial declaration remain outstanding.
However, we note that the Declaration Assessment Team was deployed to
Syria in February for its twenty-fourth round of consultations. We look forward to
hearing its findings as soon as possible. Again, we urge the Syrian Arab Republic
to cooperate fully with the OPCW and resolve all outstanding issues from its initial
declaration. I would also repeat that Norway remains aligned with the European
Union’s restrictive measures on persons and entities involved in the development and
use of chemical weapons.
Let me also reiterate our full confidence in the OPCW and its Technical
Secretariat.
Norway firmly rejects any attempts to discredit or bring into disrepute the
OPCW and the work of the Technical Secretariat. The use of chemical weapons in
Syria contravenes international law, and accountability for those responsible must
be ensured. It is untenable that no one has been held accountable for those actions.
We deeply regret needing to come back to the Council month after month to
repeat this call, yet we will continue to do so until progress is made:
The Syrian Arab Republic must fulfil its obligations in accordance with the
Chemical Weapons Convention.
Those responsible must be held accountable through credible national or
international criminal justice mechanisms, and the issue must be addressed seriously
by the Council.

21-0323313/26

S/2021/226

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
Madam President, I should like to indicate at the outset that we noted
your reference to the note by the President of the Security Council contained in
document S/2017/507. However, that note is not a Council resolution. Its provisions
are guidelines rather than binding rules. Of course, we should be concise, because
brevity is known to be the “sister of talent”, but there are situations when it does not
seem possible.
Madam President, since today is the first opportunity for you to delve into
the Council’s discussions of the Syrian chemical file, I will give a brief — yet I
believe useful to everyone here — retrospective account of this topic and related
Council discussions.
With Russia’s support, Syria voluntarily joined the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), submitted its initial declaration under
the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) and got rid of all its chemical-weapon
stockpiles. In 2014, Syria’s chemical-weapons programme was fully shut down,
all chemical-weapons stockpiles were eliminated and production capacities were
destroyed. The OPCW has proved that on many occasions. Since then, Syria has
engaged in comprehensive cooperation with the OPCW and its Technical Secretariat,
including the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT), and all investigative missions
on the ground. By the way, as concerns the fact-finding mission, it was the Syrian
authorities that first invited it to visit the country.
Unfortunately, hopes that it would help leave behind the allegations that Syria’s
leadership had used chemical weapons against its own people were not realized.
During all these years, some States have continued to play that chemical-weapons
card as a tool to exert pressure on the Syrian Government. Again and again they have
brought up grave accusations against Damascus backed up by unconvincing evidence
such as video footage on social media or the testimony of knowingly biased witnesses,
or falsified facts. At the same time, they reject the counter-arguments provided not
only by Russia and Syria but also by independent experts and organizations, and do
not give any coherent explanation as to why they do so.
Unfortunately, the Technical Secretariat assumed the role of transmitter of the
anti-Syrian claims of the Western countries and from the very beginning started to
churn out reports that would fit into that paradigm.
All evidence traditionally was rather “lame”, rich in technical discrepancies
that would often run counter to all laws of physics and rules of logic. Either projectiles
would land in vent shafts tailored precisely to accommodate their diameter, or
unguided air bombs would fly a 5-kilometre distance to hit their target instead of
falling to the ground, or the White Helmets would collect samples of sarin with
nearly bare hands.
The Technical Secretariat stopped even pretending to observe the normal
practices and procedures of collecting evidence, inter alia the principle of the secure
preservation of physical evidence. When some freethinkers among the Technical
Secretariat employees raised the alarm and refused to take part in a blatant forgery,
the Technical Secretariat leadership started to oppress, intimidate and suppress the
dissidents and to distort facts.

14/26

21-03233

S/2021/226

As a result, the bulk of the proof of the direct forgeries, manipulations and
internal violations in the OPCW Technical Secretariat reached a critical level. The
most vivid examples are the blatant violations that occurred during investigations of
incidents in Khan Shaykhun, in April 2017, and Douma, in April 2018. I call on those
who would like to form an objective idea of this to study the materials provided by
independent experts T. Postol and A. Maté at the Arria Formula meeting held on 28
September 2020 that we circulated as official documents of the Security Council and
the General Assembly. I also recommend that you pay attention to the testimony of a
former OPCW expert who had taken part in the Douma investigation, I. Henderson.
He claimed that the Technical Secretariat leadership had falsified conclusions
regarding the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian Arab Republic under direct
pressure from Western states.
I will not go into detail on the activities of the Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT), which is illegitimate per se because the Team was established once
a corresponding decision had been pushed through the OPCW Executive Council,
thus contravening the principle of consensus and violating the CWC. No wonder
its final products can withstand no criticism owing to political bias, factual falsity
and technical illiteracy. We have already shared our detailed position on this and
circulated our arguments regarding the IIT report on the Al-Lataminah incident
of 2017 as an official Council document as early as in June 2020. We will not be
surprised if IIT steps forward soon with more commissioned pseudo-revelations, as
unconvincing as those regarding Al-Lataminah. It is like releasing a new sequel in
a series of books that readers were already bored with. Everyone realizes that it will
hardly make the headlines. However, IIT’s efforts are just the tip of the iceberg. The
root cause of the problem is that our Western colleagues have long turned Syria’s
chemical file into a means of punishing the unwanted authorities in Damascus.
Therefore, attempts to establish a connection between the file and the actual use or
non-use of chemical weapons are absolutely senseless.
That is most clearly illustrated by the episode involving an accusatory
anti-Syrian decision by the OPCW Executive Council. That decision was taken in
July 2020 by the minimum required number of votes and prescribed that Syria must
meet knowingly unrealistic conditions: declare the allegedly remaining chemical
weapons and related facilities that Syria simply did not have. Of course, Damascus
was not able to meet that ultimatum. Now our Western colleagues are seeking to
incapacitate Syria in the OPCW by initiating a corresponding process. Hopefully
the majority of delegations at the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention in April will refuse to participate in that provocation and the
West-initiated punitive decision will not be taken. It is painfully obvious that there
is nothing that would require such steps — nothing extraordinary about Syria’s
chemical file in general or its initial declaration in particular. At the previous
Security Council meeting on that agenda item (S/2021/109), we mentioned that the
dialogue between the OPCW and Damascus on those issues was of a normal, routine
character. Many states, including Western ones, had to deal with the same issues in
the context of their initial declarations.
I will not dwell further on this topic, although there are more and more
examples proving that the Technical Secretariat is being used for the purposes of
the “political commissioning” I mentioned earlier. They have already damaged the
reputation of the OPCW as an international organization. I anticipate our colleagues
addressing to us further accusations of shattering and undermining the authority of
the OPCW. The fact is that such accusations are completely baseless. On the contrary,
Russia aspires to restore the good name of the organization and seeks to receive from
Director-General Arias answers to the questions that everyone is concerned about.

21-0323315/26

S/2021/226

I will stop here and, as my final point, I would like to draw your attention to
the following.
Now that a new Permanent Representative of Syria to the United Nations,
Ambassador Bassam Sabbagh, has arrived in New York, the Security Council has a
good opportunity to receive first-hand information about the situation around Syria’s
chemical file. I say so because, in one of his previous posts, Ambassador Sabbagh
for many years served as Syria’s representative to the OPCW, which gave him vast
expertise on all nuances of Syria’s interaction with this mechanism, including the
progress on chemical weapons issues reached at The Hague platform. There is no
one who could give a better account of that than he could. That is why I call on you
to give all your attention to his statement when he speaks at the end of this meeting.

Second statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
In response to the Permanent Representative of Great Britain, I would like to
comment on some statements that were made during this meeting.
We thank our British colleagues for a reminder of the third anniversary of
the notorious Skripals case. It is indeed 4 March today. I have to say that this is a
strange case, which our Western colleagues believe to have been closed based on the
infamous “highly likely” notion that has taken hold in their active vocabulary. But
closed it is not. We still have received no answers to the dozens, if not hundreds,
of questions that we posed to our British colleagues. The official website of the
Russian Embassy in the United Kingdom has posted a full list of those questions.
I strongly recommend that those who have an interest in this episode, which looks
like a mysterious case but is in fact a provocation, to pay attention to that list. As
for us, within corresponding chemical weapon-related discussions, we will find a
way to make those questions public again. And we will do our best to have those
questions answered.

16/26

21-03233

S/2021/226

Annex XI
Statement by the Counsellor of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to
the United Nations, Diani Jimesha Prince
I thank you, Madam President, and I also thank the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Nakamitsu, for her briefing.
I reaffirm Saint Vincent and the Grenadines’ well-established, principled
position that the use of chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone and under
any circumstances constitutes a reprehensible violation of international law.
Impunity for chemical-weapons atrocities should not be encouraged through
inaction. Accordingly, allegations of the use of chemical weapons must never be
dismissed, and investigations should always be comprehensive and capable of
withstanding scrutiny.
In this regard, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) plays a critical role and bears the tremendous responsibility of ensuring
the full and effective implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention. All
activities of the organization and its subsidiary bodies must therefore be characterized
by transparency, impartiality and non-politicization for it to remain fit for purpose
and an effective multilateral body. We remain supportive of its mandate and all
efforts aimed at strengthening its capacity to make certain that the quality of its
work remain of the highest standard.
We continue to encourage dialogue between the OPCW Technical Secretariat
and the Syrian National Authority to resolve the gaps, inconsistencies and
discrepancies in the initial declaration. We recognize the efforts by both parties thus
far, notwithstanding the impediments created by the global pandemic, and we urge
them to maintain the constructive engagement. On this point, we take note of the
deployment of the Declaration Assessment Team to conduct the twenty-fourth round
of consultations. We look forward to receiving the results of this deployment as well
as all other pending reports.
Despite the many diverging views, cooperation must be fostered and
sustained to make tangible progress in every aspect of this file and to ensure
the full implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). In this context, we restate the
importance of OPCW Member States pursuing consensus-based decisions to thwart
further polarization.
The Security Council and the OPCW Technical Secretariat ought not to
overlook the many notifications by the Syrian Government regarding the preparations
by armed groups to fabricate incidents of the use of chemical weapons. This is indeed
concerning, and we have an obligation to give this matter due attention to make an
objective assessment.
In our deliberations on this file, we should always keep the collective goal of
achieving a world free of chemical weapons at the forefront and remain steadfast in
preserving the norm against chemical warfare.

21-0323317/26

S/2021/226

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
[Original: Arabic]
I also thank the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Izumi
Nakamitsu, for her briefing.
Tunisia condemns, in the strongest possible terms, the use of chemical weapons
anywhere, under any circumstances and by any actor, regardless of the motives and
justifications, and emphasizes that the perpetrators of these terrible crimes must be
held to account.
The use of toxic chemicals as weapons is a threat to international peace and
security. It also violates the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction,
and resolution 2118 (2013).
My country is committed to the chemical-weapon non-proliferation regime,
which comprises the Convention and its implementing body, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). The regime constitutes a comprehensive
framework founded on multilateralism, consensus and cooperation with the aim of
ending the possession and use for hostile purposes of toxic chemicals and completely
preventing the proliferation of that type of weapon of mass destruction.
Tunisia supports the important technical activities of OPCW, in line with its
mandate, which led to the elimination of the chemical stockpile declared by the
Syrian Arab Republic. We have taken note that the coronavirus disease pandemic
continues to create challenges and obstacles for the OPCW Technical Secretariat
as it strives to carry out its mandated tasks in the Syrian Arab Republic. Tunisia
welcomes the efforts made by the Technical Secretariat and the Government of
Syria to continue their cooperation, despite the current circumstances. Indeed, the
Declaration Assessment Team and the Government managed to hold a twenty-fourth
round of consultations in Syria from 7 to 25 February.
We urge the Government of Syria to continue its cooperation and dialogue
with the OPCW in a spirit of constructive engagement in order to accelerate the
resolution of all outstanding issues and ensure full compliance with its obligations
under the Convention.
All allegations of the use of toxic chemical substances as weapons, including
by non-State actors, must be investigated in a thorough, impartial, independent and
transparent manner.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that it is the responsibility of the international
community, in particular the Council, to act collectively, in a coordinated manner
and in a spirit of unity on the Syrian chemical issue. In our view, that is the best way
to settle the issue and help to resolve the Syrian crisis.

18/26

21-03233

S/2021/226

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
I thank you, High Representative, for your insightful and thorough briefing this
morning. We greatly appreciate your sober analysis and clear calls for accountability.
As I prepared for today’s discussion, I was struck by the magnitude of the
atrocities committed by the Al-Assad regime. After 10 years of civil war, tens of
thousands of innocent civilians are now dead, and far more, far too many of them
were slain with Al-Assad’s lethal, horrific chemical weapons.
The use of chemical weapons by any State constitutes an unacceptable threat
to every State. We all know and understand this, and the United States remains
committed to holding those who use these horrific weapons to account.
We all know the Al-Assad regime has repeatedly used chemical weapons.
So why has not the Syrian Government been held accountable? The answer is sadly
simple — the Al-Assad regime has tried to avoid accountability by obstructing
independent investigations and undermining the role and work of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). And the regime’s ally, in
particular Russia, has also sought to block all efforts to pursue accountability.
Russia has defended the Al-Assad regime despite its chemical weapons attacks, it
has attacked the professional work of the OPCW, and it has undermined efforts to
hold the Al-Assad regime accountable for its use of chemical weapons and numerous
other atrocities.
The United States firmly supports the impartial and independent work of the
OPCW. We recognize their leadership, and we commend the professional manner in
which the organization carries out its mission. We eagerly anticipate future reports
from the Investigation and Identification Team (IIT).
The IIT’s first report (S/2020/310, annex) — released last April — concluded
that Syria used chemical weapons in March 2017 during three separate attacks. The
OPCW Executive Council, in response, adopted a decision in July of last year asking
Syria to take measures to redress the situation. Unsurprisingly, as reported by the
OPCW Director-General in October, Syria failed to complete any of the measures set
forth in the decision. It is unsurprising, but unacceptable.
In response to this failure to comply, the United States, along with
45 co-sponsors from across the world, have submitted a draft decision to the OPCW
Conference of the States Parties. We call upon the Conference to take appropriate
action when it reconvenes in April to send an unequivocal message to the Al-Assad’s
regime that the use of chemical weapons has real and serious consequences.
Let me remind everyone that we already agreed, as a united Council, to stop the
use of chemical weapons in Syria. In 2013, the Security Council decided in resolution
2118 (2013) that the Al-Assad regime shall not use, develop, produce, otherwise
acquire, stockpile or retain chemical weapons. The Council further decided that the
Al-Assad regime must cooperate fully with the OPCW and the United Nations. We
must not abandon that decision. The Security Council must ensure that there are
serious consequences for the Al-Assad regime’s use of chemical weapons.
The United States supports these and other efforts to hold the Al-Assad regime
responsible for the use of chemical weapons and other ongoing atrocities against
the Syrian people. The horrific list includes mass detention, torture and attacks
destroying civilian infrastructure.

21-0323319/26

S/2021/226

Accountability will bring long-overdue justice to the victims and their families
who need and deserve the international community’s support. Accountability is also
vital to build confidence in the broader political process, as called for in resolution
2254 (2015), to bring lasting stability and peace to Syria.
It is time for the Al-Assad regime to uphold its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention and resolution 2118 (2013). The regime has acted with impunity
for far too long.
The truth is, we have obligations too. We have an obligation to hold those
who use weapons of mass destruction accountable. We have an obligation to listen
to the OPCW, whose integrity is unimpeachable and whose objective, technical
expertise does not deserve to be politicized. And most important, we have a global
responsibility — a sacred responsibility — to protect our people from the inhumanity
of chemical weapons.
Very few issues would unite all nations. But the horror of chemical weapons
must remain one of them. We cannot let that norm disintegrate. We cannot give up
on the dream of a world free from these weapons of mass destruction.
So, we ask that the Security Council unite once more. Let us put aside shortterm political calculations. Let us finally put the needs of the Syrian people, and of
all people, first. And let us place the use of chemical weapons where it belongs: in
the dustbin of history.

20/26

21-03233

S/2021/226

Annex XIV

Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General and High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs Izumi Nakamitsu for her monthly briefing on the
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). I welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of Syria and the representative of Turkey at this meeting.
Allow me to focus my intervention today on the following points.
First and foremost, with regard to the importance of continued cooperation
between the Syrian National Authority and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), my delegation takes note of the eighty-ninth
report of the OPCW Director-General on the issue of chemical weapons in Syria
(S/2021/200, annex).
We recognize the efforts of the OPCW Technical Secretariat and Syria to
continue their engagement given the immediate impact of the coronavirus disease
pandemic from last year until now. It has been recently illustrated by the organization
of the twenty-fourth round of consultations between the Declaration Assessment
Team and the Syrian National Authority during the month of February 2021. We will
appreciate further update on the results of this round.
We have confidence that this collaboration is the best way possible to resolve
the remaining outstanding issues. We therefore call on the two sides to continue their
technical cooperation and consultations in a most constructive manner. We also look
forward to the full resumption of OPCW activities in order to further its cooperation
with the Syrian Government in this regard.
I would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm the need to support to the
work of the OPCW, which is mandated to assist Member States in the implementation
of the Chemical Weapon Convention (CWC).
Secondly, regarding the alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria, my
delegation shares the concern of the international community over this matter. We
are also troubled by the information regarding the possession and use of chemical
weapons by armed groups.
The use of chemical weapons in any form, by anyone, anywhere, under any
circumstances or for any reason is a clear violation of international law. Viet Nam
strongly condemns this inhuman act.
We believe that an investigation of alleged uses of chemical weapons would
help preventing recurrence. In doing so, it is also important to require incontestable
facts and evidence attained through a comprehensive, transparent and impartial
investigative process.
In conclusion, there is, without doubt, a substantial and long-standing
divergence on this matter. For that reason, it is fundamental that all sides engage in
a constructive and non-politicized manner with a view to finally putting an end to
this protracted dossier.
Our mutual goal is the full implementation of the CWC and resolution 2118
(2013). This goal can only be pursued through a joint and united effort of the
international community in supporting the ongoing cooperation between Syria and
the OPCW.
Viet Nam will continue to engage constructively in the work of the OPCW
Conference of the State Parties and follow closely the work of the Executive Council
on this matter.

21-0323321/26

S/2021/226

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Syria to the
United Nations, Bassam Sabbagh
[Original: English and Arabic]
I listened attentively to the briefing of Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and to the interventions of fellow members
of the Council. Given that I have been the Permanent Representative of my country
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) since its
accession in 2013 to the Chemical Weapons Convention, and given my involvement
over the past seven years in working with its Director-General and the various
Technical Secretariat teams, I would like to clarify some important related aspects. I
hope that fellow Council members will indulge me and allow me ample time to make
my comments:
First, the Syrian Arab Republic has repeatedly condemned the use of chemical
weapons by anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances, and has repeatedly
emphasized that it did not use chemical weapons at all.
Secondly, the Syrian Arab Republic voluntarily acceded to the Chemical
Weapons Convention in 2013. It has concluded the destruction of its chemical
weapons stockpiles and production facilities in full cooperation with the Organisation
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and its Technical Secretariat in an
unprecedented exemplary achievement, within a record time and under difficult and
complex circumstances. Syria has also been keen to fulfil all its obligations under
the Convention and has persevered in continuing consultations with the Technical
Secretariat on various issues. The monthly reports submitted to the Security
Council — the latest of which is the eighty-ninth report (S/2021/200, annex) — refer
to all ongoing cooperation activities between Syria and the OPCW.
Thirdly, with regard to questions raised about the initial Syrian declaration,
I would like to point out that this declaration was submitted within a short time
and under exceptional and pressing circumstances. That is why Syria responded
in 2014 by working with the Technical Secretariat to provide some supplementary
clarifications to it. This is a right guaranteed by the Convention and a common
practice with the OPCW. Incidentally, the United States of America is still to this
day, more than two decades after joining the OPCW, submitting supplementary
declarations to its initial one.
Syria has committed to an organized dialogue with the Declaration Assessment
Team in order to address the remaining outstanding technical issues, which actually
led to the achievement of tangible progress and closed a number of issues. In this
regard, I would like to inform the members of the Council that the Declaration
Assessment Team conducted the twenty-fourth round of consultations with the
Syrian National Authority during the second half of last February and obtained full
support for the success of its mission.
I would like to point out that some of the technical issues that are being
discussed have variant scientific explanations; therefore, it is a process that cannot
be resolved selectively or hastily. However, what is truly regrettable is that some
countries’ dealings with the subject of the initial Syrian declaration arise from two
issues. The first is bad faith and ongoing scepticism and the second is a glass-halfempty perspective — that is, that they criticize instead of expressing appreciation for
what has been achieved so far and encouraging its continuation.

22/26

21-03233

S/2021/226

Of course, I can respond to what some have raised, but I only remind them
that the production facility they focused on is indicated in the report of the DirectorGeneral of the OPCW to be declared by the Syrian Arab Republic; meaning that
this facility is included in the initial Syrian declaration. As for the discussion of
the samples analysis result, this is a scientific and technical issue that requires a
deep discussion between the experts of the OPCW and those of the Syrian National
Authority. I will not go into further detail on this point, given the confidentiality of
the topics of the initial declaration on the one hand, and so as not to turn this session
into a technical discussion, whose natural place is The Hague.
Fourthly, since the commencement of the accusations and allegations of cases
of use of chemical weapons — the countries behind their fabrication and release have
become well known — Syria took the initiative to request the Director-General of
the OPCW to send a team from the Technical Secretariat to investigate the facts and
to refute these allegations. Unfortunately, this team did not implement the terms of
reference document agreed upon and the rules stipulated in the verification annex to
the Convention during its work. Hence, the Team deviated from the professionalism
and impartiality that some members of the Security Council are praising today,
specifically in terms of not visiting the actual sites where alleged cases of use
took place, not collecting samples and preserving the chain of custody, relying on
information coming from open sources and so on. The Team proceeded to conduct
its investigations remotely, received samples whose source and collector were not
known, and interviewed anonymous witnesses who were either unidentified or
brought from an environment of terrorist groups and their arm, the White Helmets.
In that regard, I would ask Ms. Nakamitsu and the colleagues who praise
the OPCW’s professionalism for their explanation of a strange paradox in the work
of the Fact-Finding Mission in Syria (FFM). This paradox manifests itself in the
Mission’s completion of its investigations of alleged incidents which are fabricated
and published in open source and reported by suspicious parties, in record time —
that is, only a few months — while it takes more than three years to investigate
incidents reported by the Syrian Government. By the way, to this day there have been
five incidents reported by the Syrian Government since the year 2017. The reports
of the Mission have not yet been completed, which indicates an inconsistency in the
methodology of FFM’s work and its use of different and selective working methods.
As for the resounding scandal of the OPCW’s professionalism was the Team’s
investigations into the alleged incident in Douma in 2018. What was revealed by one
of the experts who participated in those investigations is clear and strong evidence
of the extent of the distortion, the great lack of professionalism and objectivity, and
complete bias of the OPCW towards theoretical assumptions that are not based on
any scientific or concrete evidence.
In this context, I would like to draw your attention to the statement issued
by the Courage Foundation on 8 February, signed by a large group of experts and
prominent scientific figures, at the forefront of which is Mr. José Bustani, the
first Director-General of the OPCW. The statement indicated that there were some
fundamental and serious concerns about the manner in which this investigation
was conducted and the occurrence of grave procedural and scientific violations,
as well as the organization’s failure to address the investigators’ concerns, and its
punishment of them for undermining the organization’s credibility and attempt to
impugn them. The statement also warned that the issue could damage the reputation
and credibility of the OPCW, stressing that the report of the alleged Douma incident
raises suspicions and inspires a lack of confidence in all similar OPCW reports,
including the report of the alleged Khan Shaykhun incident in 2017.

21-0323323/26

S/2021/226

I would like to point out that the Syrian National Authority, despite its
reservations on the methods of work of the Fact-Finding Mission and based on
serious and real concerns related to the implementation of its mandate, confirmed its
continued cooperation with the FFM and welcomed the visit of its team to complete
its investigations into the alleged incident in Kafr Zita. The team is expected to
arrive on 22 March, and the National Authority will provide it with the available
information and witnesses to enable it to complete its investigations.
Fifthly, the failure of the Joint Investigative Mechanism to fulfil its mandate
and the lack of professionalism and credibility in its reports led to the termination of
its mandate. Consequently, some Western Governments have turned to the OPCW,
manipulated the Convention’s provisions and pressured and blackmailed States
parties to adopt an illegitimate decision on establishing a mechanism of the socalled “Investigation and Identification Team” (IIT). This set a dangerous precedent
of mandating a technical organization with the powers to conduct criminal and legal
investigations to identify those responsible for the use of chemical weapons, clearly
overriding the Security Council’s mandate.
The practices of the IIT were not that different from those of the Fact-Finding
Mission, as it concluded an unprofessional report based on the principle of a balance
of probabilities, which make these conclusions contested and untrustworthy. Yet
these conclusions laid a basis for the United States and France to promote a draft
decision submitted to the OPCW Conference of the States Parties, which aims at
creating new pretexts for committing more acts of aggression against Syria and to
encourage terrorist organizations to carry out more staged chemical incidents to
serve the hostile American-Western policies.
The Syrian Arab Republic renews its call to all Member States not to be
drawn into this endeavour and to confront it in order to spare the OPCW serious
repercussions on the future of its work and its cooperation with the States parties.
In conclusion, the Syrian Arab Republic, at a time when it vehemently rejects
this hostile and politicized approach against it and demands an end to it, calls
on Member States to replace it with an objective approach and hold constructive
discussions that allow the OPCW to work according to the technical character on
which it was established and to enable it to restore its reputation, the professionalism
of its inspectors and the impartiality and credibility of its reports.

24/26

21-03233

S/2021/226

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun Sinirlioğlu
At the outset, Madam President, I would like to congratulate you on the
assumption of your duties as the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations. I also express our congratulations for the United
States presidency of the Security Council during this month.
I also thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.
It is unacceptable that the Syrian regime has not yet made a complete and
accurate declaration of its chemical weapons programme. This constitutes a serious
violation of the Chemical Weapons Convention. The eighty-ninth monthly report
(see S/2021/200) of the Director General of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) provides yet another record of this alarming situation.
There are still 19 outstanding issues regarding the Al-Assad regime’s chemical
weapons declaration. This declaration cannot be considered accurate and complete
in accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention. Among those outstanding
issues, one particularly deserves urgent attention by the Council.
Contrary to the regime’s allegations, all the information and materials
collected by the OPCW Declaration Assessment Team since 2014 indicate that the
production and/or weaponization of chemical warfare nerve agents took place at a
facility in Syria. We deeply regret that the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s request for
information about this facility has been denied by the regime. The regime must be
forced to declare the exact types and quantities of chemical agents produced and/or
weaponized in that facility.
We expect concrete action from the Council to make the regime fully cooperate
with the Declaration Assessment Team and immediately declare the full extent of its
chemical weapons programme to the OPCW. The Security Council must act in unity
and determination without delay.
In response to the Syrian regime’s non-compliance with its obligations, the
OPCW Executive Council adopted an important decision in July 2020. It set clear
and verifiable parameters for action and required the Syrian regime to return to full
compliance with the Convention within 90 days. Turkey co-sponsored this decision,
together with 39 States parties. However, the Syrian regime has yet again failed to
fulfil its obligations under this decision.
As a result, further effective measures became necessary. In this context, a
draft decision has been submitted during the second part of the twenty-fifth session
of the Conference of the States Parties. Turkey is one of the co-sponsors to that draft
decision as well, together with 45 States Parties.
Establishing truth is fundamental for our joint efforts to achieve peace and
justice in Syria. The current investigations by the Fact-Finding Mission and the
Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) on the use of chemical weapons in Syria
are crucial in this regard. The IIT has a unique role in identifying the perpetrators
of the use of chemical weapons. The Syrian regime’s denial of visas to the IIT is
another violation of the Chemical Weapons Convention. This is also a clear sign of
an attempt to hide the truth.
Turkey reiterates its support for the OPCW Technical Secretariat and its
investigative bodies. Their professionalism, impartiality and expertise are highly
commendable. We would like to warn against efforts targeting the integrity and
credibility of the OPCW.
21-0323325/26

S/2021/226

The cooperation between the United Nations and the OPCW remains essential
for a robust non-proliferation regime. We therefore welcome the adoption of the
relevant resolution (resolution 75/265) at the General Assembly yesterday, which we
gladly co-sponsored.
This month marks the tenth anniversary since the Syrian people took to the
streets peacefully to express their legitimate aspirations for freedom, democracy
and dignity. Their demand was met with oppression by the regime through the most
brutal means, including the use of chemical weapons. We condemn in the strongest
terms possible the repeated and well-documented chemical attacks by the Al-Assad
regime against its own population.
The regime must be held accountable for its violation of international law and
for crimes against humanity. The international community must stand firm to ensure
accountability for the use of chemical weapons in Syria. Let us all work together to
make this grim anniversary the beginning of a new era to end impunity.
The Council must be unified in urging the regime to swiftly and tangibly
cooperate with the OPCW without further delay. This is also key to preventing the
recurrence of the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
We would like to highlight once again the responsibility of those who have
influence on the Syrian regime.

26/26

21-03233
