S/PV.7108

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7108th meeting

Monday, 10 February 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Murmokaitė . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Lithuania)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. King
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Omaish
Mr. Maes
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Tatham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2014/68)

14-23102 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1423102*

S/PV.7108

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Council for the month of February 2014, I would like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Royal Highness Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid
Al-Hussein, Permanent Representative of Jordan, for
his service as President of the Security Council for the
month of January. I am certain I speak for all members
of the Council in expressing my deep appreciation to
Ambassador Al-Hussein and his team for the great
diplomatic skill with which they conducted the business
of the Council last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2014/68)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia, and I request the Protocol Officer to escort him
to a seat at the Council table.
Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia, was escorted to his seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, to participate in
this meeting. On behalf of the Council, I welcome
Mr. Zarif, who is joining today’s meeting via video
teleconference from Pristina.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hashim
Thaçi to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document

2/25

10/02/2014

S/2014/68, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: I wish to take this oportunity to extend
my congratulations to the President and all the new
members of the Security Council for having been
elected to this body.
In my statement today, I must take note of the
remarkable progress achieved during 2013. It was a year
of significant changes, as well as political progress, in
particular through the historic achievement, in April
2013, of the First Agreement of Principles Governing
the Normalization of Relations between Belgrade and
Pristina.
The essential basis for that progress has been
an increased level of mutual confidence and direct
communication between the parties, which have been
sustained regardless of disagreements and disputes
over the details of implementation. I once again wish
to recognize the two Prime Ministers for their ongoing
efforts at reconciliation and confidence-building,
commendably facilitated by European Union (EU)
High Representative Catherine Ashton.
Since my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7064),
several additional concrete steps have been completed
successfully. By the end of this reporting period, some
80 former Serbian police officers had completed their
induction and transition to the Kosovo police. In just
the few weeks since then, the number has grown to a
total of 142 officers, who have already been deployed
for active duty in the northern regional command. It
is expected that some 100 additional officers will
complete their induction and assume duties in the north
by the end of this week.
The implementation of the terms agreed regarding
the judiciary in northern Kosovo has not been completed
yet, although some progress was made during the most
recent high-level discussions in Brussels, on 27 January.
Both parties should be urged to move expeditiously
to bring the discussion to a conclusion, hopefully
during their twenty-second round of high-level talks,
scheduled for the day after tomorrow in Brussels.
Flexibility should be demonstrated by both sides on
such future arrangements as would ensure maximum
access to justice and promote broad public confidence
in the system.

14-23102

10/02/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Building greater confidence in the police and
judiciary throughout Kosovo is of the highest
importance, especially as implementation proceeds in
northern Kosovo. Two recent as yet unresolved cases
only underscore that importance. On 16 January, one
of the newly elected members of the North Mitrovica
Municipal Assembly, Dimitrije Janićijević, was killed
near his home. Although the motives remain unknown,
the murder followed repeated violent attacks on the
same individual and his property in recent years. The
deplorable killing, last September, of a Lithuanian
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) official, Audrius Šenavičius, in a cowardly
attack on a EULEX convoy remains unresolved.
Regardless of the circumstances and background
of those and other major crimes, as long as they
remain unsolved, they will continue to negatively
affect perceptions of insecurity and impunity for the
perpetrators and those who support and protect them.
Active cooperation by all in resolving those cases is
essential for normalizing the situation in northern
Kosovo.
Meanwhile, the implementation of other
agreements has moved forward in several areas. In
November, regular information exchange started
between the respective revenue authorities via the
European Commission’s System for Exchange of
Excise Data, fulfilling a joint commitment made by
the parties. On 14 December, the collection of duties
commenced at the two main northern crossing points.
That followed further agreement on the management of
funds collected there through a special account.
More recently, on 24 January, Belgrade, through
the European Union, handed over a first batch of
digitized cadastral records to Pristina. That marked the
start of a comprehensive comparison and reconciliation
of Kosovo property records — the first since the end of
the conflict.
Despite the overall successful conduct of Kosovo
local elections, we have witnessed a slow pace in the
establishment of new administrations in northern
Kosovo municipalities. Indeed, the inaugurations of
newly elected municipal councils were finally held on
11 January, the last day of the official deadline, after a
series of postponements. At this very moment, during
the last hours of the deadline, municipal assemblies
of the four northern municipalities are in session
to discuss and adopt the statute of their respective
municipalities. In the North Mitrovica municipality, the

S/PV.7108

decision of the mayor-elect not to take the oath of office
has necessitated a new mayoral election, which is now
scheduled for 23 February. In addition, the arrest, on
27 January, of a prominent local Kosovo Serb political
leader and a candidate for the position of mayor in
northern Mitrovica, Oliver Ivanović, on charges of
war crimes and aggravated murder, triggered local
tensions, leading to protests and public calls for his
release pending trial. That situation is indicative of
the challenges and delicacy of the implementation of
19 April Agreement.
While an important milestone will be reached with
the full constitution of the municipal administrations,
the establishment of a community/association of
Serb-majority municipalities will represent another
major step in the full implementation of the 19 April
Agreement. In order to ensure their effectiveness and
sustainability, the new municipal administrations
should be supported, both in terms of resources and
political engagement, by all local and international
stakeholders, through a well-coordinated assistance
mechanism.
The deep prevailing concerns among the local
public in the north over the implications of the ongoing
political transitions on their daily lives should be met
by determined efforts to achieve visible progress in
improving local infrastructure and delivery of public
services and in ensuring reliable and responsive law
enforcement. High demands and expectations from the
population are directed to the newly elected mayors
and members of the municipal councils. They will need
early and firm support in order to fulfil reasonable
expectations.
Looking ahead, international engagement will
be critical in enabling Kosovo Serbs to exercise their
franchise in the early Serbian parliamentary elections
scheduled for 16 March. Extensive discussions have
also taken place among local Kosovo political actors on
possible elections for the Kosovo Assembly and on the
issue of electoral reform, with a view to ensuring greater
transparency, simplicity and inclusiveness, including
the updating of the electoral lists. Some exchanges have
also taken place on possible constitutional amendments,
in particular those related to the so-called reserved
seats for representatives of the minority communities.
Those discussions have not concluded at the present
time, but their results will be crucial in paving the way
for a broader participation of Kosovo Serbs and other
minorities in Kosovo’s legislative elections.

14-231023/25

S/PV.7108

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Speaking in the broader context of international
peace and security, as the issue was raised within the
Chamber, I wish to mention that a debate also took place
within Kosovo on the participation of local residents in
conflicts in other regions, such as Syria. Last week, the
Kosovo authorities proposed to the Kosovo Assembly
a draft law that would prohibit and criminalize the
participation of Kosovars in armed conflicts abroad.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2014/68), some progress is being made in the
clarification of the fates of missing persons from
the conflict, with the discovery of human remains
at a suspected mass grave site in southern Serbia.
Excavations, which were suspended for the winter,
are due to resume in the spring. However, far too
many families on both sides still have no word on the
fate of their missing loved ones. It is imperative that
individuals and institutions with any knowledge of the
fate of the missing persons come forward and help to
achieve closure of that painful chapter. Progress on
that important matter, as well as finding an appropriate
mechanism for compensating the aggrieved families,
will certainly go a long way towards facilitating
greater reconciliation and integration among Kosovo
communities, as well as furthering the normalization
of relations between Belgrade and Pristina.
Major developments have taken place during the
past year, several of them breakthroughs on issues
outstanding since the end of the conflict. The European
perspective, as well as the effective facilitation led by
the EU High Representative Catherine Ashton, have
emerged as key instruments for political progress and
for encouraging the gradual reform and modernization
of Kosovo’s public institutions.
In December, the Council of the European Union
noted the opening of negotiations for a stabilization
and association agreement with Kosovo and took
note of the intention of the European Commission to
conclude the negotiations in the course of 2014. The
Council also adopted the general EU position for the
opening of accession negotiations with Serbia, and the
first intergovernmental conference with Serbia was
launched on 21 January. Within the broader context of
progress by both parties in their respective relations
with European institutions, major European assistance
to local projects and programmes in Kosovo will also
clearly remain central.
Moreover, bilateral donor assistance projects
should be carefully coordinated with all other efforts
4/25

10/02/2014

on the ground. In that regard, United Nations agencies,
programmes and funds are a ready and able partner
to add value to that effort. On its part, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) welcomes those processes and will continue
to be fully engaged in a coordinated effort, applying
its resources and relations with all communities to
build up confidence on the ground. It will be essential
for Belgrade and Pristina to consolidate the historic
progress achieved thus far and to overcome, gradually
but steadily, the many outstanding issues through
dialogue. It is also my hope that members of the
Council will, individually and collectively, welcome
the pragmatic steps being taken by the parties towards
the normalization of their relations. Acknowledging the
substantial progress achieved and encouraging further
steps will greatly strengthen the resolve of both sides
in overcoming the remaining challenges to building a
stable and peaceful future.
Allow me to conclude by thanking you, Madam
President, and all members of the Council for your
valuable engagement with the parties and for your
continuing support to the work of UNMIK.
The President: I thank Mr. Zarif for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dačić, Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English
text provided by the delegation): At the outset, let me
welcome the new members of the Security Council and
wish them success in their work.
It is a source of great honour and satisfaction for
me to be given yet another opportunity to address a
meeting of the Security Council dedicated to the work
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), a rare opportunity indeed to
consider, in this forum, the way to go to overcome the
problems in Kosovo and Metohija.
Let me express, once again, my gratitude for the
contribution made by the United Nations for almost
15 years now to the solution of outstanding issues.
During that time, a significant contribution has
undoubtedly been made by these quarterly meetings
convened under resolution 1244 (1999), the only valid
legal framework of the international presence in Kosovo
and Metohija.
At the next Security Council meeting, we shall
mark the first anniversary of the signing of the Brussels

14-23102

10/02/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations, reached between Belgrade and Pristina
in April 2013. In order to achieve ever-better results in
the implementation of the Brussels Agreement in the
period to come and to be able to look back at the results
in that period with satisfaction, we must establish much
clearer rules and build much greater confidence.
We appreciate very much the constructive
approach taken by the United Nations and its Special
Representative Mr. Farid Zarif, as well as by the
organizations working under the United Nations
umbrella, including the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). They have created
conditions for all sides to work together on improving
the living conditions of all people in Kosovo and
Metohija, irrespective of their ethnic affiliation. I
believe that the Council will agree that disagreements
with regard to the question of the status of Kosovo and
Metohija must not impede our efforts to act jointly to
bring about solutions to practical questions that were
pushed onto the backburner by Pristina for many years.
Thanks to the unstinting efforts of all actors in the
negotiations, major breakthroughs have been made,
which are noted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/68). Let me take this opportunity once again
to thank Baroness Ashton for her patient and wise
mediation, on behalf of the European Union, of the
negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina.
The patience and wisdom that helped us overcome
the decades-long vacuum are of key importance for the
process of the normalization of relations, which is a
precondition for the normalization of life in Kosovo and
Metohija. Should our patience and wisdom now wear
thin, not only would we not progress towards results,
but we would squander peoples’ trust and have to wait
a long time for another opportunity to rehabilitate the
idea of cohabitation.
I call on the members of the Security Council to join
efforts to create additional conditions on the ground for
the consistent implementation of the agreements we
have reached so far, for I deeply believe that this is
the only way to establish mutual trust in Kosovo and
Metohija. Short of such trust, we may not, I am afraid,
have sound foundations for any future agreements.
I am sure that, in solidifying the foundations, the
European Union will continue to lend us a helping
hand, primarily during the upcoming negotiations in
Brussels, as well as within the negotiations on European

S/PV.7108

integration that we have begun. On 21 January, the
Republic of Serbia officially started the process of
accession to the Union, of which we are very proud,
since we consider the decision of the European Union
to open the negotiations as recognition of the efforts
that we have invested in modernizing the country. We
consider that the beginning of the accession process
is also a great impetus to further work to improve the
living conditions of the Serbian people in Kosovo, on
the renewed conviction that our constructive approach
to the promotion of European values in Serbian society
will be properly appreciated. The fact that the accession
negotiations began on 21 January and that the screening
on chapter 35 of the conditions for membership was
held is telling evidence that the Republic of Serbia had
fulfilled its obligations under the Brussels Agreement
in time and approached the dialogue in a constructive
spirit.
In addition to the need to implement all basic
human rights provisions, including amending the
legal framework with respect to religious freedoms,
the Kosovo 2013 Progress Report of the European
Commission points also to the need for addressing other
very important problems confronting Serbs and other
non-Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija. The report
calls for the improved implementation of the existing
legal framework and for the enforcement of decisions to
remedy human rights infringements. It also highlights
the need for simplifying and streamlining the complex
and overlapping institutional set-up for reporting on
those rights, as well as for their promotion, at both
central and local levels. It points to the continued
attacks on religious heritage sites, in particular the
widespread desecration of Serbian Orthodox churches
and cemeteries, and the need for improving the
mechanisms for reporting and following up on such
activities.
The report also points to the weak implementation
of anti-discrimination policies and goes on to say that
many unresolved property compensation claims are
still before the courts and that inter-ethnic disputes are
unduly prolonged. The so-called Kosovo authorities,
it is also said in the report, need to do more to reach
out to displaced persons regarding the expropriation
of their real estate. The sustainability of the returns
and reintegration processes continues to be further
restrained by ongoing incidents affecting returnees,
their property and religious and cultural heritage sites,
as well as by limited access to property and public

14-231025/25

S/PV.7108

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

services, blocked or delayed property restitution and a
lack of economic opportunities.
We have called upon Serbs to participate in the local
elections in Kosovo. In order to encourage them to also
participate in the forthcoming parliamentary elections
in Kosovo and Metohija as a desirable step — which
is, I believe, in our common interests — we must
focus on eliminating the shortcomings that marred the
recent local elections. The report fails to address any
of the numerous obstacles that Serbs encountered in
that processes and that prevented many of them from
participating in the elections and exercising freely their
civil rights.
We shall continue to insist on the implementation
of the agreements reached in Brussels in both letter
and spirit, which was not the case at the local elections.
Notwithstanding the agreements, the election materials
were only partially status-neutral; mail registration of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) began after almost
a two-month delay and lasted only five days; despite
the agreement that Serbian documents were also valid,
verification of the inclusion of a person in voters’
lists with Kosovo’s Central Election Commission was
possible only on the basis of the Kosovo personal
number; and the possibility of e-mail registration was
unavailable to that category of voters.
Let me point out that the IDP identity card was
considered as proof of displacement and identity at
elections so far, while at the local elections in Kosovo
and Metohija the IDP identity card or the certificate
issued by the Refugee and Migrations Commissariat of
the Republic of Serbia were being considered only as
proof of identity. Considering that there is no other way
to prove internal displacement, the Central Election
Commission refused to recognize in this way the IDP
registration carried out and verified by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
and the voters’ list established by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
The situation regarding voters’ lists is very
complex and it is imperative that they be updated in
time for the next elections. The IDPs who were not
entered into the voters’ list of the Central Election
Commission of Kosovo are many even though they
fulfilled all conditions. It so happens that even the
election candidates had no right to vote, although
the Commission itself confirmed the validity of their
candidatures — a practice that is unprecedented in the
world.
6/25

10/02/2014

I considered it necessary to highlight the problems
that Serbs encountered in pre-election and election
processes lest an impression be created that, except in
northern Kosovo and Metohija, things run smoothly
everywhere else. There is a need to remedy those
shortcomings before the next elections. We must not
disregard the fact that, as stated in the report of the
Secretary-General, there were incidents at polling
stations in the north that did not occur in the second
round due to the intervention of political leaders and,
let me add, proper organization of the elections by
the authorities. I regret that those obviously effective
measures were not taken before the first round of
elections.
The recent assassination of Dimitrije Janićijević,
a mayoral candidate in northern Kosovska Mitrovica,
helped create an atmosphere of fear and insecurity,
which will surely dent the prospects of Serbs’
participation in elections. We are witness to exactly what
I have persistently warned about in this Chamber — a
failure to punish perpetrators of crimes against Serbs
is instrumental to creating a climate amenable to
the perpetration of new crimes, which must not go
unpunished and whose perpetrators we expect to see
brought to justice soon.
Nor has stability been helped by the arrest of
Oliver Ivanović, another mayoral candidate in northern
Kosovska Mitrovica and one of the most prominent
Serbian politicians in Kosovo and Metohija. That
is indicative of another problem we have warned
about for years and which we expect to be resolved.
While secret indictments may not exist in Kosovo and
Metohija, witnesses who must testify 15 years after
crimes were allegedly committed do. Ivanović, who
is being detained in a prison in Pristina, was arrested
specifically on the basis of such testimony. In addition,
the appellate court failed to provide an explanation as
to why the legal deadline to act upon his arrest appeal
was allowed to lapse.
The Republic of Serbia most vigorously protests
the arrest of Oliver Ivanović and requests the Security
Council to seek his release from detention and an
explanation as to why he was arrested just prior to the
holding of the mayoral elections in northern Kosovska
Mitrovica, of which he is one of the candidates.
Such unwarranted actions may threaten the already
fragile peace and stability in Kosovo and Metohija.
The Government of the Republic of Serbia has given
guarantees that Oliver Ivanović, Dragoljub Delibašić,

14-23102

10/02/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Laza Lazić and Žarko Veselinović, who are being
detained in Kosovo and Metohija, will be available to
EULEX during the court proceedings in their entirety.
Elections in northern Mitrovica will be held and
its mayor elected. Steps will be taken thereafter to
establish the community of Serbian municipalities, the
statute of which is currently being drafted. However,
we must mention the failure of Pristina to prepare
a legal framework for the effective exercise of the
competencies of the future community pursuant to
the Brussels Agreement and its lack of political
will to implement that part of the Agreement. It is
necessary to achieve fundamental agreement on the
long-term representation of the Serbian community in
Pristina’s central institutions, with a clear picture of its
participation in Government agencies, and to regulate,
inter alia, financing methods, communication with
Pristina and modalities for holding central Government
elections.
Even if it is accurate for the reporting period, the
Secretary-General’s assessment that the number of
inter-ethnic incidents has decreased does not exonerate
the perpetrators of the more than 7,000 physical attacks
that have been carried out since 1999. Regrettably,
despite our numerous protestations, no records on
ethnically motivated crimes have yet been compiled, and
the competent agencies of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government in Kosovo and Metohija continue
to fall short in trying those crimes.
Although the number of attacks is smaller compared
to previous reporting periods, the fact remains that the
attacks have never come to an end, just as it is a fact that
Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija are becoming increasingly
scarce. Therefore, the number of attacks must never be
reduced to a statistic that could be misleading; what is
clear, however, is the message transmitted by attacks
on members of a community. An ethnic crime of low
intensity may suffice to cause serious limitations to the
freedom of movement of Serbs and other non-Albanians
who find their lives compromised by a complex range
of minor limitations, such as a reluctance to travel alone
or by night, restriction of choices of place and time for
small purchases of everyday necessities, limited use
of the Serbian language in public places, the safety
of trips to school, and so on. Public condemnation of
ethnically motivated incidents would go a long way
towards improving inter-ethnic dialogue and tolerance
and help create the awareness that the future lies in

S/PV.7108

multi-ethnicity and the acceptance of returnees from
other ethnic groups.
The current discriminatory treatment of minority
communities makes it impossible for their members
to lead normal lives, especially with respect to
the enjoyment of all rights legally provided for
in instruments in force in Kosovo and Metohija.
The law on discrimination promulgated by the
Special Representative himself provides special
protection to minority communities, bans all forms
of discrimination and protects the individual not only
against discriminatory acts of public agencies, but
also against the discriminatory behaviour of legal and
natural persons. Regrettably, UNMIK and the Pristina
institutions have not followed up on the high quality of
that legal text with concrete and relevant measures to
implement it, leaving a huge discrepancy and outright
contrast between them and everyday instances of direct
discrimination.
The question of the restitution of property to
members of non-Albanian communities in Kosovo
and Metohija, among which Serbs are the majority, is
surely embedded in the question of minority rights. In
addition, there is the open question of the property of
the State of Serbia and the Serbian Orthodox Church.
The legal mechanisms initiated by UNMIK and EULEX
to address property issues, assist courts to reduce the
number of unresolved claims and provide protection to
individuals in cases of human rights violations have,
regrettably, yielded less than adequate results. That
type of litigation accounts for 40 per cent of the overall
number of unresolved cases before the courts of Kosovo
and Metohija. Furthermore, the large number of forged
ownership documents creates another impediment
to upholding of property rights. About 40,000 land
restitution claims have been filed at the Kosovo Property
Agency, while, according to unofficial data, almost
700,000 parcels have been usurped. Another problem
affecting property restitution is the lack of appropriate
protection against repeated unlawful repossession after
eviction. Moreover, Serbian property in Kosovo and
Metohija has been expropriated following the decision
of the so-called Kosovo authorities for the purposes of
highway construction. In the Gračanica municipality,
for example, about 170 out of 213 expropriated
properties belong to Serbs.
We were recently advised that the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government intended to alter the
legal status of the Trepča combine, the majority owner

14-231027/25

S/PV.7108

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

of which is the Republic of Serbia. The combine employs
a large number of members of the Serbian community
in Kosovo and Metohija. The adoption of a new law
designed to amend the ownership structure and the
legal status of the combine would undoubtedly be yet
another unilateral act that could result in altering the
rights and the status of Trepča employees and members
of the Serbian and other non-Albanian communities
in Kosovo and Metohija. That would be tantamount to
confiscating the property of the Republic of Serbia and
a violation of the basic principles of property rights.
The alteration of the legal regulation would result
in the rescission of creditors’ rights. It is far from
clear today how the question of their claims would
be resolved, considering that only creditors who had
registered claims against the Trepča combine through
the management team for the establishment of the
community of Serbian municipalities could request
payment of more than €268 million.
In that context, laws are being changed in the
areas that will remain matters of debate. By so
acting, Pristina has shown itself to be inconsistent
and unwilling to honour agreements. Furthermore,
laws are being changed in other areas as well, before
being negotiated in Brussels. Moreover, in areas where
agreement has already been reached, Pristina has failed
to show the political will needed to start the political
process that, as the first step in the implementation
of the Agreement, would change the legal framework
to allow the formation of the community of Serbian
municipalities, in accordance with its commitments.
The Serbs and members of other minority
communities in Kosovo and Metohija continue to
encounter problems. Their freedom of movement is
still limited or blocked. Their security and free use of
language, access to institutions, exercise of the right
to participate in elections and vote are threatened.
No mechanisms exist either to provide for restitution
of usurped property or to protect property from
repossession after eviction. Entry into possession is
being prevented, and there is no free choice of the place
of return and no conditions for the sustainable survival
of returnees. Even if returnees decide to return, local
communities do their utmost to make them feel neither
accepted nor acceptable. In the municipality of Klina,
two returnee houses have already been set on fire in the
past 10 days. Last but not least, attempts are continually
being made to rename or to stamp out Serbian cultural

8/25

10/02/2014

and religious heritage and to confiscate property
belonging to the Republic of Serbia.
As pointed out by the Secretary-General in his
report, one of the priorities of the United Nations Mission
is to ensure respect for human rights. We believe that
all international missions must respect such a priority,
irrespective of which right is involved. They should be
even more mindful with regard to the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of the minority communities
in Kosovo and Metohija. We see UNMIK as the main
guarantor, all the more so as the EU Mission will be
reconfigured during the year.
I would like to point out in particular that any
discussion of a possible change of the scope and
mandate of EULEX must not take place outside the
Security Council, bearing in mind that the United
Nations is the coordinating organization of the
international presence in Kosovo and Metohija. I
believe that today’s meeting is the right opportunity to
initiate a discussion on the reconfiguration of EULEX,
as the Security Council is the only appropriate forum
to agree on changes in Kosovo and Metohija that
would lead to lasting and stable progress in the field.
Given that it was necessary for the Security Council
to adopt a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/44) on
the so-called six-point plan of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, that is, to deploy EULEX under the UNMIK
umbrella, is not the approval of that body also needed
for a substantial change in the mandate and scope of the
EU Mission? The point of departure for determining
the measures to be taken to improve the contribution of
the European Union to Kosovo and Metohija should be
a report of the Secretary-General on the progress that
EULEX has achieved to date. The Republic of Serbia
expects a discussion on that topic to be started and will
participate constructively in it.
In brief, owing to the lack of mutual trust, I believe
that, in order for all agreements to be implemented,
an international presence in Kosovo and Metohija is
necessary. That is equally true for UNMIK, the Kosovo
Force, EULEX and the missions of other international
organizations. Each and every proposal for the
termination of those missions, the reduction of their
scope and a change in their mandate must be the subject
matter of a serious discussion and agreement, lest it
affect the peace and stability in Kosovo and Metohija
and, by extension, in the entire region.
Serbian officials continue meticulously to follow
the investigation launched by the EULEX Special
14-23102

10/02/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Investigative Task Force into the allegations made
in the December 2010 report of Swiss senator Dick
Marty, which was almost unanimously adopted by the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe.
According to the report, entitled “Inhuman treatment
of people and illicit trafficking in human organs in
Kosovo”, hundreds of Serbs were abducted in Kosovo
before, during and immediately after the 1999 conflict
and sent to secret detention camps in the Republic of
Albania. Many of them were subsequently selected for
forced surgery before being murdered. Their internal
body organs were extracted and sold on the international
black market.
Just as Serbia has done everything to uncover
and prosecute all those who committed atrocities
against the Albanian population in Kosovo, it expects
the whole truth on the war crimes committed against
Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija to be established and all
those responsible for such crimes to be punished. The
families of the Serbian victims must not be seen as less
deserving of justice than the victims of the other war
crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia during the
1990s.
Participating in the Security Council meeting on
21 August 2012 (see S/PV.6822) for the first time in my
capacity as Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia,
I said that the solution of the problems in Kosovo
and Metohija would be one of the most important
priorities of the new Government and that we were
ready to achieve, through negotiations and dialogue, a
peaceful and sustainable solution that fully respected
the legitimate interests of both Albanians and Serbs, as
well as all other peoples living in Kosovo and Metohija.
We want lasting peace. In order for peace to last,
it must be just. I say that as someone born in Prizren,
Kosovo and Metohija, the town that was the capital
of Serbia in the Middle Ages. Only 20-odd Serbs live
there today. As a consequence of the five-centurylong occupation by the Ottoman Empire and the
ethnic cleansing of Serbs by Albanians in the past
two centuries, Albanians are the majority population
of Kosovo and Metohija today. That fact does not give
the right to the Albanians to take unilateral decisions
of independence without the agreement of the country
from which they secede.
Let me be quite clear: Serbia is ready for
normalization and reconciliation in the region, primarily
in the interests of ordinary people. Serbia is also ready
for dialogue aimed at finding a comprehensive solution,

S/PV.7108

but it is not prepared to accept, and never will be, the
unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo and
Metohija. We warn Pristina not to misinterpret the
readiness of Serbia for dialogue and compromise as
Serbia’s weakness and not to use such readiness for the
affirmation of its self-declared independence.
In order to bring about a historical reconciliation
of the two peoples and a comprehensive solution to
the problem of Kosovo and Metohija, it is necessary
that the two sides take difficult and courageous
decisions. We played our part and shall continue the
dialogue with undiminished intensity and maximum
constructiveness. Pristina, however, must be aware
that there is no lasting comprehensive solution without
Serbia’s agreement and the decision of this body that I
am addressing, the Security Council. Fifteen years have
elapsed since the end of the armed conflict in Kosovo
and Metohija. Instead of continuing to live in the past
and condemning each other, it is time that we found a
sustainable solution for the future.
I call on all States members of the Security Council
to use the momentum reached in the solution of the
problems in Kosovo and Metohija, which, I am sure,
none of them expected when I spoke of it here 18
months ago, as an opportunity to build lasting stability
and long-lasting peace in Kosovo and Metohija and the
entire region.
I thank the Council for its attention
understanding of the challenges facing us.

and

The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Hashim
Thaçi.
Mr. Thaçi (spoke in Albanian; English interpretation
provided by the delegation): It is my special pleasure
to address the Council today in the first meeting of
2014 on the Kosovo issue and to present the positive
progress made in Kosovo during the past three months.
In particular, that includes the second round of the
first local elections throughout the entire territory of
the Republic of Kosovo, the establishment of local
municipalities in northern Kosovo and the European
Union (EU) integration process, as well as the recent
results in the bilateral process to normalize relations
between Kosovo and Serbia.
Let me start by warmly commending the continuing
efforts of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for peace
and progress in Kosovo and the Balkans. I would also
like to congratulate the new members to the Security

14-231029/25

S/PV.7108

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

10/02/2014

Council, namely, Chad, Chile, Jordan, Lithuania and
Nigeria.

recognize reality and who strive to work for a better
life.

The holding of free elections throughout the
entire territory of Kosovo on the basis of Kosovo’s
legislation — which were organized in a fair and
transparent manner, thereby upholding the highest
international standards — is the best sign that Kosovo
could sent to the democratic world and the friends and
supporters of democracy in Kosovo. The Kosovo police,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
the Kosovo Force, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the European Union Election
Observation Mission and local actors were in charge of
that undertaking. Their efforts brought about notable
results for Kosovar democracy.

The Kosovo Government and all relevant institutions
have condemned that criminal act — the murder of the
Assemblyman — and we have reached out to console
the family in these difficult days. We deem this act of
violence intolerable, and it is for this reason that we
have asked the relevant authorities to investigate the
case and bring the perpetrators to justice.

The mayors were sworn in at the inaugural meeting
of the municipal assemblies in northern Kosovo in
accordance with the laws and the Constitution of the
Republic of Kosovo. The electoral results and the will
of the people were respected. That demonstrated that
the important stage of functioning municipal bodies
had been successfully completed and that it was
accomplished in accordance with the laws and the
Constitution of the Republic of Kosovo, as well as the
Brussels Agreement of 19 April 2013.
Unfortunately, the elected mayor of the municipality
of North Mitrovica failed to take the oath of office in
accordance with the laws of Kosovo. Consequently, he
has lost the mandate and, in accordance with the law on
local elections, the President of the Republic of Kosovo
has called a new mayoral election in North Mitrovica,
which is expected to be held on 23 February of this year.
All preparations have been made for this process,
and we expect that the citizens of northern Mitrovica
will come out to vote and elect a local leader who will
be ready to accept and respect the laws of Kosovo.
On 16 January, an unfortunate and tragic death cast
a shadow over the post-election process. The murder
of Assemblyman Dimitrije Janicijevic, the Serbian
Independent Liberal Party candidate for mayor of
northern Mitrovica, shocked the people of Kosovo.
Without prejudging the outcome of the investigation,
let me say that it is my belief that this may have been a
premeditated murder by those circles that are attempting
to further hold hostage Kosovo Serb citizens who want
to become part of and contribute to the institutions
of the Republic of Kosovo — an attack on those who

10/25

Positive trends of economic and financial stability
have continued in the Republic of Kosovo, as reflected
in the 2014 budget. The budget accurately reflects our
sustainable resources and the goal of increasing social
welfare. The budget of the Republic of Kosovo for
2014 is in line with the directives of the International
Monetary Fund and predicts economic growth of over
4 per cent, which is one of the highest in the region.
At the same time, through membership in the global
financial mechanisms, it has become possible to obtain
development loans that are gradually opening the way
for the private sector to take the lead in economic
growth.
A series of agreements for the elimination of double
taxation, the protection and promotion of investments,
economic cooperation and customs have been or are
expected to be signed this year with various countries.
These achievements have been noted in the respective
World Bank reports.
Political stability and the prospect of European
integration have benefited the economy. In mentioning
Kosovo’s European agenda, let me thank here the
European Parliament, which on 16 January adopted
a resolution introduced by the European Parliament’s
rapporteur for Kosovo, Mrs. Ulrike Lunacek. The
resolution was adopted overwhelmingly by members of
the European Parliament of all political groupings.
The resolution welcomes the achievements and
results that Kosovo has registered in its six-year
journey as an independent and sovereign country. It
recognized the progress made in building a State for
all citizens, regardless of their ethnicity or faith, on the
path towards European integration.
Kosovo was also congratulated for having
achieved a number of important political reforms by
administrative and economic authorities, as well as
for the harmonization of its local legislation with the
European Union. That is one of the criteria required

14-23102

10/02/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

for meeting the conditions for visa liberalization
and building the capacity to address the priorities of
the European integration process arising from the
feasibility study of the European Commission.
As a result of those achievements, the European
Parliament’s resolution gives Kosovo great political
support and calls on five European Union — Spain,
Greece, Romania, Slovakia and Cyprus — to recognize
the Republic of Kosovo as an independent and sovereign
country. The resolution also expresses support for the
further advancement of the visa liberalization process
and negotiations on the stabilization and association
agreement process, urging the European Union to
open the door for the full integration of Kosovo.
The integration of the Republic of Kosovo into the
European Union is our primary goal; it is the only way
of modernizing and consolidating the region into the
European family.
We are currently conducting negotiations with
the European Commission to determine the content
of the stabilization and association agreement and
ensure the free movement of our citizens in the
European Union Schengen zone as two complementary
contractual processes for Kosovo. The successful
development of negotiations with the European Union
and the achievement of the stabilization and association
agreement, expected to be concluded by spring, remain
high on our governance agenda.
A few days after this meeting of the Security
Council, the Republic of Kosovo will celebrate the
sixth anniversary of its declaration of independence,
already recognized by 105 countries from all over the
world. I would like to thank all of the countries that
have recognized Kosovo, and I call on other countries,
including members of the Council that have not yet
recognized Kosovo, to take this step and join the
democratic world in support of Kosovo as an equal
and full member of the international community. Such
formal recognition of Kosovo would make a direct
contribution to the strengthening of peace and stability
in the region and beyond.
On this path of integration, the Kosovo Government
wishes to thank the secretariat of the Regional School
of Public Administration, based in Montenegro, and
the member States of the organization in the region
for Kosovo’s membership. We recognize that Kosovo’s
membership in various regional and international
organizations will help in further strengthening

S/PV.7108

regional cooperation as an important precondition for
EU membership.
Finally, the isolation for more than two decades
of Kosovo athletes has partially ended, since the
International Federation of Football Association,
after meeting with leaders of the football federations
of Kosovo and Serbia, has reached a consensus that
enables the Republic of Kosovo to play international
matches. We consider this as an important first step
towards full membership in the sports mechanisms of
European and world football.
We have seen even better developments with
respect to the Executive Committee of the European
Handball Federation, which now allows Kosovo to play
international matches without any conditions.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Council.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I wish
to thank Special Representative Zarif for his briefing. I
would like to welcome Prime Minister Dačić and Prime
Minister Thaçi back to the Council and to thank them
for their comments. I commend the Prime Ministers for
their continued dedication to the dialogue process over
these past few months.
The United States congratulates Kosovo on the
successful second-round elections held on 1 December
as well as the repeat votes in Parteš/Partesh, Zveçan/
Zvečan and northern Mitrovica municipalities. Their
organization and relatively high voter turnout reflect
Kosovo’s commitment to free and fair democratic
elections and desire among the people to make their
voices heard. We commend the coordination between
the Kosovo police, the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo to
ensure that citizens throughout Kosovo could vote in a
secure environment.
The memorandum of understanding between police
and prosecutors to address reports of intimidation and
fraud on election day also contributed to the success
of the elections. We congratulate all of the mayors and
municipal assembly members officially inaugurated
in December and January, including Kosovo’s first
female mayor, and commend their readiness to serve
their communities in accordance with Kosovo law
and Kosovo’s institutional framework. We call upon
local leaders throughout Kosovo to support dialogue,
cooperation and integration within their communities.

14-2310211/25

S/PV.7108

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The United States fully supports the European
Union-facilitated Kosovo-Serbia dialogue and the
landmark April 2013 Agreement to normalize relations.
The Prime Ministers and EU High Representative
Ashton deserve our praise and continued support for
their efforts and leadership.
Sustaining the dialogue’s successes remains crucial
for long-term stability, reconciliation and development
in the region and is in the interests of all citizens.
Normalization between Serbia and Kosovo will bring
opportunities for communities in both countries,
including jobs and economic growth. The ongoing
integration of the police, the resumption of customs
controls at the northern gates and the establishment
of the development fund for the north are just a few
aspects of the hope, order and normalcy achieveable
through the dialogue.
We welcome the acknowledgement by both Prime
Ministers that there remains much more to be done to
implement all that has been agreed. With that in mind,
we believe we should reduce the number of reports to,
and meetings of, the Council and allow Kosovo and
Serbia time to concentrate on the full implementation
of the dialogue, to include integrating the judiciary
in the north and staff from the civil protection corps
into the Kosovo framework and removing remaining
impediments to the free and lawful movement of goods
and people.
The United States appreciates the Government of
Kosovo’s outreach to Kosovo’s Serbs, especially efforts
to work with newly elected munical authorities to ease
integration, ensure functional decentralized institutions
and promote inclusiveness in the spirit of the April
Agreement. We encourage Kosovo authorities to
continue expanding those outreach efforts, particularly
in northern Kosovo, so that ordinary citizens hear and
see positive examples of the Government of Kosovo’s
commitment to all of its citizens, regardless of ethnicity.
Prime Minister Thaçi’s Christmas visit to Serbian
returnee families in Klina and Vidanje illustrates
a dedication to welcoming displaced families back
to Kosovo. The Government needs to sustain that
whole-of-society effort. Attacks, burgluries and
harassment of Kosovo Serb returnees must be
addressed in the strongest terms and the perpetrators
must face justice. Preserving and protecting religious
and cultural heritage sites is part of the effort, and we
welcome the progress that has led to the adjustment of

12/25

10/02/2014

KFOR’s presence at the Peć Patriarchate, the eighth of
nine internationally protected sites to be transferred to
Kosovo police protection. We continue to encourage the
full implementation of the Law on Cultural Heritage
and the establishment and enforcement of the special
protected zone through the Law on the Village of
Velika Hoča.
Finally, we congratulate both Kosovo and Serbia
on the achievement of their recent milestones on the
path towards membership in the European Union, with
Kosovo beginning negotiations on a stabilization and
association agreement and Serbia beginning accession
talks with the European Union.
I must again underscore the appreciation of the
United States for the growing number of countries
that have recognized Kosovo as an independent and
sovereign State. Those recognitions are a reflection
of the progress Kosovo has made on internal reforms,
as well as the new dynamic in Serbia and Kosovo
relations. It is that progress that bolsters stability in
the Western Balkans. We encourage the countries that
have not recognized Kosovo to reinforce those efforts
by joining the more than 100 United Nations Members
in acknowledging the reality of an independent Kosovo.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the Serbian Prime Minister, Mr. Ivica Dačić.
We share his views. We took note of the statement by
Mr. Thaçi.
We are grateful to Mr. Zarif for introducing the
Secretary-General’s report on the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2014/68) and for his assessment
of the situation in the province.
Russia’s position on Kosovo remains consistent. We
support Serbia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We believe that resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in
effect and is still the universally binding, international
legal basis for a settlement of the Kosovo issue. The
United Nations Mission is the main international
presence in the province. No one is entitled to hinder
the implementation of its mandate. We condemn the
attempts to undermine the role of UMIK, including those
that took place during the November and December
2013 municipal elections. We call on UNMIK to fully
and proactively carry out its mandate, and to focus, inter
alia, on tackling challenges in such important areas as
the rule of law, the protection of the rights of ethnic and

14-23102

10/02/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

religious minorities, forging intercommunity dialogue
and the protection of orthodox shrines and cultural
buildings.
We note the intensification of dialogue at the highest
political level between Belgrade and Pristina. Priority
has been given to issues linked to the establishment of
a community of Serb municipalities in Kosovo and to
clarifying their authorities. The creation of an effective
structure duly representing the interest of Kosovo Serbs
is important in terms of ensuring security for the Serb
community and maintaining stability in Kosovo as a
whole. In that regard, the Kosovo Albanian authorities
and the international presence should strengthen efforts
to develop interethnic dialogue and build an atmosphere
of trust. Without that, any talk of the multiethnic nature
of Kosovo society seems unrealistic.
The plight of the Serb minority in Kosovo remains
disturbing. There has been no progress in efforts to
return internally displaced persons. In that regard,
we note the conclusions of the Special Rapporteur
on the human rights of internally displaced persons,
Mr. Chaloka Beyani, with regard to the continued
discrimination against minorities on ethnic grounds:
high unemployment, restrictions in education and
problems recovering property stolen by the Kosovo
Albanians. Such a situation has also been confirmed
by the representatives of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and by the Kosovo
Ombudsperson.
People are afraid to go to Kosovo because of
ethnically motivated threats of violence and the absence
of security guarantees and protection of their rights by
the local authorities. Sadly, there has been a trend of
attacks by Kosovars on Serb worshippers travelling to
Kosovo for Christmas. Such a situation reflectes the
inabilitiy of the international structures, above all the
Kosovo security forces and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), to effectively
counter provocative actions by the Kosovo Albanians.
We are seriously concerned by the signs coming
from Pristina with regard to the drawdown of EULEX
activities as early as June. The Mission was deployed
with the consent of the Security Council. With that
approval, it received several mandates from UNMIK
that the European Union Mission was unable to cope
with unilaterally. As resolution 1244 (1999) remains
fully in effect, those powers are assigned to UNMIK
under international law and cannot be transferred to a

S/PV.7108

third party, particularly not to Pristina’s self-declared
institutions.
We await the end of the EULEX investigation into
allegations of illegal organ harvesting, identified by the
Council of Europe Special Rapporteur Dick Marty, and
the beginning of trials. All those found guilty of serious
crimes must be brought to justice. Proceedings must be
carried out objectively and impartially, and should not
be guided by dubious criteria of political expediency.
We are also seriously toubled by reports of the
participation of Kosovo Albanians in the Syrian armed
conflict in the ranks of Al-Qaida affiliated terrorist
groups, such as Jabhat Al-Nusra and Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant. Sadly, such facts have not been
condemned by religious and political leaders in the
province. We call on them to consider the serious
consequences that could arise once the militants return
to the territory of Kosovo. To Member States, it is clear
that further radicalization, both in the Western Balkans
and in the European Union, is inevitable in that regard.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative for Kosovo,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing today. I am also
delighted to welcome to the Council His Excellency
Prime Minister Hashim Thaçi of Kosovo and His
Excellency Prime Minister Ivica Dačić of Serbia.
The United Kingdom is grateful for the SecretaryGeneral’s comprehensive report (S/2014/68). As the
report notes, 2013 was indeed a year of significant
political progress in Kosovo. The United Kingdom
notes in particular the largely successful local elections
held at the end of the year. We once again welcome the
efforts of both Serbia and Kosovo to encourage a large
turnout to those polls. The European Union Election
Observation Mission, supported by 34 local observer
teams from diplomatic representations in Pristina,
assessed the election process to have been, by and
large, free and fair and orderly. That demonstrates that
political will and determination can translate into a
cleaner and fair process.
The United Kingdom welcomes the particiption
for the first time of citizens from the four northern
municipalities. We congratulate the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe for successfully
fulfilling its facilitatin role in the north and commend
the robust security arrangements that were put in place
by the Kosovo police, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and NATO following

14-2310213/25

S/PV.7108

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

unrest in northern Mitrovica during the first round of
the elections.
We continue to support the important work of
EULEX, including its assistance on the implementation
of dialogue agreements, the integration of institutions
in the north under Kosovo’s jurisdiction and on
strengthening the rule of law in Kosovo. We encourage
further cooperation between Kosovo and Serbia on
the issue of missing persons, including through both
national commissions. That is an extremely sensitive
process for the families involved and is crucial for
reconciliation in the region. EULEX has made a
valuable contribution to that work, and we stress the
importance of retaining its Department of Forensic
Medicine as part of the current strategic review.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/68)
also makes clear that progress in 2013 must now
be consolidated and serve as a basis for further
achievements in the coming months. Both Belgrade and
Pristina must continue with the implementation of the
19 April Agreement in the European Union-facilitated
dialogue. Steps have been taken, such as the beginning
of the integration of former Ministry of Internal
Affairs special police officers into the Kosovo police.
It is crucial that the progress continue, including
after the upcoming municipal electoral processes.
The association of Serbian-majority municipalities in
Kosovo should be established as quickly as possible
after the municipal election rerun on 23 February, in
accordance with the 19 April Agreement.
The normalization of relations between Kosovo and
Serbia is integral to both countries’ European Union
(EU) accession paths, and the full implementation of
the dialogue agreement is necessary to unlock progress.
We are right to recognize that both Prime Ministers
have demonstrated courage and political leadership in
their commitment to the process, but it is important
now that both sides implement the day-to-day details of
the dialogue agreements so that the process develops a
momentum of its own. More ownership is needed at the
working level to turn those compromises into realities
on the ground and to explain the process to the people
whom it will affect, particularly the inhabitants of
northern Kosovo.
The United Kingdom welcomed the opening of
stabilization and association agreement negotiations
between Kosovo and the EU in October 2013. Following
the December 2013 European Council’s unanimous

14/25

10/02/2014

agreement to open accession negotiations with Serbia
and to the condition that, before joining the EU,
Serbia must normalize its relations with Kosovo, we
look forward to Kosovo being formally bound into a
corresponding programme of reform and dialogue by
completing a stabilization and association agreement as
soon as possible.
The United Kingdom welcomes the continuing
international trend towards further recognitions of
Kosovo, and it encourages those countries that have not
yet done so to recognize Kosovo and, accordingly, to
contribute to regional stability.
Finally, it is heartening that once again we are
reviewing a report of the Secretary-General that
underlines significant progress in Kosovo, and, of
course, long may that continue. Given the encouraging
trend, the United Kingdom reiterates the proposal that
the Council consider reducing the frequency with which
we meet for these debates.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
I would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Farid Zarif for his briefing. We
also welcome Prime Minister Ivica Dačić and Prime
Minister Hashim Thaçi back to the Council and thank
them for their statements today.
The year 2013 was an important year for Belgrade
and Pristina on their path towards normalizing relations.
In order to maintain the positive momentum of last
year, the full and more effective implementation of the
19 April Agreement should be an urgent priority. In
that regard, we are pleased to note the tangible progress
both sides have made in the European Union-facilitated
high-level dialogue and its technical working group.
Indeed, the Agreement has already led to a number of
changes on the ground, such as the gradual transition
of the police structures in northern Kosovo. Building
upon such achievements, we look to Serbia and
Kosovo to increase their efforts towards resolving the
remaining differences, mainly in the areas of judiciary
integration. We hope that the next round of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue, to be held this week, will
lead to mutually acceptable solutions on those issues.
We also welcome the successful conclusion of the
second round of local elections in Kosovo. That is a
milestone towards normalizing relations between the
two sides and represents a big step towards regional
peace and stability. We thank the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European

14-23102

10/02/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo
Force for their indispensable contribution to ensuring
a safe and secure electoral process throughout the
country. At the same time, we strongly condemn the
election-related violence and the killing of the member
of the North Mitrovica Municipal Assembly. Such an
attempt to derail hard-won progress cannot be tolerated
and needs to be addressed decisively.
Another issue that must be considered in that
context is the scepticism and resistance of ethnic Serbs.
Winning their hearts and minds remains a challenging
task, but is essential to building lasting peace. Achieving
that will require time and good faith on all sides. In
that connection, we would like to emphasize that the
ongoing integration process in northern Kosovo should
be fully inclusive and cohesive. Furthermore, as part of
its efforts to build a harmonious, multi-ethnic society,
Kosovo must uphold its commitment to protect the
rights of ethnic minorities. In particular, further efforts
are needed to foster a more conducive environment for
the return of internally displaced persons. That should
be done by facilitating their access to housing and basic
services while ensuring the appropriate security. The
new strategy on the reintegration of repatriated persons
for the period 2014 to 2018, as approved by the Kosovo
authorities, is a most welcome measure in that regard.
Before concluding, we would like to commend
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Farid
Zarif and the entire team of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo for their valuable
contribution to promoting stability in Kosovo and the
region.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Farid Zarif
for his briefing on developments in Kosovo during
the reporting period. I also thank Prime Minister
Ivica Dačić of Serbia and Mr. Hashim Thaçi for their
statements.
The current report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/68) shows that, while progress has been made in
several areas, challenges still remain. Our contribution
to today’s debate will focus on three issues, namely,
human rights, key political developments and the return
of internally displaced persons.
On human rights, we welcome the organization
of a technical meeting on 2 December to discuss the
new draft Kosovo strategy on human rights for the
period 2014 to 2018. We support the revitalization

S/PV.7108

of non-judicial human rights institutions in Kosovo
and acknowledge the vital role of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and other international organizations
in that process. The report indicates that the Kosovo
authorities have not made progress in implementing
the recommendations contained in the 2012 report
of the Ombudsperson Institution in Kosovo as those
recommendations pertain to culture, education and
other rights of minority communities. We urge the
authorities to do more to promote and protect the
rights of minorities in order to foster inclusiveness
and strengthen cohesion. We commend UNMIK for its
continued efforts, together with the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and other stakeholders,
to promote respect for human rights in Kosovo.
Concerning the key political developments, we
welcome the continued implementation of measures
to normalize relations between Serbia and Kosovo.
We urge both sides to maintain their high levels of
commitment to the process. The establishment of new
democratic institutions through free and fair elections
has been described as one of the key aspects of the
First Agreement of 19 April 2013. That is why we take
special note of the mayoral and municipal elections that
took place in Kosovo on 3 November and 1 December.
We furthermore note that the elections were peaceful,
with the exception of those in North Mitrovica, where
unidentified masked men ransacked two poling centres,
and Pasjan, where ballot boxes were vandalized.
We applaud the zeal of the people of Kosovo for
democracy, as evidenced by the increased turn-out of
voters as compared to 2009. We consider it significant
that voters residing outside Kosovo, in Serbia and
Montenegro, were able to participate in the elections.
We commend the OSCE for its efforts in that regard.
We would also like acknowledge the positive role
played by the Serbian leadership in support of mass
participation in the elections in northern Kosovo and
that of the OSCE in facilitating logistical arrangements
for the elections despite the challenging circumstances.
With regard to displaced persons, we welcome the
commitment of the Kosovo authorities to facilitating the
return of Kosovo Serbs to their properties. We believe
that is an important step in the overall integration of
Serbs into Kosovo. We would, however, like to see
the same commitment in the case of other minorities
that have been displaced. We note from the report that

14-2310215/25

S/PV.7108

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

displaced persons who return face certain challenges,
some of which amount to a violation of their human
rights. In that regard, we call on the authorities to take
measures to end the discrimination faced by returnees
and to grant them better access to education.
We welcome the improvement in the policy
framework for managing the integration of returning
displaced persons with the approval, in October, of the
strategy on the reintegration of repatriated persons for
the period 2014 to 2018. We acknowledge the role that
UNMIK has played in the return process in Kosovo and
urge the Mission’s leadership to remain engaged with
authorities in Kosovo on that important issue.
I would like to conclude by commending UNMIK,
under the leadership of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zarif, for the admirable manner in
which it is carrying out its mandate.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2014/68) and acknowledge the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif. We also welcome the presence of the Prime
Minister of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and of Mr. Hashim
Thaciç.
On the political front, we welcome the substantive
progress made in implementing the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations of
19 April 2013. The municipal elections of 3 November
were held successfully in most of Kosovo for the first
time under a single legislative framework, marking
an important step in strengthening the process of
normalization between the parties, which lays the basis
for an association/community of Serbian municipalities.
It is now time, in the post-election phase, to
consolidate the progress achieved. That means
that future elected representatives must continue
cooperating on the implementation of the Agreement
between Belgrade and Pristina. We call on the parties
to continue their efforts with regard to the application of
the Agreement, to adopt confidence-building measures
and to make progress in the process of reconciliation
between communities.
With regard to reconciliation, the parties must now
address pending issues. Those include determining the
fate of persons who were disappeared or kidnapped, the

16/25

10/02/2014

protection of important religious and cultural sites in
the Kosovo region and the definitive reintegration of
internally displaced persons.
We reiterate the importance of continuing to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) at all levels so as
to guarantee women’s participation in all areas of
decision-making and to ensure that their needs are
adequately met. In that regard, we highlight the need
for further strengthening provisions emanating from
that resolution, especially in the justice and security
sectors.
We underscore the central role and important work
carried out by the United Nations through UNMIK in
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights. The role of UNMIK is fundamental in this
new phase of the implementation of the Agreement. It
is important to continue mutual cooperation between
the Mission and various actors, such as the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the Kosovo
Force and the international community. But such
cooperation must always remain under the aegis
of UNMIK. European Union cooperation has been
crucial in facilitating the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations.
We are concerned by the occurrence of isolated
incidents of violence in northern Kosovo during
the elections and we condemn the assassination, on
16 January, of Mr. Dimitrije Janićijević, a newly elected
member of the North Mitrovica Municipal Assembly.
Such acts risk jeopardizing the agreement reached
between the parties. We therefore support UNMIK’s
efforts to play a role of mediation and facilitation
between municipal representatives and minority
communities.
It is also important that the progress made in
transitioning police structures in northern Kosovo be
matched with progress in the judiciary so as to establish
a unified judicial system. Likewise, efforts should
continue in all other areas of the rule of law.
UNMIK could redouble its efforts on outstanding
cases of disappeared individuals. That is a debt owed to
the relatives of victims. In addition, the lack of progress
with regard to accountability is striking in that context.
As indicated at the Council’s open debate on war and its
lessons (see S/PV.7105), my country reiterates its offer
to share its experiences in the painful task of searching
for disappeared persons.

14-23102

10/02/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

In conclusion, we underscore the importance
of resolution 1244 (1999) as a basis and applicable
guiding instrument for the Kosovo region to promote
reconciliation, stability and prosperity for its
communities.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Farid Zarif for introducing the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/68) on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We likewise welcome the participation of the Prime
Minister of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and of Mr. Hashim
Thaciç.
Argentina wishes to highlight, as is traditional, the
fundamental role played by the Organization in Kosovo
through UNMIK in promoting security, stability and
respect for human rights, as well as its cooperation with
the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission, all the while remaining status-neutral under
the auspices of the United Nations.
It is worth recalling that Argentina voted in
favour of resolution 1244 (1999), when we were also
a member of the Security Council. We believe that the
resolution continues to be the applicable international
legal framework for Kosovo to reach a comprehensive
solution through a political process and negotiations.
The importance of UNMIK was demonstrated
once again with the conclusion of the electoral process
in Kosovo. We agree with the Secretary-General that
we should acknowledge the firm leadership shown by
Belgrade and Pristina in the peaceful way in which
that process unfolded, thereby sending firm political
messages that allowed procedural irregularities to be
overcome and the elections to be completed. At the same
time, we must express our concern at the incidents of
violence and intimidation which, although isolated and
eventually overcome, did hinder the free expression
and exercise of democratic rights.
We firmly condemn the brutal assassination of
a member-elect of the North Mitrovica Municipal
Assembly, and we join the call on all parties to cooperate
closely in the investigation to identify those responsible
and bring them to justice, as well as to do their utmost
to prevent such incidents occurring in future.
We welcome the commitment of the parties to
continuing the high-level dialogue under the auspices
of the European Union and we highlight the significant

S/PV.7108

progress made in the implementation of the historic
19 April 2013 Agreement. Nevertheless, we must
continue to call for the pursuit of those efforts and the
consolidation of the progress made in order to reach
an agreement on the establishment on the association/
community of Serbian municipalities.
A pending issue of particular sensitivity is the need
to overcome delays and move forward in the transition
of police structures in northern Kosovo, which should be
accompanied by progress in the connected issue of the
judiciary and other areas of the rule of law. The Republic
of Serbia in particular has amply demonstrated its
genuine commitment to the process of implementing the
April 2013 Agreement. We encourage all international
presences on the ground to continue cooperating in
accordance with their respective mandates in order to
contribute to the consolidation of achievements and the
successful resolution of pending issues.
Although we are encouraged that the general
security situation in Kosovo has been on the whole
calm, we cannot fail to focus on the security situation in
northern Mitrovica. In that context, we should reiterate
that the important work of UNMIK continues to be
essential in providing the greatest support possible to
political processes, giving special attention to those
issues related to the implementation of the 19 April
Agreement.
Argentina believes that it is very important to achieve
full respect for the human rights of displaced persons
and members of minority groups so that they can return
to their places of origin and accede to substantive rights
and not be the victims of discrimination. We associate
ourselves with the request of the Special Rapporteur
on the rights of internally displaced persons to deal
with discrimination, the high rates of unemployment,
deficient access to education and the failure to return
illegally seized properties, which continue to have
negative effects on the return of internally displaced
persons.
We are concerned that the rate of voluntary return
continues to be relatively low, which demonstrates that
it is essential to continue working to ensure the return
and the permanent reintegration of internally displaced
persons, while recognizing that the main obstacles
to increasing that rate of return continue to be issues
that are unresolved with regard to property, security
problems and poor economic prospects.

14-2310217/25

S/PV.7108

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

It is also crucially important to continue to give
priority to the tasks of overcoming the traces and legacy
of the conflict, including pending cases of disappeared
persons. Accordingly, we find it encouraging that
UNMIK continues to support efforts to ascertain
the fate of disappeared persons. We join the call for
redoubled efforts and cooperation so that impunity is
not the last word on grave violations of human rights.
We highlight the work being done by UNMIK in its
efforts to support the rule of law, especially cooperation
with all the pertinent interested parties with regard to
the main problems on the ground. As currently indicated
by the Secretary-General in his report, it is also key
for international presences in the Kosovo to continue
strengthening mutual cooperation in order to achieve
the common goal of establishing appropriate conditions
for the upcoming stages of the implementation of the
19 April 2013 Agreement.
We conclude by highlighting the work done by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
promote security, stability and respect for human rights
in Kosovo in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo for his
comprehensive briefing. I would also like to welcome
the Prime Minister of Republic of Serbia, His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, and His Excellency Mr. Hashim Thaçi,
Prime Minister of the Republic of Kosovo, and thank
them for their statements.
We have all witnessed genuine political progress in
the relations between Pristina and Belgrade during 2013,
which is reflected, above all, by the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations,
an agreement that was facilitated by the European
Union (EU) in April 2013. Jordan believes that it is
incumbent upon both parties to build on the momentum
created by the Agreement and move forward decisively
to address pending aspects. In that regard, we commend
the ongoing direct dialogue under the auspices of the
EU between the Prime Ministers of Serbia and Kosovo,
as well as the serious commitment shown by the parties
during the meetings. We also commend the ongoing
meetings of the technical working groups and their
recent progress in implementing the agreement on the
integral management of the check points.

18/25

10/02/2014

Jordan believes that the EU has a key role to play
in accelerating progress in the dialogue. While we
commend the serious and continued efforts undertaken
by the EU High Representative, Baroness Catherine
Ashton, we believe that the European effort will not
only help to overcome the challenges ahead, but also
contribute to the promotion of a culture of dialogue and
cooperation, stability and respect for human rights in
the region.
Jordan welcomes the concluion of the second
round of the mayoral elections in the municipalities in
Kosovo, which were organized in a peaceful manner
in early December 2013. Jordan also commends the
international presence in all its forms in Kosovo for all
its efforts during each election rounds, in particular the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
which facilitated the holding of the elections in the
northern municipalities as well as outside Kosovo.
The elections held in different parts of the Republic of
Kosovo, within a unique legislative framework and with
participation by both local and international observers,
were an important landmark on the path towards
strengthening democratic institutions in Kosovo, as
well as a necessary step towards achieving legitimate
representation for local communities. The upcoming
period will be crucial to strengthening the positive
results of the elections.
Jordan read with great interest the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/68), particularly with
respect to the security situation in Kosovo and the fact
that the situation was relatively stable in the period
under review, with a drop in crime rates. We regret the
killing of the elected official in northern Mitrovica. We
trust that that assassination will not have a negative
impact on the political process.
We commend the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and support its activities.
Jordan commends its ongoing efforts to facilitate
the implementation of provisions on the rule of law
in the First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations.
Jordan believes that it is vital to address,
continuously and seriously, all post-conflict issues that
have a major impact on the psychological state of various
local communities, such as the fate of missing persons
and returnees, and the ethnic groups. In that regard, we
welcome the commitment by the Kosovo authorities to
facilitate the return of displaced Kosovo Serbs to their

14-23102

10/02/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

homes, as expressed by Mr. Thaçi during his visit to
the returning families in the village of Videjë/Vidanje
on the occasion of the Orthodox Christmas. We hope
that UNMIK and other international organizations
will continue to contribute to finding solutions to all
those issues in order to build trust and achieve stronger
reconciliation in the region.
Jordan recognized Kosovo’s independence in 2009.
That independence is a de facto reality. We took note
of all the positive developments that have taken place
in Kosovo since the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999)
and the deployment of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
Therefore, We believe that it will be useful at
this stage to give the parties more time in the periods
between the quarterly reports of the Secretary-General
and their discussions by the Security Council, in order
to focus on dialogue and the implementation of the
Agreement.
In conclusion, we express our appreciation for the
efforts of to the Head of UNMIK and all its staff to
implement the Mission’s mandate in different areas.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Farid Zarif for his briefing. I welcome the presence of
His Excellency Prime Minister Ivica Dačić of Serbia
at this meeting and thank him for his statement. I also
listened carefully to the statement of Mr. Hashim Thaçi.
We respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Serbia and understand the legitimate concerns of that
country on the question of Kosovo. Resolution 1244
(1999) provides the essential legal basis for finding
a solution to the question of Kosovo. China believes
that the best approach in that connection is to find a
mutually acceptable settlement through dialogue and
negotiations on the basis of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and within the
framework of the relevant Council resolutions.
The current security situation in Kosovo is generally
stable. The implementation of the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
has made positive progress. Local elections were held at
the end of last year. Agreements were reached between
Serbia and Kosovo on issues such as the integrated
management of crossing points.
China appreciates the efforts of Serbia and of His
Excellency Prime Minister Dačić to seek political

S/PV.7108

solutions to the Kosovo issue. We encourage Belgrade
and Pristina to continue pragmatic and constructive
dialogue, effectively implement the agreements that
have been signed, effectively protect the legitimate
rights of the various communities and consolidate the
gains made in order to enable the population to benefit
from the dividends of peace and development as soon
as possible, while contributing to peace and stability in
the Balkans and Europe at large.
China commends the work carried out by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) under the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zarif and
supports UNMIK’s efforts to continue to discharge
the Security Council’s mandate. We hope that the
international presences, such as UNMIK, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo
Force, will strengthen their coordination and work in
synergy so as to play a positive and constructive role in
facilitating a solution to the question of Kosovo.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing and Mr. Ivica
Dačić, Prime Minister of Serbia, and Mr, Hashim
Thaçi, Prime Minsiter of Kosovo, for their statements.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/68)
takes stock of the historic year of 2013. The 19 April
2013 Agreement between Serbia and Kosovo, concluded
under the auspices of the European Union and the
High Representative, is an unprecedented step in the
normalization of relations between those two countries.
I also congratulate the parties on their tireless pursuit
of dialogue since that time. The hopes kindled in the
spring have been borne out by reality.
Another landmark event in recent months was the
holding of the municipal elections throughout Kosovo.
For the first time, all voters in Kosovo went to the polls
in a unique constitutional context. The relatively high
turnout through the territory, while slightly lower north
of the Ibar River, shows the progressive ownership by
the Serb population of the Kosovo institutional system.
Such events reflect the launching of a momentum both
at the bottom and at the highest level of Kosovar society.
In his report, the Secretary-General of course
calls on us to look towards the year ahead. In a context
marked by elections, the positive trend must continue.
It is incumbent upon us to remain mindful of continued

14-2310219/25

S/PV.7108

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

10/02/2014

dialogue and the political developments of the two
States.

strengthening its institutions, which is vital on its path
to European integration.

In that regard, we will continue to focus on the
milestones of the implementation of the 19 April
2013 Agreement between Pristina and Belgrade. Two
aspects are rightly underscored in the report of the
Secretary-General, that is, the ongoing dismantling
of the Serb parallel structures in northern Kosovo and
their integration into Kosovar institutions, as well as
the establishment of an association/community of
Serb municipalities with genuine powers. Those two
processes are inseparable.

All of those positive developments should be noted
by the international community. It is time for the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo to
adapt its presence to the situation on the ground, in
agreement with the Kosovar authorities and based on
their effective needs.

As stated in the Secretary-General’s report, an
increasing number of former Serb police officers from
northern Kosovo are signing up to the Kosovo police.
That is a sign of the success of the dialogue between the
two parties on that issue.
In addition, we call on both parties to continue
discussing the establishment of the judicial structures,
which will also help to promote trust among the local
population in that new institutional framework.
Finally, we encourage the parties to promote
the protection of minorities on the ground. The low
number of refugees returning to Kosovo remains a
cause for concern. Restoring mutual trust between the
communities remains the only way for Kosovo and
Serbia to open together a new chapter in their history,
firmly focused on peace and regional cooperation.
The decision to open European Union accession
negotiations with Serbia, on the one hand, and to
authorize the European Commission to negotiate a
stabilization and association agreement with Kosovo,
on the other hand, should also start to be implemented
in 2014. Normalizing relations between Serbia and
Kosovo was set by the European Union as a common
criterion for their respective European integration. We
must now ensure that both parties remain constructively
committed in the long term to improving their relations.
The year 2014 will also be the year of the strategic
review of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo. That review should take into account
developments in the regional context on the one hand
and, on the other, the desire of the Kosovo authorities
to take on more responsibility in the context of the
rule of law. It will therefore be in a context of greater
partnership that the Union will seek to help Kosovo in

20/25

Finally, like others have said during this meeting,
we believe that the Security Council’s follow-up on this
issue should reflect to a greater extent the reality of the
relations between the parties and that we should look
into reducing the frequency of debates on this issue.
Ms. King (Australia): We thank Special
Representative Zarif for his briefing and for his
leadership of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We also thank Prime
Minister Dačić and Prime Minister Thaçi for providing
their valuable perspectives on developments in Kosovo
over the past three months.
Australia applauds the substantial progress achieved
at the political level by the two Prime Ministers at their
recent meetings on the implementation of the 19 April
Agreement on normalizing relations. We also recognize
and commend the ongoing mediation efforts of European
Union High Representative Ashton. We commend the
efforts of both Serbia and Kosovo in implementing
key aspects of the 19 April Agreement, including the
significant progress made in the integration of Serbian
Interior Ministry personnel into the Kosovo police. That
is a delicate task that, when completed, will strengthen
security and stability in Kosovo.
We also welcome the holding, during November
and December last year, of mayoral and municipal
assembly elections. In accordance with the 19 April
Agreement, those elections were the first under a single
legislative framework and included, crucially, the four
northern Kosovo municipalities. While marred by some
security incidents, the elections are a testament to the
resolve of the Kosovo authorities to build a democratic,
multi-ethnic future for their nation.
We urge the peaceful, fair conduct of elections for
the mayor of northern Mitrovica, scheduled to take
place later this month.
The efforts made to normalize relations have
allowed Serbia and Kosovo to move forward on their
respective paths towards closer European integration.

14-23102

10/02/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

S/PV.7108

For Serbia, the inaugural round of accession talks
with the European Union in January and, in parallel,
the European Commission signalling its intention to
conclude negotiations for a stabilization and association
agreement with Kosovo during 2014 are both historic
decisions that recognize the efforts made by Prime
Minister Dačić and Prime Minister Thaçi towards
reconciliation between Serbia and Kosovo and stability
and prosperity within Kosovo itself.

Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I should like to
thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing, and
we commend the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) under his
leadership. I welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić,
Prime Minister of Serbia, and Mr. Hashim Thaçi of
Kosovo to the Council today. We thank both of them
for the statements they made today.

While commending the progress made to date, we
note that further work remains to implement several key
aspects of the 19 April Agreement. It will be important,
for example, to reach agreement on the statute and
establishment of the community/association of Serb
municipalities. More work also remains to be done in
northern Kosovo to establish a functional system of
courts. We hope that both Prime Ministers will be able
to make progress on this issue when they meet later this
week in Brussels.

In the political arena, Rwanda welcomes the
completion of municipal elections in Kosovo last
December. It is indeed an important step in the
implementation of the 19 April Agreement between
Belgrade and Pristina.

Australia is encouraged by the fact that the overall
security situation remained generally calm in Kosovo
over the reporting period, particularly the fact that
the number of reported incidents affecting minority
communities decreased when compared with the
previous reporting period. We condemn the shooting
of Dimitrije Janicijevic, a newly elected Serb assembly
member, in Mitrovica on 16 January. We welcome the
Kosovo authorities’ pledge to investigate his murder
and create a safe environment in northern Mitrovica.

Despite the minor challenges observed during the
elections, the good cooperation between the Kosovo
authorities and the local Kosovo Serb representatives,
which has led to the success of the elections, is very
commendable. I will use this occasion to congratulate
Mr. Ivica Dačić and Mr. Hashim Thaçi for their evident
leadership with regard to the success observed in the
implementation of the Agreement. We especially
commend them for having continued to engage
under the facilitation of the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
Baroness Catherine Ashton. We are confident that with
the kind of political will and spirit exhibited by the
parties, they will reach a common understanding on
their most controversial outstanding issues.

We remain concerned at the fact that the rate of
voluntary returns continues to be relatively low, and we
encourage Kosovo’s authorities to continue to address
discrimination and work towards better education and
employment opportunities, especially for minority
groups and returnees. In this context, we also urge
Kosovo to take concrete steps to protect the cultural
and religious heritage sites recently listed by Kosovo’s
Ministry of Culture, Youth and Sport.

On the security situation, while we note that
Kosovo remained generally calm, we strongly condemn
the murder of an elected member of the northern
Mitrovica municipal council near his residence on
16 January. We are aware that the Kosovo authorities,
the local Kosovo Serb representatives and the Serbian
Government condemn this murder, and we stress that it
is imperative that all parties concerned work together
in order to bring the perpetrators to justice.

The year 2013 was undoubtedly a positive year for
relations between Serbia and Kosovo. We encourage both
Prime Ministers to continue to engage constructively in
the year ahead in the EU-mediated dialogue and with
UNMIK to tackle any further challenges to achieve full
normalization of relations. With 2014 an election year
in both Serbia and Kosovo, we hope that both parties
will maintain the same pace of political dialogue and
continue to strengthen the stability and prosperity of
Kosovo.

On human rights, we took note of the lack of
progress in the implementation of the Ombudsperson
recommendations, in particular those related to culture,
education, access and representation in the media for
minority communities. We call on the Kosovo authorities
to pay special attention to issues facing minorities. We
welcome the technical meeting organized by the “office
of good governance within the Office of the Prime
Minister” on 2 December 2013 to discuss the new
draft Kosovo strategy on human rights 2014-2018. We

14-2310221/25

S/PV.7108

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

10/02/2014

believe that the participation of international partners
in this discussion, given their expertise, contributed
to the drafting of a comprehensive strategy on human
rights. We commend all partners, including UNMIK,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, UN-Women, the European Office in Kosovo
and the Council of Europe for their participation in this
discussion.

Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, for his
introduction of the report on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (S/2014/68). I also
thank Prime Minister Thaçi and Mr. Dačić on their
presentations.

On the return of displaced persons, we value
the assessment made by the Special Rapporteur on
the Human Rights of Internally Displaced Persons,
Mr. Chaloka Beyani, who visited Kosovo in October last
year. We commend the positive developments related to
legislation and policy, and we believe that the Kosovo
authorities, together with other stakeholders, including
donors, should work together to address the identified
challenges to the voluntary and safe return of displaced
persons. There is a particular need for concerted
efforts to tackle discrimination, high unemployment
rates, poor access to education and the repossession
of illegally occupied properties. We believe that the
solutions sought for the issues identified will need to
increase the number of voluntary and safe returns of
displaced persons to their homes.

My delegation commends the various actors
involved in the promotion of peace, stability and respect
for the rule of law in Kosovo and the entire region,
namely, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the European Union, which are
working in close cooperation with the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo on the
ground.

In the same vein, I commend the gesture made
by Mr. Thaçi, who visited two returned families on
7 January on the occasion of Orthodox Christmas,
and the commitment he made to facilitate the return
of Kosovo Serb displaced persons to their homes and
properties. On the other hand, we regret to see that,
once again, the Rahovec municipality has not begun
to implement the Law on the Village of Velika Hoča,
despite continued pressure by the central authorities
and the international community. There is no doubt that
the persistence of that issue will continue to undermine
good coexistence between both communities.
Finally, I want to take this opportunity to commend
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo for
its invaluable contribution in monitoring and advising
in the area of the rule of law. Rwanda has taken note
of the report of the report of the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
(S/2014/68, annex I) in that area.
I also commend the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for its
continued contribution. It is very important that the
European Union and UNMIK continue their assistance
to the people of Kosovo in that regard.

22/25

The report of the Secretary-General shows that
substantial progress has been made at the political level,
thanks to the political will of Pristina and Belgrade to
implement the First Agreement of Principles Governing
the Normalization of Relations between the two parties.
Municipal elections have now been held in the
various towns. We welcome that political progress,
which the international community should encourage.
However, the report mentions political conflicts in
northern Kosovo, where opponents of the Brussels
Agreement between Pristina and Belgrade conducted
a protest march against the election campaign. We
urgently call on all the parties involved to engage in an
open dialogue to find a lasting and acceptable political
solution.
With regard to security, the report refers to a
net decrease in the rate of intercommunity crime
and violence. We encourage the authorities to
continue in their role in maintaining public order. My
delegation congratulates the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo for the activities it
carries out to strengthen the capacity of the ministries
involved in the maintenance and promotion of internal
peace and security.
With regard to human rights, the report also
underscores the difficulties in implementing the
recommendations on the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees. We encourage Kosovar leaders
to create conditions conducive to the return of those
people to their places of origin, as well as to organize
their social reintegration and the recovery of goods

14-23102

10/02/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

to the original owners, which will make it possible to
build confidence among the various communities.
In conclusion, Chad would like to commend the
important continuing role played by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and the other
actors in the Kosovo crisis. In that regard, Chad urges
the international community, in particular the Security
Council, to support the Mission until the conclusion of
its stabilization mandate in Kosovo.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I,
too, welcome Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo Farid Zarif and
thank him for his briefing. I welcome as well His
Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of Serbia,
and His Excellency Mr. Hashim Thaçi, Prime Minister
of Kosovo, and thank them for their presentations.
On 3 November 2013, municipal elections were held
for the first time throughout the territory of Kosovo
under Kosovo law, in implementation of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations between Belgrade and Pristina. Despite
a few incidents, the commitment of political officials
on both sides and the significant support provided by
international partners, in particular the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European
Union, ensured the success of the municipal elections,
including in the four municipalities in northern Kosovo.
We are confident that all the necessary measures will
be taken for the partial election of 23 February to
determine the mayor of northern Mitrovica also takes
place under the best conditions possible. Once that
phase has been completed, we encourage Serbian and
Kosovar leaders to reach an agreement as soon as
possible on the modalities for the establishment of Serbmajority municipalities as. In so doing, the provisions
of the historic Agreement of 19 April 2013 will have
full effect.
In addition to the municipal elections, the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, facilitated
by the European Union, has led to progress in terms
of the progressive dismantling of parallel structures,
in particular within the police, and in terms of the
management of border crossings, with the introduction
of new procedures for the collection of customs duties.
We hope that the next round of the dialogue, to take
place in Brussels on 12 February, will be an opportunity
to make progress in the area of justice arrangements.

S/PV.7108

The normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina must necessarily be accompanied by the
energetic pursuit of reforms aimed at ensuring the rule of
law in Kosovo. The European Union Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) continues to play a key role in three areas:
first, in helping the Kosovo authorities to strengthen
their institutions; secondly, in fighting organized
crime and corruption; and, lastly, in prosecuting the
perpetrators of war crimes and combating impunity
for the most serious crimes, including those related to
allegations of organ trafficking.
Luxembourg attaches particular importance to the
fate of the 1,721 people who are still listed as missing
since the end of the conflict in Kosovo. We welcome
the fact that, with the support of EULEX and in the
presence of the authorities of Kosovo and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), the Serbian authorities began excavation
work in December along the Rudnica road in the
municipality of Raška, Serbia, where a mass grave
was discovered. The case having been assigned to an
examining magistrate, we now encourage the recovery
of remains as soon as possible to allow the families of
the deceased to establish the fate of their relatives.
As important elections lie ahead in 2014, I wish
to pay tribute to the two Prime Ministers for their
perseverance and political courage. I also want to
congratulate the European Union High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Catherine
Ashton, for the skill and efficiency with which she
continues to facilitate the high-level dialogue. The
opening of European Union accession negotiations
with Serbia, on 21 January, and the continuation of
negotiations with a view to concluding a stabilization
and association agreement between the European
Union and Kosovo must inevitably encourage Belgrade
and Pristina to resolutely and irreversibly move towards
reforms and the normalization of their relations.
At the level of the Security Council, given the
new situation on the ground, which is characterized
by a lasting stabilization of the security situation and
increased involvement by the European Union, we share
the view voiced previously by our colleagues from the
United States, the United Kingdom, Jordan and France
that the time has come to review the frequency with
which the Security Council addresses the situation in
Kosovo and the activities of UNMIK. Undoubtedly,
there is a need to consider adapting the presence of the
international community on the ground in the medium

14-2310223/25

S/PV.7108

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

term. As the European perspective of Serbia and
Kosovo materializes in the years to come, the need for
United Nations involvement in Kosovo will diminish.
We call on the leaders and citizens of the two countries
to continue to demonstrate the necessary commitment
and courage to achieve their common European future.
Luxembourg is committed to supporting them along
that path.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Lithuania.
I would like to start by thanking Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, for his briefing. I would also like
to thank Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of Serbia, and
Mr. Hashim Thaçi of Kosovo for their statements.
Today, the Security Council meets for the third time
since the historic Agreement between Belgrade and
Pristina of 19 April 2013. Much has happened during
that period. With regard to the 15-point Agreement
between Belgrade and Pristina, many elements of the
implementation plan have already been addressed.
Lithuania encourages the political leaders on both sides
to continue pursuing the path of reconciliation and to
sustain progress in resolving outstanding issues.
Last December, under the Lithuanian presidency,
the Council of the European Union approved the
negotiation mandate for accession negotiations with
Serbia, with accession negotiations having started on
21 January of this year. Negotiations on a stabilization
and association agreement with Kosovo have also
started. The mediation efforts of the European Union
and the transformative impact of the prospects of
European integration are having a clear effect on
both parties to the Agreement. Last year’s mayoral
and municipal elections in Kosovo were the first to
be held in all municipalities in Kosovo under a single
legislative framework. The upcoming by-elections in
North Mitrovica on 23 February should conclude that
crucial electoral process. We appreciate the role of
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and other relevant actors in the facilitation of
those elections. At the same time, we would like to note
that a broader electoral reform in Kosovo needs to be
completed before the legislative elections later this year.
Besides creating opportunities, progress in
European integration and the 15-point Agreement
require concrete efforts and results to be delivered

24/25

10/02/2014

in a reasonable time frame. Exchanges of liaison
officers, progress in the area of integrated border
management, police and customs collections are a few
good examples. The integration of the judiciary, the
proper implementation of the agreements on energy
and telecommunications and the uniform application of
Kosovar law throughout the territory are some of the
areas where further progress is needed. In that regard,
the continued assistance of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) is indispensable. We
acknowledge the important role that EULEX continues
to play in strengthening the rule of law. Specific focus
should now be given to the full integration of the rule
of law and municipal institutions in the north under a
single Kosovo jurisdiction.
Five months ago, during an ambush attack on
a vehicle carrying EULEX Kosovo staff members,
the first of the kind since its deployment in 2008, a
Lithuanian customs officer was killed. Lithuania calls
on all the relevant authorities to cooperate with a view
to bringing the perpetrators of that act to justice.
Lithuania welcomes the role that EULEX continues
to play in the fight against organized crime and
corruption, the prosecution of war crimes and the fight
against impunity.
The final objectives of the 19 April Agreement are
still to be met, but the political landscape has changed
fundamentally. The new realities need to be taken into
account, and that has already been done by the European
Union and NATO. We encourage the two sides and their
leaders to continue showing the decisiveness necessary
to bring about that common European future and to
contribute to the stability in the region. The progress
in the normalization of relations between Serbia and
Kosovo can trigger positive spillover effects on the
neighbouring countries.
In view of important progress on the ground, we
would be favourable to reviewing the reporting cycles
at the Council — as has already been mentioned by the
representatives of the United States, Luxembourg, the
United Kingdom, Jordan and France — with a view to
reducing the frequency of such meetings.
I would also stress the importance of strengthened
coordination among international actors on the ground,
in particular the United Nations, the European Union
and the OSCE.
Broad support from all communities in Kosovo and
Serbia for all actions taken by their leaders towards the
14-23102

10/02/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

normalization of relations and the European perspective
is vital to success. The international community should
remain fully engaged and supportive of the efforts by
the parties to sustain the progress achieved so far.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Mr. Thaçi has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Thaçi (spoke in Albanian; interpretation
provided by the delegation): I should like to add a
comment with regard the return of refugees to their
homes and property.
The return of displaced persons — Serbs — to their
homes and property is continuing. As the country’s
Prime Minister, I personally have visited them and
talked with them. We have created security conditions
to accommodate them to enable their return to their
homes and to their property. I personally encourage
them to return to the entire territory of the Republic of
Kosovo. I am fully confident in saying that the process
will continue and that all institutions in Kosovo, at the
national as well as the local levels, will be ready to
assist returnees.
As for the conflict in Syria, not only Kosovo but
also other countries in the region have had volunteers
go there to fight. As Prime Minister, I am very proud to
say that last week we adopted legislation forbidding the
participation of Kosovo citizens in the conflict in Syria,
or in other countries.

S/PV.7108

As for the continuing dialogue, I want to stress that
it has produced tangible results for Kosovo in bettering
the lives of its citizens and facilitating the path towards
European integration. The dialogue has brought about
improvements in relations between Kosovo and Serbia
and sent a message to the region. The Government of
Kosovo will continue the dialogue in 2014, including
by addressing other issues that may be of importance
or concern to help improve our neighbourly relations. I
would also like to stress that the Republic of Kosovo has
respected all the agreements made so far, and we call
on Serbia to increase its commitment to implementing
all the agreements reached in Brussels.
On 14 December, we started to implement the
agreement on collecting taxes on the border. We have
also consulted a managing board on establishing a fund
to develop the municipalities in northern Kosovo. At
our next meeting, which will take place in Brussels on
12 February, we will discuss the justice system based
on, and in accordance with, the 19 April Agreement.
The State of Kosovo will act responsibly in the dialogue
to normalize the bilateral inter-State relations with
Serbia.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

14-2310225/25
