United Nations

A/RES/68/273

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 May 2014

Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 65 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 May 2014
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/68/L.46 and Add.1)]

68/273. High-level meeting of the General Assembly on
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child
The General Assembly,
Emphasizing that the Convention on the Rights of the Child 1 constitutes the
standard in the promotion and protection of the rights of the child, and, bearing in
mind the importance of the Optional Protocols to the Convention,2 calling for their
universal ratification and effective implementation, as well as that of other human
rights instruments,
Welcoming the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, the human rights treaty with the most ratifications in
history, and acknowledging that the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
Optional Protocols thereto contain a comprehensive set of international legal
standards for the protection and well-being of children,
Recognizing that, while progress has been made, the situation of children is
critical in many parts of the world and many challenges remain to ensure the full
realization of their rights, and that in this regard the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Convention is an occasion for States to reflect on implementation gaps and to
undertake additional measures to ensure children’s rights,
1.
Decides to convene a high-level meeting on 20 November 2014 on the
occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child,1 and that the high-level meeting will comprise an opening
plenary meeting and an interactive panel discussion with the meaningful
participation of children;
2.
Decides also that, in addition to the participation of the President of the
General Assembly and the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of the United
Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
_______________
1
2

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.

13-45583

*1345583*

Please recycle

High-level meeting of the General Assembly on the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child

A/RES/68/273

the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against
Children, the Chair of the Committee on the Rights of the Child, the Special
Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, and
Member States speaking on behalf of regional groups, will address the high-level
meeting at its opening meeting;
3.
Decides further that the interactive panel discussion will be chaired by
two Member States, at the invitation of the President of the General Assembly, after
consultations with regional groups;
4.
Requests the President of the General Assembly, in a transparent manner
and in consultation with Member States, with support from the United Nations
Children’s Fund, to finalize the organizational arrangements for the high-level
meeting, including identification of the theme and panellists for the interactive panel
discussion, with due regard given to gender balance and equitable geographical
distribution, as well as the meaningful participation of children;
5.
Encourages all Member and observer States and observers to be
represented at the high-level meeting at the highest possible level and to include
children and young persons in their delegations;
6.
Invites all relevant United Nations entities and other relevant
intergovernmental, regional and subregional organizations to participate in the highlevel meeting at the highest possible level;
7.
Requests the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of
interested representatives of non-governmental organizations in consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council who may participate in the high-level
meeting;
8.
Also requests the President of the General Assembly, in a timely manner,
to draw up a list of representatives of non-governmental organizations accredited to
or in a collaborative relationship or partnership with the United Nations Children’s
Fund, as well as of other relevant non-governmental organizations, civil society
organizations, academic institutions and the private sector, who may participate in
the high-level meeting, taking into account the principles of transparency and
equitable geographical representation, for submission to Member States for their
consideration on a non-objection basis, and to bring the list3 to the attention of the
General Assembly;
9.
Further requests the President of the General Assembly, with support
from the United Nations Children’s Fund, to prepare a summary of the high-level
meeting and to bring the summary to the attention of Member States, relevant
United Nations entities and other stakeholders.
87th plenary meeting
20 May 2014

_______________
3

2/2

The list will include proposed as well as final names.
