A /77/PV.59

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

59th plenary meeting

Monday, 20 February 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda items 12 and 62 (continued)
2001–2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international
support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international
support
Report of the Secretary-General (A/76/888)
Draft resolution (A/77/L.45/Rev.1)
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General (A/77/644)

programmes and projects supported by development
partners. The New Partnership for Africa’s Development
draft resolution provides insight into how far Africa has
come since the most recent resolution was passed by
the General Assembly (resolution 76/297) and places
the spotlight firmly on those areas which need support
in the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). In many ways it is a record, year-on-year,
of what Africa is achieving.
The draft resolution also underscores the importance
of coherent and coordinated implementation of Agenda
2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
while acknowledging that much needs to be done to
overcome the challenges in its implementation. Draft
resolution A/77/L.45/Rev.1 notes that there is a need for
additional support to reduce the effects of and recover
from the pandemic to enable the continent to achieve
the 2030 Agenda and Agenda 2063.

Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba): On behalf of the
Group of 77 (G-77) and China, Cuba has the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.45/Rev.1, entitled
“New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support”.

The G-77 and China has always supported the
ambition of the Group of African States to step up
international cooperation for Africa, in a spirit of
mutual benefit and international solidarity. The Group
welcomes the remarkable collective effort to converge
the views and concerns of all parties and the immense
flexibility shown in formulating consensual language
throughout the text of the draft resolution. In that
regard, we would like to thank all delegations for their
constructive engagement and valuable inputs, which
greatly enriched the draft resolution.

The draft resolution highlights the progress made by
African countries in the implementation of its various

We would also like to extend our thanks and
appreciation to the coordinators of the draft resolution,

Draft resolution (A/77/L.46)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba to introduce draft resolutions
A/77/L.45/Rev.1 and A/77/L.46.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-05160 (E)

*2305160*

A/77/PV.59

Ms. Meryem Hamdouni of Morocco and Mr. Jeswuni
Abudu-Birresborn of Ghana, for their brilliant work
and leadership on behalf of Africa and the G-77 and
China. We equally thank the facilitator, Mr. MohamedEsseghir Latrous of Algeria, for his tireless work in
moving the process forward. The G-77 and China looks
forward to the successful adoption of this important
draft resolution.
Also, and again on behalf of the Group of 77
and China, Cuba has the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.46, entitled ¨Promotion of durable
peace through sustainable development in Africa”.
The draft resolution highlights the crucial role of
African countries in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and the progress made in that regard, as well
as in building peace for sustainable development. The
causes of conflict in Africa are many. Complex internal
and external factors continue to cause and perpetuate
disputes in many parts of the world, including Africa.
The international community should collectively
uphold the leadership and ownership of African
countries in suppressing conflicts by acting on the root
causes of such conflicts. Additional efforts are needed,
in particular a robust international cooperation and
partnership on the basis of mutual trust and the full
benefit of all for the common future of present and
coming generations, focusing on the needs of African
countries and the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The draft resolution is critical to Africa, as it
reflects on efforts undertaken by the United Nations,
the African Union and other pertinent stakeholders
to promote peace and development on the continent,
outlines related areas of concern and calls for increased
action and cooperation. Specifically, it calls upon the
United Nations system, Member States and bilateral
and multilateral partners to deliver expeditiously on
their commitments and to support the full and speedy
implementation of the provisions of the Political
Declaration on Africa’s development needs, the 2030
Agenda and Agenda 2063 of the African Union. In
order to prevent and resolve conflict at its earliest
stages, we stress the importance of ensuring that the
United Nations system supports the efforts of African
countries to achieve sustainable and durable peace.
Due to unforeseen circumstances, the report was
not released in time to be considered for substantive
inputs. Despite that challenge, the facilitator, Ms. Nadja
2/31

20/02/2023

Micael of Eritrea, and the coordinator, Mr. Tony Oweke
of Kenya, were able to aptly guide delegations towards
consensus. We would like to express our thanks and
appreciation for their great leadership and excellent
work. We would also like to take this opportunity to
thank all delegations for their spirit of cooperation and
flexibility displayed throughout this process.
The G-77 and China also looks forward to the
successful adoption of this important draft resolution.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): Even before the current
cascading crises, African countries were facing
challenges in implementing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063 of the
African Union. The ongoing crises have disrupted
economic activities, placed severe pressure on health
and social protection systems, and further burdened
Government budgets, straining public finance and
limiting policy space. However, those challenges
have not overshadowed the progress made in African
countries to mobilize domestic resources to finance
crucial investments, including infrastructure and
essential service delivery over the past two decades
to strengthen socioeconomic progress and promote
inclusive growth.
As reflected in the report of the Secretary-General
entitled “Financing for development in the era of the
COVID-19 pandemic: primacy of domestic resource
mobilization” (A/76/888), Africa’s development is
primarily financed through the continent’s domestic
resources, which account for over two thirds of total
development financing and which significantly exceed
financial inflows, including foreign direct investment
and official development assistance. On average, the
tax-to-gross-domestic-product (GDP) ratio reached
16.6 in 2019 in African countries, up from 14.8 in 2010,
which shows progress. Maximizing domestic resource
mobilization is important to build resilience against
external shocks and strengthen debt sustainability in
African countries.
In recent years, African countries have had to
borrow to finance large financing gaps. Currently,
external debts account for 60 per cent of Africa’s public
debt, with debt servicing absorbing more than 20 per
cent of Government revenues on average. Those efforts
must be supported by a comprehensive reform of the
existing global economic and financial architecture.
It is important to build on a more inclusive and
effective international debt cooperation and to curb illicit
23-05160

20/02/2023

financial flows from Africa, estimated at $88.6 billion
annually, equivalent to 3.7 per cent of total GDP. It is
estimated that curbing illicit financial flows could close
the financing gap for the Sustainable Development
Goals by 33 per cent. In addition, regulatory and policy
reforms to strengthen trade and investment, including
within the framework of the African Continental
Free Trade Area, are critical to creating an enabling
environment for innovation and entrepreneurship.
It is also imperative to fulfil official development
assistance commitments by developed countries to
developing countries. Moreover, the provision of the
means of implementation by developed countries in the
context of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, including the commitment to
provide $100 billion per year, is urgently needed, as
is the operationalization of the loss and damage fund,
as agreed at the twenty-seventh Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, to ensure the achievement of a
just transition.
Enhancing sound governance policies and structures
is more important than ever before, particularly in the
light of the implications of the coronavirus disease
pandemic and other global crises of the political and
socioeconomic conditions in the continent. The report
of the Secretary-General entitled “Promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa”
(A/77/644) underscores the importance of strengthening
the effectiveness and inclusiveness of socioeconomic
structures and political governance mechanisms to
promote inclusion in the design and implementation
of development strategies. The report also provides a
comprehensive analysis of the structural problems that
stem from the colonial period and how governance
interacts with national and regional efforts to advance
inclusive growth and sustainable development. It
also underlines the importance of giving attention
to asserting and increasing State presence across
territories and promoting inclusive public service
delivery and recognizes the efforts made by African
countries to tackle external and internal factors
affecting governance. It is imperative to strengthen
African leadership and ownership of governance
improvement processes on the continent.
In that context, the African Group commends
the work of the African Peer Review Mechanism in
fostering the adoption of practices, standards and
policies that will promote good governance, sustainable

A/77/PV.59

development, economic growth and political stability
on the continent. Accordingly, under the President, the
Group calls upon the United Nations to improve its
cooperation with the African Peer Review Mechanism
with a view to enhancing its monitoring capacity and
exchanging ideas on promoting good governance in
Africa. It is imperative to continue to strengthen the
long-standing partnership between the United Nations
and Africa to address those challenges. That is crucial
for achieving the transformational impact of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063
of the African Union and realizing their shared promise
of leaving no one behind.
It goes without saying that we fully align ourselves
with the statement made by my dear brother Pedro Luis
Pedroso Cuesta, the Permanent Representative of Cuba,
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Mrs. Carlsson Szlezak (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States. The candidate countries
North Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania, the Republic
of Moldova and Bosnia and Herzegovina and potential
candidate country Georgia align themselves with
this statement.
At the outset, we wish to thank Eritrea, as the
facilitator of the resolution on the promotion of durable
peace through sustainable development in Africa
(A/77/L.46), Kenya, as the coordinator of the Group
of 77 and China, and colleagues representing groups
and Member States who participated in informal
consultations on the draft resolution. I also want to
direct a special thanks to the Group of African States
for tirelessly championing the link between sustainable
development and peace, which is at the heart of the draft
resolution. As stated recently by Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed at the Security Council
(see S/PV.9250), there is only one route to durable
peace: it is the route of sustainable development.
Africa and the European Union have a close and
long-standing partnership in a number of fields. The EU
is Africa’s largest trade, investment and development
partner. Deepening our partnership with Africa is a key
priority for the European Union. Moreover, we believe
that the multilateral system, including the Security
Council, would benefit from a stronger African voice
and representation.
The EU continues to support African-led peace
and security initiatives, such as the Silencing the

23-051603/31

A/77/PV.59

Guns road map. The EU also contributes significant
financial support and personnel to peace and security
operations in Africa. Since 2003, the EU has committed
€3.5 billion in support of African-led initiatives,
contributing to early responses to crises, capacitybuilding and the financing of African Union-mandated
peace support operations.
The EU supports predictable and sustainable
funding for African-led peace operations authorized by
the Security Council and the ongoing discussions on the
use of United Nations assessed contributions. A tangible
example of that is our support to the African Union
human rights compliance framework. In addition, the
EU promotes the active inclusion of women and youth
in the processes to attain durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa.
The present report of the Secretary-General on the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa (A/77/644) shows evidence of a trend of
increasing violence and conflict in Africa, which is
deeply worrisome. It also presents a highly relevant
analysis of the impact of politics and governance on
conflict and sustainable development. It documents
relevant avenues to increase the presence of State
institutions in remote areas and strengthen the trust and
cohesion of local communities. The correlation between
good governance and fewer conflicts strengthens our
conviction that we need to support both the presence
and the quality of governance structures that can
provide public services across the territory.
As we approach the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) summit in September, at which we will
collectively evaluate the state of the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
it is worrisome that so many African countries are
struggling with progress on SDG 16. We believe
stronger engagement between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the African Union Peace and Security
Council could provide renewed impetus to accelerate
the implementation of SDG 16.
The European Union looks forward to further
discussions of the Secretary-General’s report. In future
considerations of the present draft resolution, it would
be logical to time the report to allow reflections on its
findings in the draft resolution itself.
Regarding the draft resolution, we note that it has
been updated to reflect several important developments
in the past year.
4/31

20/02/2023

First, on climate change, it welcomes the twentyseventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, held in
Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt. The strong adverse effects
of climate change on sustainable development are well
reflected in the draft resolution, but we regret that
some delegations could not support the reference to
the link between the adverse effects of climate change
on durable peace, as the Group of 77 and China had
proposed and as was supported by the European Union.
Secondly, draft resolution A/77/L.46 refers to the
adoption, in May 2022, of Security Council resolution
2634 (2022), on maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea.
Thirdly, we want to highlight the reference to
the important resolution 76/305, on financing for
peacebuilding, which was adopted unanimously in
September 2022. We encourage the Fifth Committee
to reach agreement on assessed contributions for the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) at its upcoming session. The
European Union will continue to support adequate,
predictable and sustained financing for peacebuilding,
including through assessed contributions to the PBF.
And we will work together with the Group of African
States for a positive outcome on that issue.
In conclusion, let me reassure the Assembly of our
ongoing and unwavering support for durable peace
through sustainable development in Africa. The EU and
its member States will continue to work on strengthening
cooperation with our African partner countries.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): Building on the longstanding engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) with countries and regions in Africa in support
of their peacebuilding priorities, the Commission
takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (A/77/644) and its approach to
governance as a tool for building peace and achieving
sustainable development, and wishes to make the
following remarks.
The PBC welcomes the report’s recommendation
to strengthen the concerted efforts of the Security
Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Economic and Social Council in order to promote an
approach that understands nation-building as a critical
element of peacemaking, peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. The strengthening of national capacities is an
important component of peacebuilding. Effective and
efficient national institutions can address internal
23-05160

20/02/2023

factors of instability and mitigate the impact of
external shocks; and collaborative and concerted action
by the international community can support national
institutions and address external factors of instability.
The Commission takes note of the interrelation
between conflict and the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals and, in that regard,
notes with concern the impact that the multifaceted
crisis triggered by the coronavirus disease pandemic
has had on the socioeconomic conditions of African
countries. The deterioration of the socioeconomic
situation, the climate conditions in many countries
in Africa and the increased budgetary constraints
resulting from the pandemic and ongoing global crises
have exacerbated existing inequalities and increased
the related risks.
The Commission stresses the need to build
peace by addressing the root causes of conflicts and
instability. In that context, there is a need to support the
efforts of States in building their national institutions
and capabilities in a way that prevents them from
slipping into conflicts and guarantees stability to
enable sustainable development. The Commission
underlines the importance of sustainable and inclusive
socioeconomic development for sustaining peace in
Africa through economic development, including,
but not limited to, transnational and transregional
infrastructure development, industrialization, poverty
eradication, job creation, agricultural modernization
and the promotion of entrepreneurship, and expresses
the need for continued support to African countries,
based on their national priorities and needs, aimed at
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Agenda 2063 of the African Union.
The Commission takes note of the data presented in
the report that suggest that good governance contributes
to the implementation of all Sustainable Development
Goals, while governance shortcomings may in some
circumstances lead to increased risk of instability and
conflict. More detailed data is required to analyse the
different dimensions of governance and identify the
type of policy and programmatic action that might be
more effective in unlocking the potential of governance
for sustainable development and durable peace in a
particular country. Enhanced collaboration among the
United Nations, the African Union, African countries
and other stakeholders should prioritize the collection
and processing of data in that area. The Commission
notes that Africa’s sociocultural diversity is one of its

A/77/PV.59

greatest assets. It promises the development of multiple
solutions to respond to emerging challenges and
boosting innovation. In order to tap into that potential,
it is crucial to ensure that governance structures are
adapted to manage and leverage sociocultural diversity.
The Commission notes that public service delivery
can promote inclusion and social cohesion, when
delivered in an efficient, effective and transparent way,
or conversely can trigger discontent and tensions as a
result of actual or perceived inequalities in and across
public services. Therefore, ensuring equal access to
service delivery is indispensable for promoting peace
and stability, and it is also an effective tool to increase
the presence of State institutions across the territory,
mitigating the risk caused by the rise of armed
non-State actors on the continent. The Commission
notes that traditional African leadership structures and
mechanisms can be pivotal in facilitating participation
and service delivery. In that regard, the Commission
encourages the United Nations to study the utilization
of traditional leadership structures as complementary
mechanisms for strengthening governance in African
countries. The Commission stresses the importance of
ensuring the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women at all levels, and calls for the engagement
of young people to overcome governance challenges.
The empowerment of women and the inclusion of
young people in various fields should be translated into
executive policies to overcome the economic, social
and security challenges.
The Commission welcomes efforts by the African
Union to enhance governance on the continent through
a robust normative and institutional framework,
including the African Charter on Democracy, Elections
and Governance, and commends the work of the
African Peer Review Mechanism in proposing practical
measures to strengthen governance structures in its
member States. The Commission encourages the United
Nations to increase its cooperation with the African
Peer Review Mechanism with a view to enhancing its
monitoring capacity.
Mr. Liu Liqun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
In recent years, African countries have strengthened
their unity and cooperation, worked hard to maintain
peace and stability and promoted development and

23-051605/31

A/77/PV.59

revitalization, thereby demonstrating their wisdom
and strength. At the same time, however, Africa still
faces severe challenges in the areas of food, energy,
finance and climate change, and there is a long way
to go to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Agenda 2063 of the African Union.
Supporting peace and development in Africa is the
common responsibility of the international community.
We should fully understand the current situation,
the specific challenges and the real needs of African
countries and provide them with more targeted help.
First, we must respect the pathway of development
and the social systems independently chosen by African
countries and their peoples and support them in solving
their issues in their own way. All countries should
advocate openness, tolerance, mutual benefits and
a win-win outcome in their cooperation with Africa.
There should be no interference in the internal affairs
of African countries.
Secondly, we must support African countries in
accelerating their pace of sustainable development and
increasing investment in capital, technology transfer
and capacity-building, and help Africa scale up its
capacity for independent development and innovation.

20/02/2023

and Africa and have been widely praised by African
countries and peoples.
Recently, China has actively helped Africa to
alleviate its debt burden. As full participants in the
G-20 Debt Service Suspension Initiative, we have
signed agreements and reached consensus on the issue
of debt service suspension with 19 African countries.
China will work with African countries and the African
Union to accelerate the implementation of the outcome
of the eighth Ministerial Conference of the Forum on
China-Africa Cooperation, strengthen synergies for
strategic development, jointly carry out the Belt and
Road Initiative in a high-quality manner and build a
community with a shared future with Africa. China has
put forward the Global Development Initiative and the
Global Security Initiative. China is ready to deepen its
pragmatic cooperation with African countries under
the framework of the Initiatives to make a greater
contribution to achieving lasting peace, development
and prosperity in Africa.

Thirdly, we must promote a more just and equitable
international political and economic order and increase
the representation and voice of Africa in international
affairs. China has always supported African countries
in playing a greater role in the global governance
system and has taken the lead in supporting the African
Union’s accession to the Group of 20 (G-20).

Mr. González Jiménez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): In September 2015, we committed to achieving
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals and adhering
to the important principle of leaving no one behind,
placing the well-being of human beings at the centre
of our policies. Today that principle is increasingly
important. Mexico acknowledges that strengthening
multilateralism is crucial for addressing the interrelated
crises that have given rise to humanitarian, economic,
environmental and other challenges. The issues that
bring us together for today’s debate can help us to focus
on some of those challenges.

China has always maintained the principles of
sincerity, genuine results, cooperation and good
faith. We believe in pursuing the greater good with a
shared interest in developing our relations with Africa
for a period of strong partnership with the continent
featuring mutual respect, equal treatment and sincere
cooperation. Since the beginning of this century, China
has built more than 6,000 kilometres of railways, 6,000
kilometres of highways, nearly 20 ports and more than
80 large-scale power facilities; provided aid to build
more than 130 hospitals and clinics, more than 170
schools and 45 stadiums; and funded more than 500
agricultural projects. Those achievements have played
an important role in promoting Africa’s economic and
social development and improving people’s livelihoods.
They have demonstrated the genuine nature and quality
of the relationship and friendship between China

First, my delegation firmly believes in the
importance of eradicating diseases with active and
residual transmission, given that without health we
cannot aspire to the level of progress and development
to which we have committed. That is why Mexico
joined the efforts of the World Health Organization
to eliminate malaria by 2025. In 2014, Mexico
implemented a strategy to certify that areas are free
of indigenous malaria, which promotes measures
such as strengthening surveillance and response in
treatment centres, the rapid analysis of blood samples,
the monitoring of mosquito species, the administration
of treatment and fumigation and the installation of
mosquito nets over doors and windows in exposed
areas. That strategy has made it possible for malaria
to be eliminated in 24 of our 32 federal entities, with
fewer than 1,000 cases reported annually since 2015.

6/31

23-05160

20/02/2023

Regrettably, we note that, according to the World
Health Organization’s World Malaria Report 2022, of
the 11.7 million malaria-related deaths between 2000
and 2021, approximately 95 per cent occurred on the
African continent. Mexico is aware of the considerable
challenge posed by the elimination of malaria globally.
But we especially encourage Member States and the
various agencies of the United Nations to work with the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria
to prioritize concrete, urgent and effective action in the
area of health in order to prevent and effectively treat
the transmission of malaria on the African continent.
Mexico recognizes the importance of using the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change to promote
programmes and projects that can effectively dovetail
with Agenda 2063 of the African Union in order to
mitigate the impact of crises such as the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and climate change on
the stability and functioning of the health, security and
development mechanisms on the African continent.
Today we have an opportunity to translate the
principle of leaving no one behind by focusing on
vulnerable groups, such as women, persons who are
ill, persons with disabilities, migrants, refugees,
LGBTI persons and girls and boys, and placing them
at the heart of our development efforts in Africa. We
encourage the more developed States, humanitarian
and health funds and the various agencies and partners
of the Organization to mobilize resources and strategies
for African countries. My delegation calls upon African
States to strengthen their public policies, Governments
and financial systems, with the aim of achieving
a level of sustainable development that prioritizes
multilateralism and safeguards opportunities for
development and the promotion and protection of, and
respect for, human rights.
In conclusion, Mexico believes in the importance of
guaranteeing the quality — rather than the quantity — of
the actions taken. That is why we encourage proposals
and discussions that focus on the issues that bring us
together today in the General Assembly, rather than
merely duplicating the efforts of other Committees,
which may have less impact. Organizing and focusing
our efforts will enable us to advance the development of
the most vulnerable States in an equitable and effective
manner. Mexico would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s meeting to consider the reports
of the Secretary-General (A/76/888 and A/77/644). My

A/77/PV.59

delegation remains open to dialogue and hopes that our
deliberations will strengthen our commitment to Africa
and its development.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): My delegation aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Cuba on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
I also join others in thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s meeting to consider the reports
of the Secretary-General on the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development and on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (A/76/888 and A/77/644). We
thank the Secretary-General for preparing those reports
and the facilitators for submitting draft resolutions
A/77/L.45/Rev.1 and A/77/L.46.
The reports made it clear once again that the
countries of Africa, along with many countries of the
global South, have suffered in the past not only from
colonialism but also the exploitation of the natural
resources that fuelled economic progress, the industrial
revolution and the scientific advancement of the
Western world. The causes of conflict in Africa are
rooted in colonial history. The past three years have been
difficult, especially for Africa and developing nations.
The challenges of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the rising prices of fuel, fertilizer and food grains, the
climate crisis and the increasing geopolitical tensions
have had an impact on development efforts. The global
Human Development Index has declined two years in a
row, erasing the gains of the preceding five years. The
international community’s steadfast support for Africa
is therefore imperative as countries in Africa pursue the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda
2063 of the African Union. In that context, allow me
to flag the following key issues with regard to Africa.
First, the challenges that persist as a fallout of
the coronavirus disease pandemic and the Ukraine
conflict have reminded us of the limitations of existing
structures of cooperation. The report of the United
Nations Development Programme states that access to
coronavirus disease vaccines was virtually non-existent
in many low-income countries of Africa. Africa will
need robust partnerships to expeditiously improve
public health infrastructure and build capacity, build
better preparedness and localize capabilities supported
by resilient and reliable supply chains.
Secondly, we need to recognize the fact that
terrorism is expanding in Africa. If left unaddressed,

23-051607/31

A/77/PV.59

terrorism may seriously jeopardize peace prospects
in several parts of Africa, which is already ravaged
by armed conflicts. We need to recognize the African
security initiatives that have proven their success in
countering terrorism. Those are Africa’s homegrown
solutions led by African countries, which have a
better understanding of their causes and issues. The
international community should provide sustainable
and adequate financial and logistical support for such
security initiatives.
Thirdly, international partnerships are important
for securing concessional financing for development
and ensuring debt sustainability in Africa. Capacitybuilding support to strengthen and improve regulatory
frameworks will also help in domestic resource
mobilization. Financial responsibility, transparency
and viability must be at the forefront when looking
at financial options, including the financing of
infrastructure projects, in order to prevent the
imposition of unsustainable debt burdens that would
add to existing vulnerabilities. In terms of project
sustainability, it is equally important that they be
accompanied by skill and technology transfer.
Fourthly, regional integration is important for
addressing the challenges, as emphasized in Agenda
2063. In that regard, it is encouraging to see the
active role being played by regional and subregional
organizations in Africa. The African Continental
Free Trade Area, with adequate infrastructure and
connectivity, can raise the potential of Africa through
the free movement of goods, services, labour and
capital and increase intra-African trade.
Fifthly, the continuing lack of representation of
Africa in the permanent category of Security Council
membership is a historical injustice that needs to
be corrected sooner rather than later. India has been
consistently calling for greater representation of
Africa through an increase in both the permanent
and non-permanent categories of the Council’s
membership, in line with the Ezulwini Consensus and
the Sirte Declaration.
Let me conclude by stating that the partnership
between India and Africa reflects the bonding of the
global South, which has been forged over several
centuries. India has been supportive of a development
paradigm that is Africa-led and Africa-owned. India
will continue to support Africa in its development
priorities and remain committed to its partnership
8/31

20/02/2023

with Africa in its journey to implement the Sustainable
Development Goals and Agenda 2063.
Ms. Marin Sevilla (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we
align ourselves with the statement delivered by the
representative of the Republic of Cuba on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela joined the
consensus that will enable the adoption without a vote
of draft resolution A/77/L.46, entitled “Promotion of
durable peace through sustainable development in
Africa”. However, it expresses its reservations with
respect to the content of paragraph 23 of the draft
resolution. Since my country is not a State party to
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
which is reaffirmed in Security Council resolution
2634 (2022), my delegation reiterates the need for that
Convention to be updated in the future, because it
continues to include elements that prevent our country
from ratifying it. The Convention’s norms are not
applicable to my country, neither as conventional law
nor as customary international law, except for those
that the State of Venezuela has expressly recognized or
will recognize in the future by incorporating them into
its national legislation.
Mr. Segura Aragón (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation would first like to thank the
Eritrean delegation for its efforts in facilitating the
important draft resolution A/77/L.46, on the promotion
of durable peace through sustainable development
in Africa.
Peace and security in Africa will always have
significant effects on global stability and development.
That is why El Salvador has always believed in the vital
importance of consistently and firmly supporting and
promoting efforts and a multidimensional approach
in the areas of conflict prevention and resolution,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, as an essential
component of the sustainable development of nations.
My delegation echoes the concerns about the threat
posed by piracy and armed robbery at sea owing to
its effects on the security and economic activities of
the region, in particular in the case of draft resolution
A/77/L.46, with respect to the Gulf of Guinea. In that
regard, we call for continued support for the efforts of
the Governments of the African continent.
In the face of that threat, it is important to ensure
maritime security, while also clarifying that the United
23-05160

20/02/2023

A/77/PV.59

Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea does not have
an exclusive application for addressing that challenge,
and that there are other legally relevant and applicable
instruments that exist for that purpose. Including that
type of language in the draft resolution excludes the
States that are not part of the Convention and also
excludes references to other relevant instruments
that are part of international law and that serve to
address multidimensionally the measures aimed at
counteracting piracy and armed robbery at sea.
As we have stated in the framework of other
intergovernmental processes, El Salvador continues to
stress the importance of ensuring that the language on
oceans and the law of the sea does not refer exclusively
to the application of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea as the only framework applicable
to ocean activities, since there are other existing
principles and instruments of international law,
including the principles of international environmental
law, through which we can refer in a multidimensional
and progressive manner to the various converging
aspects of the sustainable conservation of the oceans
and their management.
In conclusion, although my delegation will join the
consensus on this important draft resolution, we wish
to express our reservations with respect to its reference
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea, which is reaffirmed in Security Council resolution
2634 (2022), which resolution is in turn incorporated in
paragraph 23 of draft resolution A/77/L.46.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/77/L.45/Rev.1 and A/77/L.46, one by one.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/77/L.45/
Rev.1 and in addition to those delegations listed in the
document, Türkiye has also become a sponsor of draft
resolution A/77/L.45/Rev.1.
I should also like to announce that, since the
submission of draft resolution A/77/L.46 and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
draft resolution A/77/L.46: Albania, Austria, Belgium,

Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain and Sweden.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/77/L.45/Rev.1, entitled
“New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.45/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/77/L.45/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 77/270).
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.46, entitled
“Promotion of durable peace through sustainable
development in Africa”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.46?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/271).

A/77/L.46

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position after adoption, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Schlyter (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Albania, the Republic of Moldova and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the potential
candidate country Georgia, align themselves with this
explanation of position.
At the outset, let me express the EU’s gratitude to
Algeria as the facilitator of the negotiation process on
resolution 77/270. I also thank the Group of 77 and China
coordinator, Ghana, as well as the Group of African
States and other delegations, for their engagement.
Africa and the European Union have a close and
long-standing partnership, and the EU is Africa’s
biggest trade, investment and development partner. We
place great value and importance on our partnership,
and deepening that partnership with Africa is one of
the EU’s top priorities, as has been underlined by the
adoption of the Joint Vision for 2030 at the EU-African
Union summit held last year. Moreover, we believe that

23-051609/31

A/77/PV.59

the multilateral system would benefit from an even
stronger African voice.
During the seventy-fifth session of the General
Assembly, we supported and celebrated the return to
the adoption by consensus of resolution 75/322. Last
year we favoured the return of the discussion of this
sub-item to the fall semester of the General Assembly
in order to reflect its importance and that of sustainable
development in Africa. Maintaining consensus is a
priority for the EU, and we participated actively and
constructively in the negotiations on resolution 77/270.
We welcome the fact that the resolution was updated: it
reflects the seriousness of the dire and uncertain global
socioeconomic outlook. It was also updated to reflect
key challenges and priorities, including the crises of food
security, nutrition and energy. We join in welcoming
the African Emergency Food Production Plan Facility
to boost food security, nutrition and resilience on the
continent and stress the EU’s continued support for
sustainable agriculture and food security in Africa, as
well as for recovery and resilience in the wake of the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
We also welcome the call to promote investments
in sustainable, reliable, modern, inclusive and equitable
energy systems. We are committed to harnessing
the EU’s Global Gateway to respond to those and
other infrastructure and development challenges.
We also look forward to engaging in discussions and
contributing to further updates of resolution 77/270 at
the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly,
including on developments with regard to some of the
most pressing crises of the day, in particular combating
climate change.
The EU would like to explain the reason for
our reservation with regard to the use of the term
“welcoming” in paragraph 17 of resolution 77/270, with
reference to the adoption of resolution 77/244, entitled
“Promotion of inclusive and effective international
tax cooperation at the United Nations”. The European
Union and its member States agree on the timeliness
and importance of strengthening international tax
cooperation in an effective and inclusive manner. That
is why the European Union joined consensus on that
resolution. However, we refer to the remarks made at
the time of adoption of resolution 77/244 (see A/77/
PV.56) and recall that the high-level political agreement
of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD)/Group of 20 (G-20) inclusive
framework on base erosion and profit-shifting is already
10/31

20/02/2023

gathering 141 jurisdictions committed to delivering a
multilateral solution to address the tax challenges that
all countries — whether small or large economies,
developed or developing countries — have to face in a
globalized environment.
Creating a new parallel track of discussions is
not the right answer to the objective of strengthening
cooperation and would jeopardize that common
objective. Instead, the basis for meeting that objective
lies in the success of the current initiatives. We should
focus at operationalizing the landmark agreement
reached in October 2021 under the OECD/G-20 inclusive
framework, which will bring concrete benefits for all
economies, including those of developing countries,
in addition to more stability. While recognizing
diversity, we should encourage the OECD/G-20 to
continue — and moreover to increase — its efforts
on capacity-building, in cooperation with other
multilateral or regional organizations, such as the
African Tax Administration Forum, in order to promote
a widespread implementation of the two-pillar solution,
for the benefit of all. In summary, notwithstanding its
reservation with regard to paragraph 17, the EU strongly
supports resolution 77/270, now and in the future, and
gladly joined the consensus to adopt it today.
I would like to conclude by affirming the EU’s
commitment to our partnership with Africa, which I look
forward to strengthening and deepening going forward.
Mrs. Atanaszov (Hungary): Regarding sub-items
(a) and (b) of agenda item 62, Hungary aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of the
European Union, and I would like to add the following
remarks in my national capacity.
Hungary remains committed to promoting durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa. In that
regard, we are aware of the different challenges and
threats facing the continent: decreasing economic
growth, the food crisis, armed conflicts, religious
persecution, natural disasters and climate change. The
Government of Hungary responds to those problems
with the Hungary Helps programme by rebuilding
schools and health-care centres in order to provide
assistance to thousands of internally displaced persons,
promoting the social reintegration of families living
in poverty, facilitating access to clean water and
supporting the development of sustainable agriculture
and renewable energy sources.
23-05160

20/02/2023

We would also like to take this opportunity to put
on record Hungary’s position concerning the twentyfirst preambular paragraph of resolution 77/270 and
paragraph 14 of resolution 77/271, which contain
references to the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration. I would like to recall that Hungary
did not adopt the Global Compact and does not
participate in its implementation. Therefore, we would
like to dissociate ourselves from those paragraphs.
Mr. Akbulut (Türkiye): Türkiye takes the floor in
explanation of position on resolution 77/271.
As a strategic partner of the African Union, Türkiye
supports all efforts to maintain peace and security in
Africa. We are also pleased to contribute, at the bilateral
and multilateral levels, to sustainable development
on the continent. Cooperation in combating piracy
in Africa constitutes an important dimension of
our partnership, and Türkiye plays an active role in
international efforts to that end. Türkiye agrees with the
general content of resolution 77/271, and we support its
purpose. We appreciate that the resolution recognizes
the significance of maritime security in the Gulf of
Guinea. The threat of piracy and armed robbery in the
region needs to be addressed by enhanced regional and
international cooperation.
On the other hand, with regard to the reference
to Security Council resolution 2634 (2022) contained
in paragraph 23 of resolution 77/271, I would like to
reiterate that Türkiye disassociates itself from the
references to the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea contained in resolution 2634 (2022), which
cannot be construed as a change in the legal position of
Türkiye with regard to the instrument concerned.

A/77/PV.59

77/244, entitled “Promotion of inclusive and effective
international tax cooperation at the United Nations”,
which was adopted last December, Canada supports
the need for international cooperation to ensure fair
and effective taxation. We appreciate the desire among
many countries for international tax arrangements
that would better help harness taxation to support
development efforts. However, we do not support
the proposition of a new, potentially duplicative tax
cooperation process at the United Nations. Canada was
not alone in voicing its concerns over resolution 77/244
at the time of its adoption. Indeed, while the proposed
amendment to that resolution that would have helped
to address those concerns was not adopted, more than
50 countries voted in favour of the amendment. We
therefore find it regrettable that delegations insisted on
maintaining a focus on welcoming a specific resolution
concerning which it is well understood that there was a
divergence of views, rather than noting the importance
of international tax cooperation.
Canada joined the consensus on resolution 77/270
to lend our strong support to development cooperation
in Africa and sustainable development for all, a goal that
we should all ensure remains the focus of resolutions
adopted under this item in years to come.
Mr. Fogarty (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to join the consensus on resolution
77/270, and we thank Algeria for its facilitation of
the resolution.

Ms. Hinton (Canada): We would like to thank the
facilitator, the Permanent Representative of Algeria, as
well as all delegations that took part in the negotiation of
resolution 77/270, for their active engagement. Canada
was pleased to see that resolution return to adoption
by consensus in recent years and is supportive of the
overall goals and aspirations of the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development and Agenda 2063 of the African
Union, including the need for balanced and integrated
economic, social and environmental development.

The United States values its close partnership
with African countries to pursue the shared goals of
sustainable development, security, global health, food
security and nutrition, democracy, adapting to and
mitigating climate change, and shared prosperity. We
strongly support the African Union’s efforts to realize
the goals and aspirations that the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development was established to achieve.
We welcome the resolution’s commitment to social
protections as a fundamental component of sustainable
development. In that regard, we appreciate its references
to the important role of civil society and efforts to
strengthen good governance, human rights and sound
economic management.

However, we must take this opportunity to raise
our concerns with regard to paragraph 17 of the
resolution and the manner in which international
tax cooperation is addressed. As stated during the
negotiations of both resolution 77/270 and resolution

The United States would like to clarify its positions
with regard to some of the language contained in the
resolution. The United States is fully committed to
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as a
global framework for sustainable development, and to

23-0516011/31

A/77/PV.59

advancing the Sustainable Development Goals. We note
that paragraph 58 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development recognizes that implementation must
respect, and be without prejudice to, the independent
mandates of other processes and institutions, including
negotiations, and it does not prejudge or serve as
a precedent for decisions and actions under way in
other forums. For example, the 2030 Agenda does not
interpret or alter any World Trade Organization (WTO)
agreement or decision.
The United States is fully committed to the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change and recognizes that
many African countries are highly vulnerable to the
impacts of climate change. We note the importance
of mobilizing financing from all sources — public
and private, international and domestic — in order to
urgently scale up climate action. The United States
reaffirms its support for the developed country goal of
jointly mobilizing $100 billion per year through 2025 to
address the needs of developing countries in the context
of meaningful mitigation, action and transparency on
implementation. In that context, however, we regret
that the characterization of the $100 billion goal
contained in paragraph 15 is inconsistent with the
agreed formulation of the goal in the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
Paris Agreement. Accordingly, we dissociate ourselves
from the consensus on that language and underscore that
it should not be used as precedent for other resolutions.
We underscore our position that trade language
negotiated or adopted by the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, or under their auspices,
has no relevance for United States trade policy, for its
trade obligations or commitments or for the agenda at
the World Trade Organization, including the discussions
or negotiations in that forum. While the United Nations
and the WTO share common interests, they have
different roles, rules and memberships. Similarly, that
includes calls to adopt approaches that may undermine
incentives for innovation, such as technology transfer
that is not both voluntary and on mutually agreed terms.
Regarding the reference in paragraph 17 of
resolution 77/270 to resolution 77/244, entitled
“Promotion of inclusive and effective international tax
cooperation at the United Nations”, the United States
refers Member States to its statement made in the
Second Committee on 23 November 2022. While the
United States acknowledges that the United Nations
system increasingly uses the term “illicit financial
12/31

20/02/2023

flows”, we continue to have concerns that the term
lacks an agreed international definition. We also note
that the right to development discussed in resolution
77/244 is not recognized in any of the core United
Nations human rights conventions, does not have
an agreed international meaning and, unlike human
rights, is not recognized as a universal right held and
enjoyed by individuals and which every individual may
demand from his or her own Government. Indeed, we
continue to be concerned that the right to development
identified in resolution 77/244 protects States instead
of individuals.
Lastly, while we agree that strengthening national
health systems and the expansion of coordinated
surveillance systems in the health sector are essential
for the implementation of the International Health
Regulations, we recommend the inclusion of the animal
and environmental sectors as well, as the prevention
and detection of, and the response to, health threats
requires a multisectoral One Health approach in order
to be effective and sustainable over time.
Mr. Cho (Republic of Korea): At the outset, allow
us to express the Republic of Korea’s full support for
our collective efforts towards Africa’s development.
We therefore support the overall concept behind the
timely and important resolution 77/270.
However, our delegation cannot help but disassociate
itself from paragraph 17 of resolution 77/270, which
welcomes resolution 77/244, entitled “Promotion of
inclusive and effective international tax cooperation at
the United Nations” — the tax cooperation resolution.
As I recall, the tax cooperation resolution faced
several procedural issues prior to its adoption last year.
Furthermore, there was a paragraph vote before its
adoption because some issues remained unsettled and
were to be further discussed in the Second Committee
during the upcoming session of the General Assembly.
This year’s resolution on the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD) is not the appropriate
place or time to welcome the recently adopted tax
cooperation resolution. Our delegation made that point
consistently throughout the consultation process, and it
was echoed by many other delegations. Also, we heard
the same point voiced in this Hall as well. Proposals
were proactively made to bridge the differences in
positions but, to our regret, the attempts at compromise
were totally rejected and brushed aside. That experience
only increased our concerns that discussions at the
23-05160

20/02/2023

A/77/PV.59

United Nations cannot always guarantee inclusiveness
and transparency or accommodate different views.

through sustainable consumption and
production, building on Agenda 21

I would like to take the opportunity to add one
more remark. The tax cooperation resolution is not
a matter for a certain group, as alleged by certain
members, but for all Member States in macroeconomic
terms. Therefore, we believe that any global discussion
on international cooperation and tax matters must be
conducted in an inclusive, transparent manner that
also properly encompasses the interests of all Member
States. It is our sincere hope that this practice with
regard to paragraph 17 of the NEPAD resolution will
not be repeated during the subsequent discussion of
the tax cooperation resolution, as it is a matter of great
importance to all of us.

Draft decision (A/77/L.52)

Mr. Sowah (United Kingdom): At the outset, I
would like to thank my colleague from the Republic of
Algeria, Mr. Mohamed-Esseghir Latrous, for his able
facilitation of the consultation process on resolution
77/270. The Assembly can count on the United
Kingdom’s support of the resolution. We were happy to
join the consensus on its adoption.
I would like to set out the United Kingdom’s position
on paragraph 15. The United Kingdom views that
paragraph to be in line with the language of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
which is mainly focused on climate mitigation efforts
in relation to the $100 billion goal, which is to be jointly
raised through public and private financing, as well as
through other sectors. In the interests of consistency,
we would like to clarify the record in order to avoid any
misrepresentation of the intent behind that goal.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position on the resolutions just adopted.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage
of its consideration of agenda item 12 and sub-items (a)
and (b) of agenda item 62.
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Sustainable Development
(a) Towards the achievement of sustainable
development: implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, including

The President: The Assembly will take action
on draft decision A/77/L.52, entitled “Accreditation
and participation of intergovernmental organizations
in the United Nations Conference on the Midterm
Comprehensive Review of the Implementation of the
Objectives of the International Decade for Action,
‘Water for Sustainable Development’, 2018–2028”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft decision A/77/L.52?
Draft
decision
(decision 77/551).

A/77/L.52

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 18.
Agenda item 127 (continued)
(n) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons
Draft resolutions (A/77/L.48, A/77/L.49/Rev.1)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation to introduce
draft resolution A/77/L.48.
Mr. Shevchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Before introducing draft resolution
A/77/L.48, I would like to note that the situation with
regard to the biennial draft resolution of the General
Assembly on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons has unfortunately deteriorated over many
years now. Today there are two draft resolutions on
the same issue on the agenda of the General Assembly.
Draft resolution A/77/L.48 was submitted first, and
draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1 was submitted second,
as can be seen from their numbering. In that regard and
based on information we just received, I would like to
propose that the General Assembly adhere to its rules of
procedure, which stipulate that the first draft resolution
should be considered first. We hope that Member States
will support that proposal.
The President: Since I gave the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation to introduce

23-0516013/31

A/77/PV.59

draft resolution A/77/L.48, may I ask whether or not
the proposal by the representative of the Russian
Federation is that the Assembly proceed immediately
to consideration of draft resolution A/77/L.48? Do I
understand correctly the motion of the representative
of the Russian Federation?
Mr. Shevchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to propose that the General
Assembly, based on its rules of procedure with respect
to the consideration of draft resolutions, consider first
the draft resolution that was submitted first. We hope
that Member States support that.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Netherlands on a point of order.
Ms. Brandt (Netherlands): As the host country
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and penholder on draft resolution A/77/L.49/
Rev.1, the Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly objects
to the motion presented by the Russian Federation. In
recent years, regrettably, the international community
has been confronted with recurring allegations of
chemical-weapon use. Some of those allegations have
already been attributed to various perpetrators, but
many incidents have yet to be investigated.
We regret that the Russian Federation, after initially
attending our open consultations with the entire
membership, decided to submit a complete inversion of
this draft resolution. We were not given any notice that
it was going to happen, and there were no consultations
on the Russian draft. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
sincerely deplores those actions by Russia, as they are
not consistent with the working methods of the United
Nations and the good practice of penholdership and
open and inclusive consultations.
The Netherlands decided, despite those actions,
to continue our process of open and inclusive
consultations, as we had planned, as has taken feedback
on board from all delegations. The balanced text that the
Netherlands is proposing is a balanced outcome of those
consultations and negotiations. We took care to be as
factual as possible, avoiding qualifications that would
cause undue controversy and, thereby, undermine the
very purpose of this draft resolution.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands therefore urges
that the General Assembly act on our draft resolution
first. We strongly feel that only one draft resolution
should be adopted under this agenda item in order to
14/31

20/02/2023

avoid confusion or duplication. I therefore strongly
object to the Russian motion and urge the General
Assembly to join us by voting against it.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Russian Federation on a point of order.
Mr. Shevchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to note rule 71 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly, according to
which the question raised can be immediately decided
on by the President based on those rules. Our proposal
was made before the delegation of the Netherlands
spoke. In that regard, we ask to once again consider our
suggestion that the General Assembly should follow its
rules of procedure, which state that the first draft text
submitted should be taken up first.
We ask for this question to be put to a
vote and decided on immediately.
The President: I have consulted with legal
services. The representative of the Russian Federation
moved that the Assembly first consider draft resolution
A/77/L.48. However, we also heard an objection to that
motion. I shall now put the motion by the representative
of the Russian Federation to a recorded vote.
I call on the representative of the Russian Federation
on a point of order.
Mr. Shevchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to note, once again, that in
accordance with rule 71, objections can be immediately
put to a vote, but also note that objections can be decided
by the President. As far as we can tell, the President
has not yet made a decision on our proposal, which
was submitted first. Therefore, the objection raised
by the representative of the Netherlands cannot affect
today’s discussions.
We therefore ask once again to make a suggestion
that the General Assembly should follow its own rules
of procedure, which stipulate that the draft text that
is submitted first should be taken up first. We ask the
President to immediate make a decision in that regard.
The President: I will now put to a recorded vote the
motion that consideration of draft resolution A/77/L.48
should precede consideration of draft resolution
A/77/L.49/Rev.1.
A recorded vote was taken.
23-05160

20/02/2023

In favour:
Algeria, Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Honduras, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kyrgyzstan,
Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Nicaragua, Pakistan,
Peru, Russian Federation, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkmenistan, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Djibouti, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Türkiye, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burundi, Chad, Chile, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Ghana, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria,
Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa,
Suriname, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, Yemen
The motion was rejected by 23 votes to 55, with
53 abstentions.
The President: Since we have two draft resolutions
before the Assembly, I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1.
Ms. Brandt (Netherlands): I have the honour to
introduce draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the

A/77/PV.59

Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons”,
on behalf of almost 50 co-sponsors.
At the outset, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, as
the main submitter of this draft resolution, wishes to
thank delegations for their constructive participation
in the consultations on it. The aim of this biennial
draft resolution is to highlight the importance of the
continued cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). The OPCW, the organization that
oversees the implementation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention, contributes to international peace and
security by verifying the destruction of chemical-weapon
stockpiles, by working through industry inspections
to prevent the re-emergence of chemical weapons, by
promoting the peaceful use of chemistry for activities
not prohibited by the Convention and by investigating
the alleged use of chemical weapons.
As co-host of the OPCW, the Netherlands has
submitted this biennial draft resolution since 1997.
Today’s draft resolution is an update of resolution 75/265,
of 3 March 2021, and reflects factual developments
since then.
The global community cannot turn a blind eye
to these atrocities and should work to bring those
responsible to justice. The role of the OPCW is
essential for our efforts towards achieving that goal. A
strong message of support for United Nations-OPCW
cooperation is a strong signal of the commitment of
Member States in that regard.
As I already stated, we regret that the Russian
Federation decided to submit a competing version of
this draft resolution. We believe that the text we propose
is a balanced outcome of a process of consultations and
negotiations, where we have taken care to be as factual
as possible, avoiding qualifications that would cause
undue controversy and undermine the very purpose of
the draft resolution.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands indeed urges
that the General Assembly act on our draft resolution
first, and we strongly feel that only one draft resolution
should be adopted under this agenda item in order
to avoid confusion or duplication. We feel that this
would be a strong signal that we keep to established
working methods, acknowledge penholdership,
respect consultative processes and do not wish to see
procedural diversions confuse our work, while at the

23-0516015/31

A/77/PV.59

same time expressing support for the mandate of a
crucial organization in safeguarding global norms.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation to introduce
draft resolution A/77/L.48.
Mr. Shevchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation, together with China,
the Syrian Arab Republic, the Republic of Belarus and
Nicaragua, submitted this draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in order
to restore its consensual nature, which has been eroded
recently due to the continuing politicization of the topic
of chemical weapons, both within the United Nations
and in other international organizations.
We do not agree with that approach. We believe that
the goal of the biennial draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the OPCW, as well as
of other similar General Assembly resolutions, is to
express the support of Member States for cooperation
between the United Nations and international and
regional organizations.
Our draft is strictly factual in nature and is fully
aligned with sub-item (n) of agenda item 127. The text
is devoid of any political bias. In it, we propose that the
General Assembly express appreciation for the work of
the OPCW to support compliance with the Chemical
Weapons Convention by strengthening the capacity of
Member States in that area.
We also note the upcoming fifth special session
of the Conference of the States parties to review the
operation of the Chemical Weapons Convention, to
be held in May. We call on Member States to support
draft resolution A/77/L.48 and thereby show support
for cooperation between the United Nations and the
OPCW, which ought to be unpoliticized. Unfortunately,
we have seen that poisonous trend in the activities of
these important organizations over the past few years.
With regard to the accusations made against us just
now, we would like to note that we were open to dialogue
and prepared to engage in meaningful discussion on
the draft resolution on cooperation between the United
Nations and the OPCW. We pointed out the critical
shortcomings with draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1
during consultations and later, including through the
dissemination of a note.
16/31

20/02/2023

However, the Netherlands chose to escalate the
situation. We are deeply disappointed that today we saw
yet another attempt to revise the long-standing practices
of the United Nations. Instead of following the rules of
procedure, a number of Member States wanted a draft
that was submitted much later to be examined first,
which would obviously have far-reaching consequences
for the work of the General Assembly.
I would like to again stress that the United Nations
and the OPCW do not belong to a select group of
countries that wants to dictate to the rest of the world
what should or should not be in a draft resolution
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
OPCW, a group of countries that wants to decide which
comments should be taken into account and which
should be abandoned.
In our approach to the draft resolution, we have
based ourselves strictly on the content of the agenda
item. The Netherlands unfortunately purported to
expand this content, allegedly to include other items
within the purview of the OPCW, but even this dubious
approach was used very selectively.
I note that, out of the 13 paragraphs of the draft, 7
are directly linked to Syria. Other issues on the OPCW
agenda have been fully ignored. By contrast, draft
resolution L.49 mentions Ukraine, which has nothing to
do with the issues being discussed today. We are clearly
seeing attempts to use this document to promote certain
States’ own political agenda. We categorically reject
this attitude towards the draft resolution, and we called
on the Netherlands to change its approach and take
into account the legitimate concerns of a number of
States. Unfortunately, today, we are seeing a continued
politicization of this agenda item as well and efforts of
certain States to force other States to choose sides.
Although the Dutch draft has been updated twice,
it still lacks important information, mentioning instead
certain issues that go beyond the temporal scope of the
two-year resolution and beyond this theme. We therefore
felt compelled to at least give some kind of respectable
nature to the draft resolution. We would therefore like
to propose the following draft amendments to draft
L.49.
We propose including a new paragraph 5, which
would be worded as follows:
23-05160

20/02/2023

(spoke in English)
“Emphasizes that achieving a world free of
chemical weapons is of paramount importance
and welcomes progress towards this goal in
the recent years, in particular, the ascension of
Angola, Myanmar and the State of Palestine as
non-chemical-weapon-possessor States, which
brings the number of States parties to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction to 193 in total”.
(spoke in Russian)
We also propose deleting paragraphs 6 and 7 of
L.49, which state, respectively,
(spoke in English)
“Recalls the report of the Conference of the States
Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction on its
fourth special session, held in The Hague on 26 and
27 June 2018, and also recalls the decision adopted
at the special session entitled ‘Addressing the threat
from chemical weapons use’,
and
“Notes the establishment of the Investigation and
Identification Team of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons as announced at
the ninety-first session of the Executive Council
of the Organization in a note by the Technical
Secretariat, EC-91/S/3, dated 28 June 2019, entitled
‘Work of the Investigation and Identification
Team established by decision C-SS-4/DEC.3
(dated 27 June 2018)’, in which all States parties
were informed about the establishment of the
Investigation and Identification Team with the
purpose of identifying, in compliance with
C-SS-4/DEC.3, the perpetrators of the use of
chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic”,
(spoke in Russian)
because these two paragraphs do not fall within the
two-year temporal scope of the draft resolution.
We also propose replacing, in paragraph 8, the word
“of” with “that” and inserting the word “so-called”
after the words “report of the” and the following text
after the word “C-SS-4/DEC.3”:

A/77/PV.59

(spoke in English)
“whose establishment was announced in a
note by the Technical Secretariat without prior
consultations with all States parties or any
corresponding decision”.
(spoke in Russian)
We also propose replacing the words
(spoke in English)
“and expresses appreciation for the work done in
this regard”
(spoke in Russian)
with the words
(spoke in English)
“provided no clear indication that the Team had
based all of its assessments on the samples collected
and analysed under the chain of custody”,
(spoke in Russian)
so that paragraph 8 would read as follows:
(spoke in English)
“Takes note with grave concern that the first report
of the so-called Investigation and Identification
Team pursued into paragraph 10 of decision
C-SS-4/DEC.3,
whose
establishment
was
announced in a note by the Technical Secretariat
without prior consultations with all States parties
or any corresponding decision, entitled ‘Addressing
the threat from chemical weapons use: Ltamenah
(Syrian Arab Republic) — 24, 25 and 30 March
2017’, released on 8 April 2020, as well as the
second report of the so-called Investigation and
Identification Team, entitled ‘Addressing the threat
from chemical weapons use: Saraqib (Syrian Arab
Republic) — 4 February 2018’, released on 12 April
2021, as well as the third report of the so-called
Investigation and Identification Team, entitled
‘Addressing the threat from chemical weapons
use, Douma (Syrian Arab Republic) — 7 April
2018’, released on 27 January 2023, provided no
clear indication that the Team had based all its
assessments on the samples collected and analysed
under the chain of custody”.

23-0516017/31

A/77/PV.59

(spoke in Russian)
In paragraph 9, we propose the following
amendments: replacing the word “of” with the word
“that” and the words
(spoke in English)
“and welcomes the transmission of that decision
and its associated reports to the Security Council
and the General Assembly through the SecretaryGeneral”
(spoke in Russian)
with the words
(spoke in English)
“was adopted by vote of 29 States parties in favour,
3 against and 9 abstentions”,
(spoke in Russian)
so that the paragraph reads as follows:
(spoke in English)
“Takes note that the Executive Council decision EC94/DEC.2, dated 9 July 2020, entitled ‘Addressing
the possession and use of chemical weapons by
the Syrian Arab Republic’ was adopted by a vote
of 29 States parties in favour, 3 against and 9
abstentions”.
(spoke in Russian)
In paragraph 10, we propose the following
amendment, replacing the words “Takes note of” with
the words “Takes note that”, and inserting after the
words “the Syrian Arab Republic”
(spoke in English)
“was adopted by a vote of 87 out of 149 States parties
participating, with 15 against and 34 abstentions”,
(spoke in Russian)
so that the paragraph would read as follows:
(spoke in English)
“Takes note that decision C-25/DEC.9, dated
21 April 2021, of the Conference of States Parties
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, entitled ‘Addressing the possession and
the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian Arab
Republic’, was adopted by a vote of 87 out of 149
18/31

20/02/2023

States parties participating, with 15 against and 34
abstentions”.
(spoke in Russian)
We also propose deleting the following words in
paragraph 11:
(spoke in English)
“notes in this regard the transmission by the
Director General of all monthly reports, as well as
all reports of the fact-finding mission, during the
reporting period, and expresses appreciation for
the work done in this regard”,
(spoke in Russian)
so the paragraph would read as follows:
“Recalls Security Council resolution 2118 (2013) of
27 September 2013, in which, inter alia, the Council,
requested the Director General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to report
to the Security Council, through the Secretary
General, on a monthly basis, on the implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013) and the decision of
the Executive Council of the Organization of
27 September 2013, and also recalls paragraph 5 of
Security Council resolution 2209 (2015) of 6 March
2015, in which the Council welcomed the intention
of the Director General to include future reports of
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons fact-finding mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic, which was mandated to establish the
facts surrounding allegations of the use of toxic
chemical for hostile purposes in the Syrian Arab
Republic, as a part of his monthly report to the
Council”.
(spoke in Russian)
We also propose, in paragraph 12, deleting the
words “Expresses grave concern regarding the situation
arising from the aggression against Ukraine, and” and
inserting after the words
(spoke in English)
“[w]elcomes the fact that the Technical Secretariat
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons closely monitors developments with
regard to any possible use of chemical weapons”,
(spoke in Russian)
the following:
23-05160

20/02/2023

(spoke in English)
“provided that the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons is the organization
given responsibility by States parties to ensure
the impartial, independent and professional
implementation of all provisions of the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction, including article 11; and calls
upon all Member States to promote international
cooperation in the fields of chemistry for
peaceful purposes through the transfer of relevant
technologies, material and equipment and the
removal of all and any discriminatory restrictions
that are contrary to the letter and spirit of the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical
Weapons and on Their Destruction”,
(spoke in Russian)
so the paragraph would read as follows:
(spoke in English)
“Welcomes the fact that the Technical Secretariat
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons closely monitors developments with
regard to any possible use of chemical weapons,
provided that the OPCW is the organization
given responsibility by States parties to ensure
the impartial, independent and professional
implementation of all provisions of the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction, including Article 11; and calls
upon all Member States to promote international
cooperation in the field of chemistry for peaceful
purposes through the transfer of relevant
technologies, material and equipment and the
removal of all and any discriminatory restrictions
that are contrary to the letter and spirit of the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical
Weapons and on Their Destruction”.
(spoke in Russian)
I would ask that these draft amendments be put to
a vote.
The President: In the light of the considerable
length of these oral draft amendments, I shall suspend

A/77/PV.59

the meeting, during which suspension I will ask the
Secretariat to update the background documents
and seek clarification with the Russian Federation
as to whether these draft amendments represent one
draft amendment or a series of independent draft
amendments.
The meeting was suspended at 4.55 p.m. and
resumed at 5.10 p.m.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has submitted a single oral amendment to
A/77/L.49/Rev.1.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I will list the additional
sponsors for both draft resolutions, A/77/L.49/Rev.1
and A/77/L.48.
First, I should like to announce that, since the
submission of the draft resolution, and in addition to
the delegations listed in document A/77/L.49/Rev.1, the
following countries have also become sponsors of the
draft resolution: New Zealand, Türkiye and Ukraine.
Next, I should like to announce that, since the
submission of the draft resolution, and in addition to the
delegations listed in document A/77/L.48, the following
countries have also become sponsors of the draft
resolution: Belarus, China, Nicaragua, the Syrian Arab
Republic and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The President: Delegations wishing to make a
statement in explanation of vote before the voting
on any of the draft proposals under this agenda item
are invited to do so now in one intervention. Before
giving the floor for explanations of vote before the
voting, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Ms. Brandt (Netherlands): I just wanted to once
again express our regret that the Russian Federation
is now introducing new language that has not been
signalled or communicated before, and basically is also
not in its own version of draft resolution A/77/L.48. We
do not see that as contributing to a fair and transparent
process, and it is potentially confusing the wider
membership. We therefore urge Member States to vote
against the draft oral amendment to draft resolution
A/77/L.49/Rev.1.

23-0516019/31

A/77/PV.59

Ms. Mustafa (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, my delegation regrets that draft
resolution A/77/L.48, introduced by the delegation of
the Russian Federation and sponsored by my country’s
delegation and a number of other delegations was
not considered. That draft text is about cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), and
its content is in line with its title. It could have been
adopted by consensus if the Western countries had
acted professionally and objectively.
My delegation would like to explain its vote before
the voting on draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons”,
introduced by the delegation of the Netherlands. In that
context, my country’s delegation would like to make
the following general comments.
First, the delegation of the Netherlands has insisted
for the fifth time in a row on introducing selective
wording in that draft resolution, which contains
references to contentious resolutions. The delegation of
the Netherlands knows well that those resolutions are
controversial within the OPCW, as they were adopted
by voting against the practice established to adopt
draft resolutions of the Organization by consensus. My
country and many others have several comments and
serious concerns, which we expressed at the OPCW in
The Hague.
Secondly, the delegation of the Netherlands ignored
all appeals from Member States at the only negotiating
meeting that it held, namely, to adopt the draft resolution
by consensus. It prioritized its narrow political interests
over adopting a sovereign and technical resolution that
positively reflects cooperation between the United
Nations and the OPCW.
Thirdly, I would like to recall that all the resolutions
under agenda item 127, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and other organizations”,
were adopted by consensus. None of those resolutions
mentions issues currently being debated in any
other organizations. However, the delegation of the
Netherlands was unique in politicizing that draft
resolution, reflecting a non-professional approach.
Since the delegation of the Netherlands is insisting
on politicizing that draft resolution and transferring
the technical debate of the OPCW from The Hague to
New York, I would like to clarify the position of the
20/31

20/02/2023

Syrian Arab Republic with regard to the politicized
paragraphs of the draft resolution, namely, operative
paragraphs 6, 7, 8 and 9. They refer to the resolutions
related to establishing the so-called Investigation and
Identification Team (IIT), which is illegitimate, along
with its reports. It was established outside the mandate
of the Chemical Weapons Convention by manipulating
its provisions given that voting should not be a tool
to violate the Convention’s mandate. The Team also
followed erroneous working methods and lacks
legitimacy, setting a dangerous precedent by allowing a
technical organization to deal with the use of chemical
weapons in explicit violation of the mandate given to it
by the Security Council.
With regard to operative paragraph 10, it refers
to an unjust decision based on unreliable report of the
IIT. It also lacks legitimacy because it was adopted by
less than half the States parties to the OPCW. Contrary
to other resolutions adopted by consensus within the
OPCW, that draft resolution constitutes a precedent
in the history of the OPCW, as it is directed against a
member State that voluntarily joined the Convention and
has honoured all its commitments under the Convention.
With regard to operative paragraph 11, it
mentions the reports of the OPCW Fact-finding
Mission (FFM), which worked at a distance. It chose
to rely on open sources and information presented
by terrorist organizations and their arms such as the
White Helmets. In addition, the FFM violated its
competencies and the working methods contained in
the annex to the Convention with regard, for example,
to the collection of evidence and samples, as well as
maintaining the chain of custody. Its conclusions, such
as the FFM report on the presumed incident in Douma,
are illogical and non-scientific. Several independent
experts presented a detailed scientific report, listing
all the allegations regarding that alleged incident, and
showing that that incident was falsified and fabricated.
The FFM proved to be a tool used by certain countries,
such as the United States, the United Kingdom and
France, to politicize the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s
work in Syria.
With regard to operative paragraph 12, it provides
additional proof of the politicized selective approach
adopted by the delegation of the Netherlands, with the
support of Western countries. That paragraph contains
language that targets certain countries.
23-05160

20/02/2023

I reaffirm that the Syrian Arab Republic
categorically condemns the use of chemical weapons
by anybody, anywhere, anytime and under any
circumstances. I recall that Syria took a strategic and
voluntary decision to join the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Since then, even before the Convention’s
entry into force, we have fully cooperated with the
OPCW with regard to Syria. We announced our initial
declaration and destroyed all our chemical stocks in
record time. To date, Syria continues to cooperate in an
open and transparent manner with the OPCW Technical
Secretariat and its legitimate technical teams.
In conclusion, in the light of the Syrian Arab
Republic’s serious concerns regarding a number of
paragraphs in the draft resolution, my delegation
requests to put to a vote the politicized operative
paragraphs 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 and then to vote
against the draft resolution as a whole. I call on Member
States that uphold the principle of professional work
and the provisions of the Charter to raise their voice
against politicizing that technical item of the agenda
and vote against those politicized paragraphs. I call on
them not to accept the text of the draft resolution as
currently presented.
Ms. Schlyter (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Albania, the Republic of Moldova and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the potential candidate
country Georgia, and the countries of the European
Free Trade Association Iceland and Liechtenstein,
members of the European Economic Area, as well as
Andorra, Monaco and San Marino, align themselves
with this statement.
The EU continues to support the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
politically, diplomatically and financially to ensure
the full and effective implementation of, and universal
adherence to, the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC). We remain steadfast in defending the
organization against deliberate and baseless attacks on
its integrity and credibility.
We reiterate our call on those States not yet party
to the CWC to join the Convention without further
delay. They will actively contribute to the preparation
of the fifth Review Conference of the States Parties
to the CWC, which will be an opportunity to consider

A/77/PV.59

how to further strengthen the implementation of
the Convention.
From all those angles, we find the biennial draft
resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons”, to be
very important. We support its robustness, and in
that regard, we appreciate the work of the traditional
penholder of the draft resolution, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, as host country to the OPCW. That is
why we co-sponsored the Netherlands draft resolution
presented as A/77/L.49/Rev.1 in a unified manner and
hoped that the General Assembly action would focus
on the well-rounded draft resolution presented by the
usual penholder.
We deplore the procedural obstacles that Russia,
supported by a few States, has created with the
intention of undermining the process and making the
adoption of the Netherlands draft resolution more
difficult. Disregarding for a while the fact that Russia
hijacked the role the penholder of this draft resolution
without any prior consultations and sufficient support
and/or without a responsible approach to drafting and
focusing on the amendments proposed, we find them
very problematic. Russia is attempting to erase the
past 10 years of the work of the OPCW by obliterating
the reality on the ground, as reflected in the OPCW’s
reports. The results of the investigative work of the
OPCW, notably those of the OPCW fact-finding mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic and the Investigation and
the Identification Team, on cases of chemical weapons
use in Syria have been consistently shared with the
United Nations and regularly discussed by the Security
Council as matters directly relevant to international
peace and security. That is why it has to be reflected
in the current factual manner in the draft resolution
addressing cooperation between the two organizations.
We are therefore unable to support the Russian
proposals. We will vote against the amendments, and
we urge everyone to do the same.
Mr. Balouji (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to take this opportunity to explain the position of
my delegation concerning draft resolutions A/77/L.48
and A/77/L.49/Rev.1, both under agenda item 127 (n),
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons”.
First, I would like to express the fact that Iran
strongly condemns the use of chemical weapons by

23-0516021/31

A/77/PV.59

anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances.
We believe that the use of such weapons, like other
types of weapons of mass destruction, is a crime
against humanity.
From our perspective, this biennial draft resolution
should aim to strengthen cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons collectively and collaboratively.
In that regard, we acknowledge the fact that draft
resolution A/77/L.48 represents a consensual approach,
which was previously experienced at the sixty-seventh
session of the General Assembly. We believe that this
draft resolution is a step in the right direction and can
put an end to the trend of division among Member
States, which has been polarizing the performance of
their respective organizations.
However, we note that draft resolution A/77/L.49/
Rev.1 is yet another unbalanced draft text, which is
furthering the unfortunate situation that has arisen
from reflecting the views of only a limited number of
Member States in the most politicized manner, while
disregarding the views of others.
A thorough consideration of its paragraphs could
prove that this draft resolution neither correlates with its
title, nor reflects points and issues towards that process.
It contains some unrelated issues, particularly in its
operative paragraphs 5 to 12, which are unacceptable
in this draft resolution. We believe that it is essential for
this draft resolution to focus on cooperation between
the two organizations by confining the scope of the
draft resolution to topics covered by the agreement
between those organizations. It is important to remind
the General Assembly and its membership that this
draft resolution is not a country-specific one nor a
document focused on implementing the Chemical
Weapons Convention, for which an annual resolution is
adopted by the General Assembly.
Finally, we have consistently emphasized that
technical issues should be resolved collaboratively
and within the respective competent bodies, rather
than through political pressure, which has repeatedly
jeopardized the credibility and integrity of the
disarmament machinery. We called for the avoidance
of including any contentious issues during the informal
consultations on draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1 by
offering greater input. Unfortunately, that concern was
not met. We therefore have no choice but to vote in
22/31

20/02/2023

favour of draft resolution A/77/L.48 and against draft
resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1.
Mr. Shevchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We take the floor in explanation of vote
before the voting on draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1.
We will not delve into a profound analysis of the
document. Contrary to what we heard earlier from
the representative of the Netherlands, the Russian
Federation made its comments known on numerous
occasions during consultations and subsequently in
writing —a note to that effect was circulated to all
the permanent missions. We would like to stress once
again that a draft resolution on cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) is currently
being discussed. Blatant attempts to politicize even
that issue clearly demonstrate that certain delegations
do not view the United Nations as an Organization
made up of members on an equal footing to discuss
serious international problems, but as a platform to
promote their own foreign policy objectives. That
is totally unacceptable and undermines the spirit of
the Organization.
We once again call on Member States to focus on
the issue at hand today. We hope that our willingness
to finally reach at least some form of compromise
on the provisions of the draft resolution in order to
thereby preserve the important annual resolution on
cooperation between the United Nations and OPCW
will not be ignored once again. Otherwise, we will vote
against both the paragraphs that we find unacceptable
and draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1 as a whole. We call
on Member States to do the same, especially as draft
resolution A/77/L.48, which we introduced, remains a
viable option. We would like to remind the observer
of the European Union that we have advocated for the
General Assembly to follow its own rules of procedure
today. To say that is akin to creating an obstacle to
consideration of the issue is simply untrue. Not only
should our document have been considered first, but
it was intended to be a unifying and depoliticized
document that would adhere to the goals and principles
of the annual resolution. The adoption of such a draft
resolution continues to remain possible.
Mr. O’Sullivan (Australia): I take the floor to
explain Australia’s intention to vote against the oral
draft amendment to draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1.
Australia is proud to be a State party to the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC) and is a strong supporter
23-05160

20/02/2023

of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). Australia has full confidence in
the professional, impartial and independent work of its
Director-General and Technical Secretariat. We thank
the Netherlands, as the host country of the OPCW, for
its long-standing sponsorship of the annual resolution
and the comprehensive and inclusive consultation
process. Draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1 was prepared
following a comprehensive and inclusive consultation
process with all interested parties. The fact that it was
co-sponsored by 48 Member States is evidence of its
broad cross-regional support and the genuine process
that led to its drafting.
Australia will always speak out against attempts to
undermine the work of the OPCW. Australia condemns
in the strongest possible terms the use of chemical
weapons. The use of chemical weapons anywhere,
anytime, by anyone, under any circumstances is
unacceptable and contravenes international norms and
standards. There must be no impunity for those who
use chemical weapons. The OPCW Investigation and
Identification Team (IIT) is an example of professional
investigators working to identify the perpetrators of
chemical weapons use. The IIT was established in
accordance with the rules and procedures of the OPCW.
Australia has full confidence in the IIT’s work in Syria
and commends the Team for its rigorous, impartial
and independent analysis, which was performed under
difficult circumstances. The recently released IIT report
concludes that the Syrian Arab Air Force perpetrated a
chemical weapons attack in Douma, Syria, in 2018.
Unfortunately, one CWC State party in particular
has repeatedly acted to undermine the IIT and the
broader investigative capacity of the OPCW in order
to shield the perpetrators of chemical weapons attacks.
The proposed oral amendment represents a continuation
of such unacceptable actions. Refusing to acknowledge
the challenges posed to international peace and
security by the continued use of chemical weapons,
as is being attempted by the oral draft amendment, is
highly irresponsible. It undermines the essential work
of the OPCW and shields the perpetrators of chemical
weapons attacks. The substantive oral draft amendment
has been proposed from the floor, with no consultation
with interested parties. It is difficult to see how such
an action contributes to good-faith negotiations. The
fact that the oral draft amendment differs significantly
from the submitting State’s own draft resolution is
evidence that it is an attempt to circumvent accepted

A/77/PV.59

practices rather than a genuine effort to seek consensus.
That is why Australia will vote against the oral draft
amendment and why we welcome the Netherlands’
continued leadership of an inclusive consultation
process that supports rather than threatens the OPCW
and the CWC.
Mr. Makarevich (Belarus): I will try to be brief.
(spoke in Russian)
We believe that draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (A/77/L.49/Rev.1)
is extremely important and serves as a key element
not only of the chemical weapons non-proliferation
regime, but of the entire international security system.
Therefore, we are convinced that the subject and the
issue of the adoption of the draft resolution must be
considered in a broader context. However, given the
current reality and what we have seen today in this
Hall, it appears that the international security system
is cracking, and divisions are growing. Unfortunately,
certain countries systematically continue to improve all
means of eliminating their neighbours, which we cannot
accept. The universal document, which was intended to
serve as a guide for the non-proliferation of chemical
weapons, is now replete with irrelevant private issues
and serves the interests of certain States. We believe
that such a situation is unacceptable.
In that context, we support draft resolution
A/77/L.48, which was submitted by the representative
of the Russian Federation. We reaffirm what our
Russian colleagues said earlier: it was submitted in
accordance with the rules of procedure and the Charter
of the United Nations.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons”.
In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure,
the Assembly shall first take a decision on the oral
draft amendment submitted by the representative of the
Russian Federation.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

23-0516023/31

A/77/PV.59

In favour:
Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Mali, Nicaragua, Russian Federation,
Syrian Arab Republic, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Türkiye, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ghana,
Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mauritius, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Yemen
The draft oral amendment was rejected by 56 votes
to 12, with 61 abstentions.
The President: Separate recorded votes have been
requested on paragraphs 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 of draft
resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1. There being no objection to
those requests, I shall first put to the vote paragraph 6
of the draft resolution.
A recorded vote was taken.
24/31

20/02/2023

In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Trinidad
and Tobago, Türkiye, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Yemen
Against:
China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Eritrea, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Mali, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Russian Federation,
Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burundi, Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Ghana, Honduras, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Mongolia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman,
Rwanda, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam
Paragraph 6 of draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1
was retained by 80 votes to 11, with 38 abstentions.
The President: I shall next put to the vote paragraph
7 of draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
23-05160

20/02/2023

Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Namibia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago, Türkiye,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Yemen
Against:
Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Eritrea, India, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Mali, Nicaragua, Russian Federation,
Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Honduras, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Mongolia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, United
Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam
Paragraph 7 of draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1
was retained by 79 votes to 11, with 37 abstentions.
The President: I shall next put to the vote paragraph
8 of draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein,

A/77/PV.59

Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago, Türkiye,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Yemen
Against:
Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Eritrea, India, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Mali, Nicaragua, Russian Federation,
Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Ghana, Honduras, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan,
Viet Nam
Paragraph 8 of draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1
was retained by 76 votes to 11, with 40 abstentions.
The President: I shall next put to the vote paragraph
9 of draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, Namibia, Netherlands, New
Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,

23-0516025/31

A/77/PV.59

Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Trinidad and Tobago, Türkiye, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Yemen
Against:
Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Eritrea, India, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Mali, Nicaragua, Russian Federation,
Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining:
Algeria,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Honduras, Indonesia,
Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mongolia, Mozambique,
Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, United
Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam
Paragraph 9 of draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1
was retained by 79 votes to 11, with 37 abstentions.
The President: I shall next put to the vote paragraph
10 of draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago, Türkiye,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
26/31

20/02/2023

Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Yemen
Against:
Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Mali, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian
Arab Republic
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Ghana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nigeria,
Oman, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam
Paragraph 10 of draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1
was retained by 79 votes to 10, with 39 abstentions.
The President: I shall next put to the vote paragraph
11 of draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Senegal,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago, Türkiye, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Viet Nam,
Yemen
23-05160

20/02/2023

Against:
Belarus, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Eritrea, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Mali,
Nicaragua, Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam,
Burundi, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mongolia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Togo,
United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan
Paragraph 11 of draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1
was retained by 81 votes to 8, with 37 abstentions.
The President: I shall next put to the vote paragraph
12 of draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Türkiye, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Against:
Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Mali, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian
Arab Republic
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,

A/77/PV.59

Burundi, Colombia, Djibouti, Egypt, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam,
Yemen
Paragraph 12 of draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1
was retained by 71 votes to 10, with 46 abstentions.
The President: I shall now put to the vote draft
resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1 as a whole, for which a
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Türkiye, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yemen
Against:
Belarus, China, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Mali,
Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab
Republic

23-0516027/31

A/77/PV.59

Abstaining:
Algeria, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burundi,
Cambodia, Cuba, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kyrgyzstan,
Madagascar, Mozambique, Nigeria, Oman,
Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Tajikistan, Tunisia, Uzbekistan, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1, as a whole, was
adopted by 112 votes to 7, with 18 abstentions
(resolution 77/272).
The President: The representative of the
Netherlands has moved, within the terms of rule 91 of
the rules of procedure, not to take action on the next
proposal, namely, draft resolution A/77/L.48. I would
like to recall that the second sentence of rule 91 reads
as follows,
“The General Assembly may, after each vote
on a proposal, decide whether to vote on the
next proposal”.
I shall now put the motion by the representative of
the Netherlands to a recorded vote.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Myanmar, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Türkiye, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Egypt, Eritrea, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Mali, Nicaragua, Russian Federation,
Syrian Arab Republic, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Dominican
28/31

20/02/2023

Republic, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guyana,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Yemen
The motion by the representative of the Netherlands
was adopted by 54 votes to 12, with 61 abstentions.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor on a point of order.
Mr. Shevchenko (Russian Federation): We
would like to explain our vote on the motion by the
representative of the Netherlands. Of course, we voted
against it. I would like to note that today’s meeting was
the culmination of discussions on the issue of chemical
disarmament — a demonstration of how that issue has
been forcefully politicized by any available means by
a certain group of States that insistently promote their
own agenda, which as we have seen today bears no
relation to the actual issue of chemical disarmament.
We would like to once again call on Member States
to consider the consequences that could have for the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and for the United Nations as a whole.
The President: Before giving the floor to those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of vote
after the voting on the resolution just adopted, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to express my delegation’s
profound concern about the growing trend of
introducing competing draft resolutions, with no desire
at all for negotiation. For several years now, that has
been a repeated occurrence in the First Committee,
and we are now faced with the same situation in the
plenary. The substantive issue of the draft resolutions
being considered is put on the back burner, and this
forum becomes more an arena for disruption and
antagonism than one for negotiation, to the detriment
of diplomacy and the constructive spirit that should
23-05160

20/02/2023

guide us. In the case at hand, the substantive content of
draft resolution A/77/L.48, which was submitted by the
representative of the Russian Federation, and of draft
resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1, which was submitted by
the representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
is in general acceptable — all the more so as both have
overlapping elements that could have led to a single
text had there been genuine negotiations. But that did
not happen.
I would like to clarify that Mexico abstained in the
voting on paragraph 12 of resolution 77/272 because
the issue of Ukraine is not currently part of the area
of cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
Mexico’s position on the conflict in Ukraine has been
made very clear in all our statements and votes, both
in the Security Council and the General Assembly.
We hope that in the future, in order to preserve and
strengthen the exercise of multilateral diplomacy, we
will not give more importance to competing draft
resolutions than to good-faith negotiations and will
not include matters that are not central to the draft
resolutions being considered.
Mr. Liu Liqun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, thank you for giving me the opportunity
to take the floor. China has concerns about resolution
77/272, which was submitted by the Netherlands as
draft resolution A/77/L.49/Rev.1. China co-sponsored
draft resolution A/77/L.48, which was submitted by the
Russian Federation. I wish to explain China’s position
in that regard.
As a founding signatory to the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC), China has always been
committed to safeguarding the object and purpose
of the Convention and is firmly against the use of
chemical weapons by any country, organization or
individual, under any circumstances. In recent years,
amid the growing political confrontation within the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), certain countries have used chemical-weapon
hotspot issues to undermine parties that hold different
views and have resorted to putting proposals to
the vote at every opportunity, seriously poisoning
the cooperative atmosphere at the OPCW. China is
concerned about that situation. In our view, the draft
resolution submitted by the Netherlands should have
focused on cooperation between the United Nations and
the OPCW, upheld the traditional consensus-building
spirit, fully respected the concerns of States parties,

A/77/PV.59

demonstrated the solidarity of Member States and,
above all, avoided any politicized content that could
exacerbate tensions and differences and that bore no
relation to the topic of the draft resolution. That would
have effectively safeguarded the healthy and sound
working environment at the United Nations.
I would also like to take this opportunity to draw
the attention of the broad membership to the issue of
the destruction of the chemical weapons abandoned
in China by Japan. Nearly eight decades have passed
since the end of the Japanese war of aggression against
China. Yet the catastrophe and the suffering caused
by the war continue to plague the Chinese people. The
large quantities of chemical weapons abandoned on
Chinese soil by Japan remain a serious threat to the life
and property of the Chinese people and the safety of the
environment and pose a major challenge to the realization
of the object and purpose of the CWC. Regrettably,
the process to destroy those weapons has encountered
serious delays over the years, and the destruction plan
has been postponed four times. Given the accelerated
process to destroy chemical-weapon stockpiles, Japan’s
abandoned chemical weapons have become a major
obstacle to the goal of a chemical-weapon-free world.
China hopes that the international community, the
United Nations and the OPCW will pay more attention
to the destruction of abandoned Japanese chemical
weapons, and urges Japan to fulfil its responsibilities
in good faith and expedite the destruction process.
The implementation of the Convention is now at a
critical juncture. In view of the upcoming fifth Review
Conference of the States Parties to the Convention,
China stands ready to actively participate in the review
process and continue to work with Member States and
States parties, practice true multilateralism and strive
to build a world free of chemical weapons.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
stresses its support for all cooperation efforts between
the United Nations and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) aimed at
achieving the objectives of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and ridding the world of such weapons.
Egypt had hoped that one draft resolution would be
adopted by consensus on that subject instead of two
separate draft resolutions being put to the vote. As
such, Egypt voted in favour of resolution 77/272 but
abstained in the voting on a number of its paragraphs,
given that they address specific issues inscribed on
the agenda of the OPCW. Egypt is not a member of the

23-0516029/31

A/77/PV.59

OPCW. To address specific issues in such a resolution
is to politicize a resolution that is technical in nature.
That is why Egypt abstained in the voting on those
controversial paragraphs. For those reasons, Egypt once
again calls on Member States to maintain the technical
nature of the annual resolution on cooperation between
the United Nations and the OPCW in the future and to
adopt a single draft resolution by consensus in order
to support cooperation between the two organizations.
Mr. Rizal (Malaysia): Malaysia takes the floor in
explanation of its vote on draft resolution A/77/L.48 and
on resolution 77/272 — submitted as draft resolution
A/77/L.49/Rev.1 — both entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons” and submitted
for the Assembly’s consideration.
In our statement in explanation of vote on resolution
75/265 (see A/75/PV.56), adopted under the same agenda
item two years ago, in March 2021, my delegation had
expressed hopes for a refined text that would facilitate
the future work and operations of the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). Unfortunately, this year we have
moved further away from our goal of consensus, with
the submission of two competing draft resolutions.
While the Assembly decided to adopt resolution 77/272
as contained in document A/77/L.49/Rev.1 and not to
consider the text contained in document A/77/L.48, we
deeply regret that the initiators of those draft resolutions
were unable to reach agreement on a single text that
could be broadly supported by all delegations. That
is yet another instance of the increased polarization
within this organ, which goes against the spirit of
multilateral cooperation embodied in the Charter of the
United Nations.
There is no doubt about the importance of the
OPCW as the implementing body of the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC). Sustained cooperation
between the United Nations and the OPCW is important
for attaining the CWC’s overarching objective of the
total elimination of chemical weapons. However, as was
the case in previous years, resolution 77/272 contains
references that either do not relate directly to its title
or do not enjoy consensus among Member States. The
issues contained in paragraphs 6 to 10 of resolution
77/272 were duly covered in the annual First Committee
draft resolution on the Chemical Weapons Convention,
which was recently adopted by the General Assembly
as resolution 77/73. Those paragraphs, which among
30/31

20/02/2023

other things discuss empowering the OPCW with an
attribution mandate, involve well-known divergences
among Member States and may detract from the main
objective of promoting cooperation between the United
Nations and the OPCW.
With regard to paragraph 11 of resolution 77/272,
my delegation maintains the position that there was
no need to include a lengthy reference to a Security
Council dossier in that text. With regard to paragraph
12 of resolution 77/272, Malaysia’s position on the issue
of Ukraine is clear and remains unchanged. We firmly
believe in the importance of upholding the rule of law,
the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States. However, we are of the view that
the inclusion of that issue in resolution 77/272 poses
unnecessary complications in the context of the subject
at hand. Furthermore, the OPCW’s role in ensuring
the full implementation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention applies in all parts of the world, whether in
peace or conflict situations.
Recognizing the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations and the OPCW, Malaysia
once again voted in favour of resolution 77/272 as a
whole. However, for the reasons I mentioned, Malaysia
abstained in the voting on paragraphs 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11
and 12 of the resolution, as well as in the voting on
the oral draft amendment to it. We believe that the
proposals submitted in the Assembly Hall today, while
addressing some of our concerns, would have benefited
from ample time for deliberations. We sincerely
hope that, when this item is next before the General
Assembly, we will consider one draft resolution that is
focused on promoting cooperation between those two
critical organizations.
The President: Due to the lateness of the hour,
the Assembly will hear the remaining speakers in
explanation of vote after the voting at a later date, to
be announced.
The exercise of the right to reply has been requested.
May I remind members that statements in the exercise
of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the
first intervention and five minutes for the second
intervention and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Kusano (Japan): I would like to briefly react to
the issue of abandoned chemical weapons raised by the
Chinese delegation.
23-05160

20/02/2023

In accordance with the destruction plan agreed
between Japan and China, Japan has been making,
and will continue to make, the best possible efforts
to complete the destruction. I would like to take
this opportunity to reaffirm Japan’s unwavering
commitment to the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the destruction of abandoned chemical weapons.
We remain fully dedicated to advancing cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
Mr. Liu Zhao (China) (spoke in Chinese): Given
the time constraints, I will briefly respond to the
representative of Japan’s statement in exercise of the
right of reply.
The fact is that, as long as the chemical weapons left
in China remain there, the Chinese people will suffer

A/77/PV.59

from those weapons. That is one of the grave war crimes
committed by Japan during its aggression against China.
China welcomes Japan’s position expressed earlier and
hopes that Japan will step up its efforts in that regard,
including by dedicating more personnel and resources
to the destruction of all chemical weapons by 2027 and
to tackling the issue of contaminated soil, among other
issues, in a responsible manner. China will continue
to maintain its cooperation with Japan and provide the
necessary support.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (n)
of agenda item 127.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

23-0516031/31
