UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/379
5 April 1999
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: FRENCH

LETTER DATED 1 APRIL 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to inform you of my decision to appoint His Excellency
Mr. Moustapha Niasse (Senegal) as my Special Envoy for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo Peace Process. Mr. Naisse’s mandate will be to:
(a) Further demonstrate to the leaders concerned my interest in and
commitment to the regional efforts directed at restoring peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo;
(b) Assess progress made in the Lusaka process, and ascertain the
positions of the parties towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict;
(c)

Identify the main obstacles to signing the ceasefire agreement;

(d) Have a wide range of contacts with Congolese political and civil
leaders with the aim of making an assessment of the prospects for broader
political participation and national reconciliation through the internal
democratic process and an inclusive political dispensation;
(e) Sound out African leaders on the role, if any, the United Nations, and
especially the Security Council and myself, could play in promoting a negotiated
settlement; if so, what should be the form and substance of that role;
(f) Ascertain the type of support countries outside Africa are prepared to
extend in order to promote a peaceful settlement of the conflict, and whether
they are ready to support materially and financially, through a trust fund or
otherwise, a distinct United Nations role in peacemaking for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo;
(g) Report to me on his mission, and submit recommendations on practical
measures that the United Nations, the Security Council and myself could take to
assist or complement the existing peace initiatives.
A former Prime Minister and long-serving Foreign Minister of his country,
Mr. Niasse will bring to his mission the authority of the statesman, the
experience of the diplomat, and a deep commitment to peace in Africa. He has
accepted to start his mission urgently, and is expected to leave New York about
99-09524 (E)

050499

050499

/...

S/1999/379
English
Page 2

10 April after a week of consultations at United Nations Headquarters.
Mr. Niasse will be assisted by my Representative for the Great Lakes Region,
Mr. Berhanu Dinka.
I should like to emphasize that my decision to appoint a Special Envoy was
taken in close consultation with His Excellency Mr. Salim A. Salim, SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of African Unity, and His Excellency
Mr. Frederick J. T. Chiluba, President of Zambia, who has been spearheading with
great energy and dedication the peace process initiated by the Southern African
Development Community. Allow me, Mr. President, to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the efforts of the many African leaders who have worked towards a
peaceful settlement of the latest conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo since it erupted in August 1998.
I should be grateful if you could bring this information to the attention
of the members of the Council and convey to them my hope that their Governments
will grant their full diplomatic and political support to my Special Envoy
during his challenging mission.

(Signed)

-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
