A /71/PV.47

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

47th plenary meeting

Thursday, 17 November 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Zamora Rivas
(El Salvador), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 36
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General (A/71/616)
Draft resolution (A/71/L.13)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I give
the floor to the representative of Germany to introduce
draft resolution A/71/L.13.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union later today in this debate.
Let me start by expressing our gratitude to all
Member States for their constructive cooperation in
preparing this year’s draft resolution entitled “The
situation in Afghanistan” (A/71/L.13). The draft
resolution remains a vivid expression of support for
Afghanistan and its people by the entire membership
of the United Nations. For the first time in years, we
have managed to considerably streamline the text,
restructure some chapters and add others. We now
have a draft resolution that reflects the relations of the
international community with Afghanistan in a more
concise yet comprehensive way.
The greatest concern expressed in the draft
resolution refers to the still-difficult security situation

in Afghanistan. We deeply deplore the high number of
civilian lives lost due to cowardly terrorist attacks and
incessant fighting. The recent attack on the German
Consulate in Mazar-e-Sharif is but one of many in a
long list of incidents. Our thoughts are with those who
perished and were injured in that horrific attack. I would
like to take this opportunity to explicitly thank our
NATO partners and the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces for the courageous help they provided
to fend off the terrorist attackers and protect our staff.
In that context, I would like to welcome the outcome of
the NATO Summit, held in Warsaw, where important
contributions and further training for the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces were pledged.
More than 800,000 Afghan refugees have returned
to Afghanistan from neighbouring countries during the
course of this year. This poses a great challenge for the
Afghan Government and the receiving communities.
This year, we have introduced a new chapter on
refugees to the draft resolution in order to highlight
this important humanitarian problem. I would like
to commend the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration for their assistance to the
returning refugees and call upon all Member States
to support the Government of Afghanistan in its
efforts to ensure a sustainable reintegration of those
returning refugees.
At the same time, many Afghans are still arriving
in Europe — young, educated citizens who are badly
needed for the reconstruction and economic development
of Afghanistan. Halting and reversing that trend is in

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-38971 (E)

*1638971*

A/71/PV.47

the interest of all of us, but especially of Afghanistan
itself. The Afghan Government has to provide its people
with the prospect of a future in their own country.
We therefore strongly encourage the Government of
Afghanistan to make further progress on its reform
agenda. At the Conference on Afghanistan, held in
October in Brussels, the international community
demonstrated its support politically and financially
in an unparalleled way. Now it is up to the Afghan
Government to do its part.
The implementation of political and economic
reforms and the fight against corruption are of crucial
importance. We welcome the establishment of the
national High Council on Governance, Justice and
Anti-Corruption and the Anti-Corruption Criminal
Justice Centre and look forward to them becoming
fully operational. Moreover, as reflected in the draft
resolution, preserving and consolidating gains in the
protection and promotion of human rights and the equal
participation of all members of society, especially
women, in all spheres of Afghan life remains critical.
We also noted that the list of regional development
and cooperation initiatives and projects mentioned in
this year’s draft resolution has increased substantially.
Germany wholeheartedly encourages greater regional
cooperation. We sincerely hope that regional States
and organizations will assume greater responsibility in
our joint efforts to support Afghanistan in the future.
That also applies to an Afghan peace and reconciliation
process, which remains the only way to long-term
stability in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, let me assure the Assembly that
Germany will remain committed to supporting
Afghanistan. We will continue our financial assistance
and our support for the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces in the years ahead, in line with our
Brussels and Warsaw commitments.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): It was 70 years ago, two
days from today, that Afghanistan’s flag was raised
on the grounds of the United Nations as its fiftysecond Member. Today, I am pleased to stand before
the Assembly on behalf of a great nation with the
world’s support behind us for the unanimous adoption
of draft resolution A/71/L.13, entitled “The situation in
Afghanistan”. Allow me to thank all Member States for
their support for the draft resolution.
I would like to express my gratitude to Ambassador
Harald Braun, Counsellor Peter Neven and the rest of
2/29

17/11/2016

the team at the Permanent Mission of Germany for so
ably leading negotiations on the draft resolution. We
are also thankful to the delegations who took part in the
negotiations in a constructive spirit, as an expression
of their solidarity with and support for Afghanistan. In
addition, I wish to thank the Member States that have
sponsored the draft resolution, which signifies their
continued support for a stable Afghanistan.
Afghanistan’s
story
of
resilience
and
accomplishments against all odds — despite our
ongoing struggle against illegalities and stagnation, in
particular those crafted and imposed on us by regional
orchestrators of violent extremism and terrorism —
should be a source of hope and inspiration for those
who champion the shared values of a democratic and
free society, based on the rule of law, human rights
and dignity for all. However, in the current scenario
of violent extremism and radicalism threatening our
global order, unanimous international consensus and
support for Afghanistan are needed in the fight against
global terrorism. We hope that through this resolution,
Member States will be guided in addressing key issues
facing Afghanistan.
To say that Afghanistan has achieved unprecedented
progress in the past fifteen years while faced with
enormous challenges is not an overstatement. I
witnessed this yet again during my visit to Kabul last
week, finding a more vibrant and cleaner city with
major improvements in waste management. Almost all
Member States have been involved in some form in the
reconstruction and development of Afghanistan since
2001. The giant leap forward in almost all sectors of
society would not have been possible without their
contribution. The Government and the people of
Afghanistan are truly grateful for this support, and
we look forward to continuing our joint partnership
for prosperity and peace. We will do so on the basis of
mutual commitments, under the Self-Reliance through
Mutual Accountability Framework and the Afghanistan
National Peace and Development Framework agreed
upon at the recently concluded Brussels Conference.
The outcome of last month’s Brussels Conference
on Afghanistan was truly a milestone, as it revitalized
the essence of our partnership with the international
community. The National Unity Government’s progress
report on the benchmarks of the comprehensive reform
agenda laid out our efforts towards a democratic
State. We will remain consistently focused on
strengthening State institutions, developing self16-38971

17/11/2016

A/71/PV.47

reliance, and crafting social services to serve our
people. It is therefore imperative that we consolidate
these gains as Afghanistan completes its Millennium
Development Goals and embarks on the Sustainable
Development Goals.

attacked the German Consulate in the northern city
of Mazar-e-Sharif, where six civilians were killed
and over a hundred injured. The recent attacks are the
latest attempts by the terrorist handlers to undermine
our stability.

Notwithstanding the transformational effects of our
gains for the country, we have faced continued threats
from violent extremism and terrorism. In 2016 we have
witnessed new security challenges that impinge upon
various levels of national, regional and global stability.
Currently, multiple conflicts plague many nations with
painful stories of suffering, displacement and exodus of
refugees in search of safety. Foreign terrorist fighters
are on the move, taking advantage of negative State
rivalries and operating across regions to establish new
footholds in various countries.

In order to make our security forces more sustainable
and provide them with everything needed to face the
ever-evolving terrorist tactics, we require continued
support from the international community. We note
with gratitude the outcomes of the NATO Warsaw
Summit, on the basis of which partner countries pledged
new commitments for training, equipping, financing
and further enhancing the operational capacity of our
security forces until the end of 2020. We very much
welcome the decision to maintain the Resolute Support
Mission beyond 2016. The pledges of renewed support
have instilled renewed confidence in our armed forces.

In Afghanistan, we have paid a heavy price at the
forefront of the global struggle against terrorism. The
year 2016 was one of the bloodiest in terms of both
civilian and military casualties. We faced a thinly
disguised, undeclared war, when a neighbouring State,
contrary to the Charter of the United Nations and the
principle of good-neighbourly relations, used the proxy
Taliban, including the Haqqani network, Al-Qaida,
Da’esh, and others, to orchestrate and conduct attacks
with the aim of overrunning a number of provincial
capitals and stoking the flames of disunity among the
Afghans. Those who seek solace in their intentions
to keep Afghanistan bleeding must remember that
such actions would bleed them too and warrant
international isolation.
The export of foreign terrorist fighters, including
Da’esh in parts of Afghanistan, remains a serious
concern. Lately, they have sought to expand their brutal
presence into northern Afghanistan, often operating
in tandem with the Taliban and other affiliate groups.
Nevertheless, I am pleased to report that, against
enormous odds, our national security forces have
heroically confronted this myriad of interconnected
extremist groups trained elsewhere and exported to
Afghanistan. They have thwarted terrorist militia plans
for the capture and control of territory in different parts
of the country, repulsing successive attacks in various
provinces, including Kunduz and Helmand.
Terrorist militias continue to sustain heavy
losses, whereupon they resort to desperate attacks
on soft targets, including aid agencies, educational
institutions and civilian premises. Last week they

A joint international response to combat terrorism
can succeed only if the world addresses the key
enablers of terrorism. Without foreign planning,
safe havens, provision of training and weapons and
logistical support, groups like the Taliban would not
have the same destructive reach and could be addressed
from within the democratic political system of our
country. The fact that rogue elements within certain
State structures facilitate violent extremist activities
is hugely problematic and contrary to the relevant
counter-terrorism and sanctions regime resolutions
of the United Nations, particularly resolutions 1373
(2001), 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014), 2253 (2015) and 2255
(2015).
A renewed three-tier approach to the United Nations
counter-terrorism strategy is needed. At the level of our
debates, we ought to address the question of the impact
on the growth of terrorism of negative State rivalries
and State use of violence in the pursuit of political
objectives. At the operational level, we need to enrich
existing resolutions or adopt new resolutions to target
the drivers of such policies within State structures. At
the implementation level, the effective enforcement of
the counter-terrorism resolutions and sanctions regimes
equally on the Taliban, Al-Qaida and Da’esh, as well as
on Member States that provide political and military
support to them, can have a significant impact on war
and peace in Afghanistan.
President Ghani has asked for the timely inclusion
of select Taliban leaders in the sanctions list. We
welcome the recent visit of the Sanctions Committee

16-389713/29

A/71/PV.47

to Afghanistan, where relevant issues were discussed
with the senior leadership. We urge all Member States,
in particular countries accommodating terrorists, to
actively strengthen mechanisms within State structures
for the proper implementation of these resolutions.
There is an urgent need for increased and meaningful
interaction between the United Nations counterterrorism bodies and Afghan security agencies.
The National Unity Government has made
unremitting efforts to advance the cause of durable
peace. This has been a key issue for both President Ghani
and Chief Executive Abdullah. We are determined to
bring peace to Afghanistan, with or without the support
of those who have thus far failed to proactively support
this process. The recently signed peace agreement
between the Afghan Government and the leadership of
Hizb-e Islami marks our strong commitment to peace
and the fact that we are willing to take hard decisions
for it.
The implementation process has already begun
with the cessation of active hostilities between our
national security forces and those loyal to this group,
when circumstances permit. We hope this agreement
can serve as a model for those Taliban who are ready
to give up violence and embrace peace. We believe that
the Quadrilateral Coordination Group — comprised of
Afghanistan, Pakistan, China and the United States of
America — can still be a useful platform to facilitate
dialogue with the Taliban. Yet achieving any degree of
progress requires clear and decisive action to honour
commitments within the framework of the Group’s
road map.
The National Unity Government’s efforts to
promote regional economic cooperation through the
pursuit of common regional objectives and existing
processes, organizations and programmes are moving
forward. Some of the recently concluded or currently
ongoing regional projects are the Chabahar Port, the
Lapiz Lazuli Corridor, the Turkmenistan-AfghanistanPakistan-India Natural Gas Pipeline Project and the
Central Asia-South Asia power project, as well as
the railway line between China and Afghanistan.
The Afghan-led Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan and the Heart of AsiaIstanbul Process are working to strengthen connectivity
and increase trade and transit for the benefit of regional
prosperity. The region sees in Afghanistan a country
that is located in the heart of Asia with the potential
to develop as a key player in strengthening economic
4/29

17/11/2016

ties and cultivating regional connections. Once again,
we would like to reiterate that we are willing to work
with all neighbouring countries to achieve a shared
prosperous future for all.
Good governance has paved the way for notable
strides across social indicators. We have created a
culture of free speech and tolerance for alternative
opinions. The 2016 World Press Freedom Index ranks
Afghanistan fourth best among the 13 countries of
South and Central Asia.
Afghanistan is committed to the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, based on our eight-year plan
of action. Women’s empowerment has created a more
equal society, with women taking key roles in State
institutions and various professional fields. Multiple
women’s protection centres for survivors of domestic
violence and children’s protection units to prevent
recruitment of children in the armed forces are
functional. Respect for rule of law and promotion and
protection of human rights for all are key values in
strengthening the development of our nation.
As a country firmly committed to the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, Afghanistan is a
candidate for the Human Rights Council for the 20182020 term. We look to the support of Member States for
our candidacy. We can state with confidence that a vote
for Afghanistan will be a vote to strengthen the human
rights architecture worldwide.
By strengthening the national consensus for a
viable approach to reform our electoral institutions,
we are enhancing the credibility and transparency
of our future elections and the democratic process
in Afghanistan. Recently, the Selection Committee
presented a list of candidates to the President from
which a select group will be appointed to serve as new
commissioners in the electoral bodies. Last week, the
leadership of the National Unity Government convened
a consultative meeting with a broad spectrum of
prominent personalities to exchange views on issues
related to holding future elections. Those meetings
demonstrate our efforts to enhance national unity and
political stability.
The fight against corruption remains our
priority. Earlier this week, the Anti-Corruption
Criminal Justice Centre for the first time held two
trials that were open to the public and monitored by
representatives of civil society, the media and national
16-38971

17/11/2016

and international observers. That further signifies the
Government’s commitment to prosecuting corruption
cases among senior officials. In our efforts to promote
good governance at all levels, we have also pursued
merit-based appointments to achieve more effective,
transparent and accountable institutions that are able to
serve our people.
Countering the menace of the narcotics trade and
breaking down the nexus of criminality and drugs
remain crucial objectives for us. Increased insecurity
leads to a rise in opium production. In that regard, we
are aiming to counter the challenge of illegal narcotics
money, which is fuelling extremist activities, through
our comprehensive Afghan National Drug Action Plan
with the support of our international partners.
Due to a shrinking economy and increasing
insecurity, Afghanistan is still one of the largest
source countries of refugees. That, along with 485,000
internally displaced persons in 2016, remains a cause
of concern. In recent months, we have witnessed the
return of around half a million refugees from Pakistan.
We urge the Pakistani Government to have a more
meaningful dialogue with us on that issue. Given the
magnitude of the problem, we invite the international
community to support the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs flash appeal to provide for
the immediate needs of this population. Currently,
the Government is working on a long-term vision for
the returnees.

A/71/PV.47

the vision of a self-reliant and prosperous Afghanistan,
one that serves its people and the world. As we move
forward, we hope that we can continue to count on
international support, in solidarity with the heroic
people of my country.
Mr. Mahmadaminov (Tajikistan): Tajikistan is
pleased to be a sponsor of draft resolution A/71/L.13,
which we hope will be adopted by consensus, as in
previous years. We express our sincere appreciation
to the delegation of Germany for facilitating the draft
resolution. It is encouraging that all States Members of
the United Nations share the common view with regard
to the importance of peace and stability in Afghanistan
and of its key role in the promotion of regional
cooperation and integration. There is no doubt that
peace and stability and socioeconomic rehabilitation
in Afghanistan are crucial for the development and
prosperity of the entire region.
Tajikistan supports the efforts of Afghanistan and
its people to strengthen and reinforce the progress in
tackling the issues of the transition period, including
national dialogue and reconciliation. Tajikistan calls for
the acceleration of targeted assistance to Afghanistan in
economic rehabilitation, the implementation of social
programmes and the creation of jobs in the country.

The joint sacrifices made by Afghanistan and our
international partners over the past 15 years have brought
a profound change in the lives of ordinary Afghans.
Together, we have created a situation whereby Afghans
look to the future with a great degree of confidence,
knowing their country will never again be taken back
to the past, when tyranny, extremist ideology and
darkness prevailed over justice, democracy and rule of
law. Today’s Afghanistan is among the most pluralistic
societies in our region, and slowly but surely, we are
regaining our historic place as a hub of connectivity,
flow of people and exchange of innovative ideas among
diverse cultures and backgrounds.

The involvement of Afghanistan in the process of
multifaceted regional cooperation contributes to the
success of the efforts of the international community.
Tajikistan has been engaged in the rehabilitation
of social and economic spheres and infrastructure
in Afghanistan through connecting the transport
arteries of our countries to create an energy bridge,
the Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission
and Trade Project (CASA-1000), providing essential
commodities and training specialists. The construction
of the CASA-1000 electricity transmission line has
been launched recently. CASA-1000, which will be
implemented jointly with the Kyrgyzstan, Afghanistan
and Pakistan and development partners, will provide
an energy connection between Central Asia and South
Asia and will contribute to the further development of
both regions.

Looking ahead, we are confident in our ability to
continue to solidify the gains made in a wide array of
spheres. Nevertheless, we also realize the road ahead
is not devoid of difficulties. In that light, we urge our
friends and international partners to stay the course
with fortitude and determination in the quest to realize

Another important direction of our efforts is
towards the creation of a favourable environment for
the wide use of the transit potential in Central Asian
countries, including Afghanistan. In this context,
Tajikistan believes that the establishment of a legal
basis and the necessary infrastructure for the free

16-389715/29

A/71/PV.47

movement of goods, services and investment in the
region are crucial. We therefore consider it important
to sign the relevant documents on the utilization and
construction of regional framework projects, including
the Trade and Transit Agreement between Tajikistan,
Afghanistan and Pakistan and the construction of the
Tajikistan-Afghanistan-Turkmenistan railway.
By implementing national and regional projects
on energy, transport and the establishment of free
economic zones on the border with Afghanistan,
Tajikistan is helping to engage Afghanistan in regional
economic integration. These projects are aimed at job
creation, poverty eradication and ensuring a favourable
environment for development. The Government of
Tajikistan will continue its efforts to further strengthen
cooperation with the Government of Afghanistan
and with international partners to support peace,
stability and socioeconomic development in our
neighbouring country.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I give
the floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida (European Union): I have the
honour of speaking on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States. The following countries
align themselves with this statement: the candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia.
I would like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan for his statement. I also thank all
delegations that have participated in the consultations
on draft resolution A/71/L.13, and particularly the
German team for so ably facilitating the negotiations.
We are looking forward to once again adopting the
draft resolution by consensus.
Afghanistan has made considerable political,
security, economic and developmental progress over
the past decade. The General Assembly resolution
highlights many of those advances, for which the
Government of Afghanistan and the Afghan people
deserve much credit. Nevertheless, the gains made are
fragile and major challenges remain.
Last month, the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan was successfully concluded. The EU
and its member States would like to thank the high6/29

17/11/2016

level representatives of the 75 partner countries
and 26 international organizations — including the
representatives of a number of United Nations system
organizations, particularly Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon — who all came to Brussels and helped to
make the Conference a success.
First, it was a success in financial terms: the
international community pledged $15.2 billion in
support of Afghanistan’s development priorities for the
period 2017-2020. Showing its sustained commitment
towards Afghanistan, the European Union as a whole
pledged €5 billion. These figures surpassed expectations
and show the continued engagement of the international
community in Afghanistan, which is based on the
driving principle of mutual accountability between the
Afghan Government and international donors.
Secondly, the Brussels Conference was a political
success, as it gave a clear sign of support to the National
Unity Government to continue its reform path. That
includes electoral reforms, administrative reform,
economy and governance, human rights and the rights
of women and children and the fight against corruption.
To that end, cooperation among all Afghan political
actors is essential.
The Brussels Conference side event, under the
theme “Empowered Women, Prosperous Afghanistan”,
signalled the strong priority attached to the protection
and empowerment of women by the Afghan
Government, the EU and the international community.
The European Union welcomes the commitment of the
Government of Afghanistan to achieving the full and
equal participation of women in political life and in all
Afghan institutions. We encourage the Government of
Afghanistan to increase efforts to finance and put into
action the national action plan for the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). We must
protect the gains made by Afghan women, as their
continued active involvement at all levels of Afghan
society and in the negotiations on the future of their
country remains a priority for the European Union.
We also welcome the commitment of the Afghan
Government to fully implementing the action plan to
end and prevent the recruitment and use of children
and the road map towards compliance, and the progress
made. We encourage the Government of Afghanistan
to continue its cooperation with the United Nations
towards full implementation, with the support of the
country task force on monitoring and reporting.
16-38971

17/11/2016

On behalf of the European Union and its member
States, I would like to reiterate that joint State-building
and development efforts in Afghanistan can be
sustained only if they are based on reinforced regional
cooperation. Significant investments and further
cooperation are needed to improve connectivity in
the region and unlock growth potential that would
benefit Afghanistan and the region as a whole. Besides
economic development, security and migration
issues are also to be dealt with through a regional
approach, and a basis for common regional support for
Afghanistan must be found. The Brussels Conference
on Afghanistan confirmed a strong interest from the
international community in supporting Afghanistan
and its neighbouring countries in this endeavour.
The European Union welcomes the undeterred
willingness of the Afghan Government to engage with
all armed groups in a political process. The only way
to find a durable end to the conflict in Afghanistan is
through a lasting political settlement. In order to reach
a peace settlement, the EU remains fully committed to
supporting an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process that represents all Afghan citizens and their
legitimate interests, preserves Afghanistan’s unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity and upholds the
equal rights of all Afghans under the Constitution
of Afghanistan. The EU welcomes all initiatives to
create a environment conducive to such a process,
particularly the efforts undertaken by the Afghan
Government, and calls on all parties to engage in such
a process.
The European Union welcomes the adoption of
the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework and the Self-Reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework. Those Frameworks pave
the way for much-needed tangible progress in terms of
poverty reduction and the provision of basic services
and public goods to Afghan citizens. To that end,
specific actions and inclusive reform approaches are
required in sectors such as agriculture, infrastructure,
and rural and urban development, as envisioned in the
new national priority programmes.
We welcome the priority that the Afghan
Government gives to tackling corruption, which remains
a major obstacle to development and stability. In that
connection, we welcome the establishment of a High
Council on Governance, Justice and Anti-Corruption,
the Anti-Corruption Criminal Justice Centre and the
National Procurement Commission.

A/71/PV.47

We also welcome the efforts carried out by
the Government, together with donors and United
Nations agencies and coordinated by the United
Nations Mine Action Service, in demining the Afghan
territory. During the past decade, the EU contributed
over €60 million to mine action in Afghanistan.
We encourage the Government, in partnership with
the international community, to continue pursuing
the goal of a mine-free Afghanistan. Such a goal is
instrumental for achieving, inter alia, the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The EU is alarmed by the high number of civilian
casualties in Afghanistan, which are at record levels.
Improving security remains fundamental for stability
and development in Afghanistan. Therefore, we
welcome the commitments made at the NATO Warsaw
Summit in July in support of the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces.
The past months have also seen a new spike in
migration from Afghanistan, while the country is also
confronted with an increasing number of returnees,
particularly from the neighbouring countries of Iran and
Pakistan, but also from Europe and elsewhere. Support
to sustainable reintegration of returnees is a key area
of joint commitment under the New York Declaration
for Refugees and Migrants (resolution 71/1), adopted
on 19 September. The Sustainable Development Goals
support the promotion of safe, responsible and orderly
migration on the basis of well-managed migration
policies. Therefore, we strongly encourage the Afghan
Government to show leadership in addressing the needs
of displaced people who are returning to Afghanistan.
Wishing to address some of the important
challenges linked to migration, the European Union and
Afghanistan recently made a joint commitment, called
“The Joint Way Forward”, to stepping up cooperation in
addressing and preventing irregular migration, in full
respect for international law, including the principle of
non-refoulement.
However, the EU remains convinced that the best
way to fight irregular migration is to provide Afghans,
especially younger generations, with better jobs and
economic prospects through increased economic and
financial stability in Afghanistan. Our development
cooperation will support that aspect with specific
measures. We welcome the recent agreement between
the Afghan Government and the International Monetary
Fund on the Extended Credit Facility arrangement, which

16-389717/29

A/71/PV.47

will participate in improving macroeconomic stability
and management in the country. The economic report
provided for the Brussels Conference demonstrated
that the fiscal and economic policies put in place by the
Afghan Government are increasingly successful.
Finally, insecurity and instability are also fuelled
by the illicit cultivation, production and trafficking
of narcotics, which remain an important concern for
the European Union, because they can have severe
consequences for Afghanistan — high consumption
rates within the population that fuel the illicit economy,
the corruption of institutions and the financing of
international terrorism. We encourage the Government
of Afghanistan to continue to pursue a balanced and
integrated approach within the framework of its
National Drug Action Plan, with the full support of
the international community and in close cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and relevant regional frameworks, such as the Paris
Pact initiative.
It is important that the international community
remain strongly committed to accompanying
Afghanistan towards long-term progress and stability.
The European Union will continue to support the
transformation process in order to promote the
emergence of a fully self-reliant, peaceful, democratic
and prosperous society for the benefit of all Afghans.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to start by thanking Germany for leading negotiations
on this year’s draft resolution (A/71/L.13). I would also
like to thank Afghanistan and all other nations that
constructively engaged on the text.
The United States is pleased to co-sponsor this
year’s draft resolution on the situation in Afghanistan.
The draft recognizes that while Afghanistan continues
to face grave security, political and development
challenges, the commitment of the Afghan Government
and the international community to building a secure,
prosperous and democratic Afghanistan is firm
and unyielding.
The past year has not been an easy one. The Taliban
and other armed groups have conducted attacks on
provincial capitals, university students and diplomatic
missions, including last week’s attack on the German
Consulate in Mazar-e-Sharif and on the Resolute
Support Mission base in Bagram. They have targeted
citizens, government leaders, humanitarian workers
and international partners in a cynical but ultimately
8/29

17/11/2016

unsuccessful effort to discourage those who seek to
build a better life for all Afghans. In the face of such
acts, we commend the bravery of the Afghan security
forces, which are effectively responding to Taliban
attacks and denying them major population centres and
critical infrastructure.
The United States continues to believe that the only
way to end the conflict, enable a responsible drawdown
of international troops and establish the conditions
for stability in Afghanistan is through a peace and
reconciliation process between the Aghan Government
and the Taliban. The United States reaffirms its support
for the security and development of Aghanistan.
We joined allies and partners in demonstrating our
strong, continued support for Afghanistan and the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces at
the NATO Warsaw Summit in July with pledges of
renewed assistance through 2020 and a commitment to
sustaining NATO’s training, advisory and assistance
Resolute Support Mission beyond 2016.
In October, the international community reaffirmed
its partnership with the Afghan Government through
mutual commitments of financial assistance and
accountability measures under the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework. We also
recognize the importance of stability and security in
Afghanistan for the stability and security in the region.
We encourage Afghanistan’s friends and neighbours
to support the Afghan Government and its efforts to
bring peace, stability and prosperity to Afghanistan,
and we welcome regional development initiatives and
other efforts to advance regional cooperation and
economic integration.
As the international community has demonstrated
a commitment to Afghanistan’s future, we look to
Afghanistan’s Government to continue its efforts to
combat corruption, protect human rights, establish
effective State services and prepare the legal and
administrative framework necessary for democratic
national elections. In this regard, we welcome the
commitments made by the Afghan Government under
the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework. We stand ready to work with President
Ghani, Chief Executive Abdullah, the Afghan
Government and the Afghan people to advance security,
political stability, electoral reform and accountable
governance in the coming years.
16-38971

17/11/2016

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
supports the adoption by consensus of draft resolution
А/71/L.13, on the situation in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is in the early stages of its transformation
decade, and China commends the positive results of
the Afghan National Unity Government’s dedicated
efforts to promote socioeconomic development and
reconciliation. Afghanistan still faces fundamental
challenges in the political, economic and security areas.
A united, stable, friendly and developing Afghanistan is
in the common interest of the international community
and the countries in the region. It is the hope of China
that the international community will pay close attention
to the Afghanistan issue, while continuing to provide
support and assistance so as to help Afghanistan to
achieve stability and development.
First, we must help Afghanistan to embark on the
road to self-owned development. Afghan affairs should
ultimately be handled by the Afghan people themselves.
The international community should pay continued
attention to Afghanistan and do all it can to help the
Afghan Government and people, while judiciously
respecting that country’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity and respecting the right of the
Afghan people to independently choose their political
system and development road. China commends the
formulation by the National Unity Government of the
National Peace and Development Framework. It is our
hope that the political factions in Afghanistan will
resolve their differences through dialogue and work
together for the noble cause of national development
on the basis of the Framework. The international
community should help the Afghan Government
enhance its capacity-building in the light of the Afghan
development strategy and its specific needs
Secondly, we must steadfastly promote the Afghan
reconciliation process. Advancing the Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned inclusive reconciliation process is the
only way to achieve lasting peace and development
in the country. The parties concerned in Afghanistan
should give priority to the long-term interests of the
country and its people and play an active part in political
reconciliation. The international community should
provide impetus to the peace and reconciliation process
in Afghanistan. China supports the continued work
by the four-party coordination group of Afghanistan,
Pakistan, China and the United States, pursuant
to United Nations resolutions, to assist the Afghan
Government to achieving early talks with the Taliban.

A/71/PV.47

Thirdly, we must help Afghanistan improve its
security environment. The Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces shoulder the primary responsibility
for maintaining peace, stability and security there. The
international community should help the Forces build
up their capacity and strengthen the country’s ability
to take over its own national defence and to counter
and effectively combat terrorism, transnational crime
and drug trafficking. Draft resolution А/71/L.13
acknowledges the important contributions made by
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and
other organizations in the region to the maintenance
of Afghan security and stability. It is our hope that
the countries of the region will continue to promote
security cooperation with Afghanistan so as to provide
the security environment for the national development
of the country.
Fourthly, we must assist Afghanistan in promoting
socioeconomic development. The international
community should fulfil its commitment to helping
Afghanistan in its recovery and capacity-building
endeavours so that it will be able to achieve sustainable
economic development. Afghanistan enjoys geopolitical
and resource advantages, and its prospects for regional
economic cooperation are good. Draft resolution
А/71/L.13 clearly sets out how the One Belt, One Road
initiative will be of great importance to Afghanistan’s
economic development and regional cooperation. We
take discussing, building and sharing together as the
building principle of the One Belt, One Road initiative;
the spirits of the Silk Road of peaceful cooperation, open
inclusiveness, mutual learning, and win-win objective
based on mutual benefits as our guidance; and forging
communities of common destinies and interests as our
goal for cooperation. It is our hope that the countries
concerned will be fully mobilized, pursuant to the
draft resolution, to jointly move forward the One Belt,
One Road initiative to strengthen regional economic
cooperation and interconnectivity, provide secure
environment for the One Belt, One Road initiative
and project implementation, and help Afghanistan to
integrate into regional development.
As a good neighbour and friend of Afghanistan,
China has always supported that country in its worthy
endeavours towards reconstruction and development.
China will continue to support Afghanistan in
strengthening its security capacity-building and in
combating terrorism within the country, and we will
also assist the SCO in its efforts towards that end.

16-389719/29

A/71/PV.47

17/11/2016

We fully support the integration of Afghanistan into
regional cooperation. We will work with Afghanistan
to implement the China-Afghan Memorandum of
Understanding and the One Belt, One Road initiative,
and strengthen our cooperation in the areas of economic,
trade, energy and infrastructure development.

civilian casualties tells us, and Australia is concerned
about this year’s extremely high numbers of civilian
casualties, which have had a devastating impact on
families and communities. Ordinary Afghans deserve
better. Much also remains to be accomplished in the
area of human rights.

China stands ready to join with the international
community in making an unremitting effort to
facilitate the early achievement of peace, stability
and development in Afghanistan .

At major international meetings in Warsaw and
Brussels, the international community’s support for
Afghanistan’s security and development was affirmed,
and Australia has joined its international partners in
recommitting to Afghanistan’s future through security
sector sustainment, the continuation of our fourth
largest bilateral aid programme and the extension of
our $80 million annual aid commitment until 2020. We
continue to deploy Australian Defence Force personnel
to the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission. By
providing coordination, assistance and reporting, the
contribution of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan to the country and its people has been
profound. We applaud its leadership and dedicated staff
and thank them for their service.

Mr. Yardley (Australia): This year has seen both
opportunities and significant challenges for Afghanistan
and the international community that stands with it.
We saw efforts towards an Afghan-led peace process,
action towards elections for Afghans to exercise their
democratic rights, and successful meetings that have
secured a way forward for international support for
Afghanistan. Security, governance, and the reform
agenda remain key priorities.
The National Unity Government, under the
leadership of President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah, has proved resilient even in difficult
circumstances. The Afghan people expect upcoming
elections to be held in a timely manner. We encourage
the Government to continue working to meet
those expectations. We commend the advances made
so far, as well as the broader progress on economic
and judicial reform, and we urge for perseverance in
continuing that trend.
We welcome the increasing focus on expanding
regional cooperation in this year’s draft resolution
(A/71/L.13), and we are grateful that Afghanistan’s
neighbours have affirmed their commitments to
supporting Afghanistan in the future. We look to
those regional partners to fund and resource their
commitments accordingly.
There can be no doubt about the challenges that lie
ahead, but security and stability in Afghanistan can
be restored only through peace processes. We urge all
the parties concerned, including the Taliban, to seek
further progress towards peace in 2017. Insecurity
and conflict continue to pervade every aspect of life
and governance in Afghanistan. Law and order, and
effective policing, are key to securing public trust.
The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
have fought bravely and resolutely, but the insurgency
remains defiant. The Afghan population still bears the
brunt of this war, as the United Nations reporting on
10/29

Australia remains committed to supporting
Afghanistan in close partnership with a responsive and
accountable Afghan Government. We would like to
thank our partners for their constructive approach to
developing today’s draft resolution, and Germany and
Afghanistan for their key roles in particular. We are
pleased to once again be a sponsor of the resolution and
look forward to its adoption today by consensus.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the German coordinators
for their hard work in preparing the Assembly’s annual
resolution on Afghanistan.
Afghanistan’s complex situation continues to
be a major focus for the international community.
The increase in the number of civilian casualties is a
serious concern. The spread of the influence of the socalled Islamic State is particularly worrying, including
its efforts to absorb other armed opposition groups
in northern parts of the country and other regions.
We believe it is important to prevent militants from
crossing into Afghanistan.
Russia will support the adoption today of draft
resolution A/71/L.13 by consensus. However, we note
that the text did not properly characterize Taliban
and Al-Qaida operatives in Afghanistan as terrorists,
despite the fact that the terrorist threat in the country
has only grown in recent months. We believe that the
16-38971

17/11/2016

widely used term “violent extremism” does not do
justice to what is happening in Afghanistan or to the
actions of the Taliban, Al-Qaida and the Islamic State.
The only correct way to describe their evil deeds
is terrorism.
We can only be concerned about the fourfold
increase in the land area devoted to drug crops in
Afghanistan’s previously relatively well-off northern
provinces, noted in the recent Afghanistan Opium
Survey 2016 report of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC). That report also gives
an unbiased indication of the sharp, tenfold drop in
the volume of drug crops destroyed. We are all aware
that the United Nations classifies the spread of Afghan
opium as a threat to international peace and stability.
In that context, we should recall that beyond the risk
it represents, drug production provides terrorists with
significant financial support. They receive as much as
40 per cent of their revenue from the drug trade, and
the situation is only getting worse, bringing suffering
both to Afghanistan itself and to many other countries.
We support the efforts of the Afghan authorities to
ramp up the fight against drug trafficking, and we urge
the foreign military presence and international donor
community to help them with this.
For its part, Russia is making a major contribution
to the efforts to combat the production and distribution
of drugs originating in Afghanistan. In particular,
a project of the regional UNODC programme for
Afghanistan and its neighbours is under way. We
continue to conduct free training in specialized
Russian higher-education institutions for Afghan law
enforcement agency personnel, including narcotics
squads. A joint project training anti-drug personnel
from Afghanistan, Pakistan and the Central Asian
countries — which until 2014 was carried out under the
auspices of the NATO-Russia Council and was ended
not by us but by NATO — is now being implemented
by the Russian Federation jointly with UNODC, which
is coordinating the project.
We support the Afghan Government’s policies
aimed at achieving national reconciliation. We are ready
to help in promoting the negotiation process, including
showing flexibility on questions related to the possible
softening of the sanctions regime of Security Council
resolution 1988 (2011) vis-à-vis the Taliban if it does
not run counter to the national interests of the Afghan
Government.

A/71/PV.47

Unfortunately, so far attempts to reconcile with the
Taliban have not had positive results. We believe that
the primary responsibility for the currently evolving
situation with regard to security and the training of the
Afghan security forces lies with the NATO States, which
to date have not reached their stated objectives. Many of
the other tasks that the International Security Assistance
Force — which has now left Afghanistan — was dealing
with also remain unresolved.
For our part, we are ready to continue to work
together in the future with Afghanistan through
structures that have proved their efficacy, particularly
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO).
Afghanistan’s cooperation with the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO) also has good potential for
improving our joint counter-terrorism and anti-drug
efforts. The constructive roles of the CSTO and SCO
are clearly reflected in today’s draft resolution.
Ms. Zahir (Maldives): My delegation wishes to
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on the situation in Afghanistan (A/71/616).
The Maldives notes with concern the mixed trends
evident in recent developments in the situation in
Afghanistan. On the one hand, there has been progress
on the political front, with several key positions
filled and, with the assistance of the United Nations,
clear steps taken to ensure the successful holding in
October of legislative and local elections. The Afghan
Government has remained committed to improving
the human rights situation, particularly with regard
to women and children. It has followed through on its
words with concrete actions, and its continued efforts
in that area are encouraging.
We are, however, faced with the bleak truth that,
over the past 12 months, the situation in Afghanistan
has been marked by critical and worrying incidents,
especially on the security front. The number of attacks
by the Taliban and other armed groups is at its highest
level since 2001, and casualties among both security
forces and civilians have increased. This comes as the
Afghan Government’s efforts to engage the Taliban
in talks have stalled amid uncertainty and internal
leadership struggles within the Taliban. More troubling
is the death toll of civilians and the effect these problems
have on innocent people.
The persistent long-term weakness of Afghanistan’s
social, political, and economic institutions has proved
to be a fertile breeding ground for successive cycles of

16-3897111/29

A/71/PV.47

conflict. That cycle must be broken if a lasting solution
is to be found, and conditions on the ground that are
conducive to peace must be created. Among other
things, therefore, the international community has an
important role to play in giving support to the peace
and reconciliation process, capacity-building measures,
anti-corruption initiatives, development assistance and
the strengthening of civil society. By fostering trust,
resilience and cohesion across society, the root drivers
of conflict can be dealt with and the Afghan people can
realize their long-held aspirations.
The situation in Afghanistan continues to have an
impact that extends far beyond its borders. We need
look no further for proof of that than at the simple
fact that this item has been on the General Assembly’s
agenda since its thirty-fifth session. Despite dramatic
changes in the specific nature of the situation in
Afghanistan over the past 36 years, it has remained of
sufficient concern to the international community to
have been considered by the Assembly in all but two of
its sessions since 1980. We must therefore redouble our
efforts to promote a culture of peace and cooperation
in Afghanistan. In particular, as the Secretary-General
notes in his report, the support of the countries of the
region is essential in the longer term, both to boost the
country’s economy and to address issues of peace and
security. The Maldives welcomes the possibility of
cooperation and collective efforts with regional partners
for peace and security and for enhanced economic
cooperation and connectivity, including through the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation.
Recent events have made it clear that much
remains to be done if lasting peace is to be achieved in
Afghanistan. At the core of that process are the Afghan
people themselves, but they should not and cannot be
alone in their efforts. The Maldives believes that it is
only with the broadest possible base of support that
peace can take firm root in Afghanistan, and it is the
duty of the international community to support the
Afghan people in building a peaceful, prosperous and
democratic nation.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the forthcoming adoption later today of
draft resolution A/71/L.13, which provides a clear
reaffirmation of the international community’s
ongoing commitment to supporting peace and stability
in Afghanistan.
12/29

17/11/2016

After more than 15 years of international assistance,
it is wonderful that many States recommitted to
continuing their support for Afghanistan until 2020
at the Warsaw and Brussels conferences earlier this
year. They did so based on a shared recognition that an
unstable Afghanistan means instability for the region
and for the wider international community, and that
Afghanistan’s stability will continue to require the
support of regional and international partners for the
foreseeable future.
However, despite the progress that has been made
over the past year, Afghanistan continues to struggle
to make meaningful strides in tackling the key drivers
of instability. The National Unity Government is still
hampered by uncertainty and infighting. The Afghan
Parliament’s recent dismissal of seven ministers for
what appear to be minor administrative failings is
cause for concern. We hope those actions do not further
compromise the Government’s stability or its ability to
tackle the many challenges the country faces.
After we saw some reasons for optimism at the
end of last year, the peace and reconciliation process
with the Taliban appears to have stalled. The Taliban
continues to hold the Government of Afghanistan at
arm’s length while it wages an increasingly bloody
war on the Government and the people and on the
international presence in the country. New Zealand
would like to express its condolences for the recent
attacks on German, American and Afghan security
officials that killed and injured dozens. Such attacks,
and the broader Taliban war, continue to be funded by
profits from narcotics trafficking and illicit mining.
Concerns have also been mounting about an impending
humanitarian crisis in eastern Afghanistan, with the
expected return of 1.5 million refugees from Pakistan
in the coming months.
The investment of the international community
in Afghanistan will be effective only if we make
strategic use of all the tools at our disposal to support
peace, stability and security. Failure to do so would
be to the detriment not only of Afghanistan but of the
region and the international community more broadly.
Beyond its bilateral commitments, New Zealand
has done its part — as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), on sanctions, and of the Council’s Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
16-38971

17/11/2016

entities — to explore what more can be done through
those mechanisms to support those goals.
I just returned earlier this week from a visit to
Afghanistan to discuss how the sanctions regimes could
be utilized more effectively. I welcomed the commitment
expressed by many Afghan interlocutors, including
President Ghani, to making greater use of the Taliban
sanctions regime as a tool for supporting the peace and
reconciliation process. I hope those discussions will
lead to concrete steps, including further listing of the
Taliban leadership and its supporters who benefit from
ongoing criminality through narcotics trafficking and
illicit mining. I also hope that we will see greater use
of the exemption procedures in the sanctions regime
for listed persons who are genuinely engaged in the
peace process.
New Zealand welcomes the peace agreement
reached between the Afghan Government and
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar of Hezb-i-Islami. We hope it can
serve as an example for broader peace agreements in
future. It will be appropriate for the ISIL and Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee to give swift consideration to
delisting Gulbuddin Hekmatyar once a request is
received from the Afghan Government.
However, for all of those efforts to succeed,
Afghanistan’s commitment must be matched by others
in the region, particularly its immediate neighbours. We
welcome the focus on enhancing regional cooperation
in today’s draft resolution. The very nature of the
challenges that Afghanistan faces demands this. The
cross-border financial flows that fund insurgency and
terrorism in Afghanistan, and the movement of foreign
terrorist fighters, cannot be addressed by Afghanistan
alone. That requires a collective effort, not least because
it will bring a collective benefit. It should be clear to all
that a destabilized Afghanistan is in no one’s interests.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for
his statement.
We welcome the successful completion of the
consultations on today’s draft resolution on the
situation in Afghanistan (A/71/L.13). It not only
underscores the progress achieved in Afghanistan so
far, but also provides guidelines for the future efforts
and responsibilities of both Afghanistan and the
international community. We look forward to once
again seeing the resolution adopted by consensus, and
we are pleased to be one of its sponsors.

A/71/PV.47

During the past 14 years, Afghanistan has gone
through a remarkable transition process and achieved
considerable progress in many fields. We welcome
the dedication and determination of the Afghan
Government, the security forces and the people in
making genuine efforts to overcome all kinds of
challenges. However, those accomplishments are
still reversible. The security situation is fragile, and
Afghanistan is still at a critical juncture. Therefore,
the international community’s continuing support to
the security and development efforts of the Afghan
Government during the transformation decade is vital.
We should bear in mind that Afghanistan eventually
needs to build its own capacity for the most part. In the
meantime, we must extend all the help we can to assist
the work of achieving a secure, stable and prosperous
future for Afghanistan.
The stability of Afghanistan, and subsequently
that of the region, will depend on improved security.
Lasting peace in Afghanistan can be achieved only if
the peace and reconciliation process is successfully
concluded. With this in mind, we welcome the recent
peace agreement between the representatives of the
Afghan Government and Hezb-i Islami.
We welcome and encourage the Afghan
Government’s efforts to bring the reforms to life.
We believe that their successful implementation
will consolidate the political and social cohesion
in the country. Turkey will continue to support the
Afghan Government as it implements its security and
development agenda as long as our help is needed. We
will continue our bilateral assistance in the security and
development areas, and we will contribute to NATO’s
efforts as a framework nation within the Resolute
Support Mission.
Turkey’s official development assistance to
Afghanistan between 2002 and 2015 exceeded
$962 million, representing its single largest development
programme ever undertaken. We mainly focus on
projects in the fields of education, health, infrastructure
and capacity-building for government institutions.
Furthermore, at the recent Brussels Conference
on Afghanistan, Turkey pledged $150 million for
2018-2020, which will be used on a project basis in
coordination with the Afghan authorities. We believe
that a genuine dialogue among the countries of the
region is particularly important and necessary. In
that regard, Turkey will also continue to contribute to

16-3897113/29

A/71/PV.47

Afghanistan through multilateral platforms, such as the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that the
Afghan people deserve a better future. The international
community’s continued commitment will strengthen
their hopes in that regard. It is our joint duty to help
Afghanistan to reach that goal.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to express my
gratitude for being able to take part in this important
debate on the situation in Afghanistan, and I wish to
extend my sincere appreciation to Ambassador Harald
Braun of Germany and his colleagues for skilfully
guiding consultations on draft resolution A/71/L.13,
entitled “The Situation in Afghanistan”, which
we support.
Unfortunately, I must begin my statement by
expressing deep concern about the security situation
in Afghanistan. The United Nations has reported that
there were 2,324 security incidents in October and
14 terrorist attacks in Kabul. Both reflect a growing
trend. The international community has reiterated its
commitment to providing sustained financial support
to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces.
Last month in Brussels, Japan pledged to continue to
provide $130 million in security assistance per year for
the next four years. We are aware of the ongoing efforts
of those Forces to overcome security challenges, and
we do see some improvements. However, the situation
on the ground overall is still deteriorating.
Improved security is the most important
prerequisite for Afghanistan’s development. It is crucial
that we see progress on an Afghan-led and Afghanowned peace process, together with significant security
improvements. Japan calls upon President Ghani and
Chief Executive Abdullah to cooperate closely in order
to strengthen the National Unity Government and
achieve reconciliation. The threat of violent extremism
is undermining the socioeconomic stability of
Afghanistan. Undoubtedly, violent extremism is rooted
in and exacerbated by weak governance. In addition
to international assistance, efforts by the Government
on national reconciliation, administrative reform and
fiscal consolidation are essential. The Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework for 20172018 sets out clear targets for the Afghan Government,
which we strongly urge it to achieve.
Based on the principle of mutual accountability,
Japan pledged at the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan
14/29

17/11/2016

to continue assistance of up to ¥40 billion per year
for the next four years, starting in 2017. The Brussels
Conference and today’s resolution demonstrate strong
support for Afghanistan. But our work does not end
here. We must focus on implementing our commitments.
Our ultimate test will be whether Afghanistan achieves
self-reliance to the point where donors no longer need
to announce multi-year pledges.
Today’s resolution contains many initiatives
highlighted by the Government and neighbouring
countries. Regional cooperation and connectivity
will provide a stronger foundation for economic
growth in Afghanistan. We eagerly await news on the
implementation of those initiatives and commitments,
and look forward to welcoming progress in our
resolution next year.
In conclusion, let me say that Japan is committed
to continuing to assist Afghanistan on its path towards
self-reliance and mutually beneficial relations with
its neighbours.
Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): Allow
me to express my appreciation for the opportunity
to address the General Assembly. Canada thanks
Germany for facilitating the draft resolution on the
the situation in Afghanistan (A/71/L.13), and for
responding successfully to requests made last year for
a more streamlined and succint resolution.
Allow me to proudly state that Canada remains
steadfast in its desire for peace and security in
Afghanistan and throughout the world. Canada is
committed to helping the Afghans create a sustainable
future and a country that is well governed, respects
human rights and is in control of its own destiny.
Canada does not want to see Afghanistan be a haven
for terrorism.
(spoke in English)
Those are the reasons why Canada pledged
$465 million in security support and development
assistance to Afghanistan at the Warsaw NATO
Summit in July 2016 for the 2017-2020 period,
comprising $195 million for security and $270 million
for development assistance.
Canada fully supports an Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process and thanks the Government of
Afghanistan for its efforts to date, despite formidable
challenges over the past year. We also welcome the
constructive role neighbouring countries are offering to
16-38971

17/11/2016

play towards greater regional cooperation and peace and
reconciliation in Afghanistan. We note with particular
appreciation the important role regional actors can play
and have played, alongside the Afghan Government and
international organizations, in ensuring the safety and
dignity of Afghan refugees. We welcome a continuation
of that support for those who are most vulnerable,
particularly women and girls.
It is important to emphasize that peace and security
cannot be achieved without the active and substantive
participation of all members of society, including
women and girls. In that regard, we are pleased to see
the following elements in the annual resolution on the
situation in Afghanistan: commitments to achieving the
full and equal participation of women in all spheres of
Afghan life, acknowledgement of the vital role women
play in the peace process, recognition of child protection
and social development needs, and the importance
placed on the rule of law and respect for human rights,
including the rights of women and children in ongoing
security sector reforms. Canada, for its part, will
continue to focus on our Women’s and Girls’ Rights
First approach in all of our health, education and human
rights programming in Afghanistan.
Canada supports draft resolution A/71/L.13. We
stand with the Afghan people as they strive for a more
secure and prosperous future and will continue to
support them in their pursuit of peace.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): I would like to thank
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for his
statement. We all appreciate the work of the delegations
that have contributed to the text of the annual draft
resolution (A/71/L.13). We especially appreciate the
effort by our German colleagues, who once again
facilitated negotiations in a highly professional manner.
Slovakia would like to align itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union (EU).
Six weeks ago, leaders of both Afghanistan
and the international community met in Brussels
at the conference co-organized by the EU and the
Government of Afghanistan. That was the biggest
international event held in Brussels during the Slovak
presidency of the Council of the European Union.
The Conference has been widely and justly praised
as successful. In terms of participation, 75 countries
and 25 organizations expressed their commitment
to supporting the people of Afghanistan. In terms of
financial assistance, $15.2 billion have been pledged

A/71/PV.47

to further the development of Afghanistan. And in
terms of political vision, the leaders of Afghanistan
continue to work together in a constructive manner to
maintain an inclusive political process. Those results
have provided a solid foundation for the Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned reform processes in the country.
Given the momentum, progress in the peace
restoration and reconciliation process in Afghanistan
is more important than ever before. We encourage
the Administration in Kabul to further engage in all
activities related to the stabilization of Afghanistan,
including providing safety and security, good
governance, transparency in decision-making, and the
improvement of the current living conditions of the
Afghan people, with special regard for the younger
generations, women and girls.
Afghanistan, which receives a contribution of
€300,000 a year from Slovakia, continues to be one of
three priority countries on which our development aid is
concentrated. Furthermore, at the Brussels Conference,
the Minister for Foreign and European Affairs of the
Slovak Republic, Mr. Miroslav Lajčák, announced a
one-off contribution of €500,000.
We focus our assistance strategy primarily on
three priority areas: education, agriculture and health
care. It is not by chance that we focus our policy on
those areas, since we firmly believe that making
tangible improvements in the quality of people’s lives
contributes to the sustainable nature of development.
Education is the integral and essential part of any
development effort. The Slovak contribution is aimed at
finalizing the construction of two schools, which will
then be handed to the Afghan Government. We hope
that they will provide employment for many teachers
and places of study for hundreds of children. We are
also putting our investment in education to good use by
providing scholarships for foreign students.
In the area of agriculture, we would like to assist
our partners in Afghanistan to fulfil their potential by
producing enough food for internal consumption and,
as was the case in the past, by profiting from the export
of surplus production.
Finally, Slovak assistance focuses on access to
health care because, as enshrined in Goal 3 of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, ensuring healthy
lives and promoting well-being for all at all ages is
essential to sustainable development.

16-3897115/29

A/71/PV.47

Slovakia is proud to deliver on its pledges, since
we are fully aware that at least 75 donors can make
a difference. Our efforts will not materialize without
the able and inclusive leadership of our Afghan
partners. We are looking forward to working with
the Administration in Kabul. We are ready to further
coordinate our activities with global stakeholders
and regional partners. Here in New York, I am
personally happy to continue in a constructive and
productive dialogue with my colleague, the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, His Excellency
Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): It is often said that the
United Nations is about acting together to defend the
dignity intrinsic to all human beings by fostering
sustainable peace, and that the objective at the United
Nations is to work together in solidarity to assist other
members of the human family in need. If that is indeed
the case, then today’s annual debate on the situation
in Afghanistan affords us an opportunity to engage
in introspection and take stock of whether our actions
towards a valued Member State and its brave people
conform to the lofty values and goals that we cherish
and profess.
It is usual to begin statements on Afghanistan by
highlighting the number of civilians, including women
and children, who are killed in numerous attacks every
day. There are, however, innumerable inspiring stories
of common men and women of Afghanistan attempting
to make a difference in the most trying circumstances.
Those stories get overtaken by news of death and
destruction. How many of us know that well-endowed
Afghan lifters picked up eight medals in an international
powerlifting championship held earlier this year? How
many of us have heard of the innovation of two young
Afghan brothers, Massoud and Mahmud Hassani, who
have designed a low-cost drone, called Mine Kafon, to
detect and destroy mines in their country? How many
sports enthusiasts among us can point out that the only
country to beat the eventual winners of the World T-20
Cricket Championship this year was Afghanistan?
Such stories of common Afghans trying to excel
and bring joy and succour to their fellow countrymen
and women are not reflected in numbers and percentage
points. Each month, as the percentage of children killed
and of attacks on civilians and schools increases, we
witness the silencing of many who, had they lived,
could have transformed the future of Afghanistan.
We are therefore alarmed at the expansion of the war
16/29

17/11/2016

theatre in Afghanistan and the significant increase
in the number of casualties suffered by the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces in recent months.
We offer our sincere condolences to those affected by
the loss of lives and destruction of property in several
terrorist attacks in Afghanistan, in which hundreds of
innocent people were killed and maimed, including the
recent attacks on the United States airbase in Bagram
and the German Consulate in Mazar-e-Sharif.
The commitments made at the Brussels Conference
reflect the international community’s willingness to
pursue and broaden engagement with Afghanistan, per
the needs of the Afghan people. At the Conference, India
committed a sum of $1 billion for capacity-building
in education, health, agriculture, skill development,
empowerment of women, energy, infrastructure and the
strengthening of democratic institutions.
Even as we collectively make efforts to rebuild
institutions, infrastructure and networks in Afghanistan
through cooperative endeavours, there are those who
aim to destroy and undermine what is being rebuilt.
Groups and individuals that perpetrate violence
against the people and the Government of Afghanistan
operate from shadowlands entirely outside the fabric of
international law. They must not be allowed safe havens
and sanctuaries in Afghanistan’s neighbourhood. Our
collective efforts on that front will go a long way in
promoting sustainable peace in Afghanistan.
Draft resolution A/71/L.13, to be adopted today,
has very encouraging language on regional cooperation
and connectivity. India believes in and is committed
to working with Afghanistan and regional countries
on restoring a central role for Afghanistan as the land
bridge of our region. It is with that goal in mind that
India chose Amritsar as the city to host the Heart of
Asia Ministerial Conference next month. Amritsar sits
on one of Asia’s oldest and longest major routes, dating
back to the second century B.C.E. Five centuries ago,
the modern version of this road was built from Kabul
to Kolkata by the Indo-Afghan King Sher Shah Suri.
Even today, that same road could become a major
artery running through India, across Pakistan and on
to Afghanistan. Those with narrow mindsets need to
open their hearts and allow arterial roads to be used
for Afghan trade to and from everywhere in the region.
The security challenges faced by the Afghan
people and Government have not receded. We note
that Afghanistan, along with the Resolute Support
16-38971

17/11/2016

Mission, continues to make efforts to combat terrorism.
However, the shadowy supporters of some of the
terrorist organizations — like the Taliban, the Haqqani
Network, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham,
and Al-Qaida and its designated affiliates, such as
Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and the Jaysh Muhammad — have
not been deterred, as is reflected in the upward trend in
the casualty tolls.
The United Nations must do more to send the
right message. The inconsistent implementation of the
sanctions imposed on some of these terrorist outfits
eats away at the authority of the United Nations and
needs to be addressed. The leader of the Taliban — a
proscribed entity — must be designated as a terrorist
individual. The international community is impatient
for action. Earlier this week, Afghan President Ashraf
Ghani himself asked a delegation of the Security
Council Sanctions Committee to include that person,
and others like him, in the list of terrorists. Unless the
Security Council and its subordinate bodies are part of
a cohesive response to global terrorism, they run the
risk of becoming marginalized from the safeguarding
of the most fundamental security priorities of Member
States whose fabric is being torn asunder by terrorists.
Afghanistan’s National Unity Government has
India’s full support for strengthening its defence
capabilities. We believe that the international community
should stand by the Government and the people of
Afghanistan in these difficult times. We believe that
the path to reconciliation in Afghanistan should be
through an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process, in
accordance with the internationally accepted red lines,
reflecting the aspirations of the people of Afghanistan.
At the same time, peace and the peace process cannot
be indefinitely postponed. An immediate cessation of
violence is necessary, and the international community
must redouble its efforts for the peace and reconciliation
process to deliver results and to do so quickly. We have
to preserve and consolidate the gains made by the
people of Afghanistan in the past decade and a half.
We applaud the role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). It
is providing assistance in various sectors, even as
Afghanistan is witnessing one of the largest influxes
of returning refugees and its security challenges are
becoming more complex. However, UNAMA must
also squarely confront the difficulties that continue
in Afghanistan on account of the safe havens and

A/71/PV.47

sanctuaries that terrorists continue to enjoy beyond
Afghanistan’s borders.
I conclude by reiterating our best hopes and wishes
for the people of Afghanistan who continue to strive
for excellence in their cities and spaces, ridden with
war and conflict. India places its full faith in the brave
and resilient people of Afghanistan. We also lend our
full support to the international community’s efforts,
in furtherance of the positive values and progressive
agenda that it is being pursued in Afghanistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We commend the German
delegation for its efforts in skilfully steering the
negotiations on the annual resolution on Afghanistan,
which the General Assembly will soon adopt, and that
Pakistan is co-sponsoring.
The annual General Assembly resolution continues
to be a signal and embodiment of the support of the
international community for the people and Government
of Afghanistan. We support the General Assembly’s
call on the Afghan Government to continue to work in
a spirit of cooperation to achieve meaningful progress
for the socioeconomic development of their country.
Unity within the Afghan Government is indispensable
for it to effectively address the multiple challenges the
country faces.
The situation on the ground today is a troubling
picture of increasing insecurity, escalating violence,
growing civilian casualties and rising threats to
Afghanistan’s political and economic stability. The
presence of large numbers of terrorists, foreign terrorist
fighters and militant groups in the vast ungoverned
areas of Afghanistan presents an imposing challenge
to the long-term stability of Afghanistan. They pose a
threat not only to Afghanistan but also to my country
and, indeed, the entire region. Afghanistan could once
again become a source of global terrorism, with grave
implications for the region and the world.
Through the draft resolution (A/71/L.13) that we
will adopt today by consensus, we will unanimously
and unequivocally affirm that there is no military
solution to the prolonged conflict in Afghanistan.
Sustainable peace is only possible through a negotiated
settlement. That has been Pakistan’s consistent and
considered position throughout the long war. We are
gratified that it is now confirmed by international
consensus. A dialogue between the Afghan Government
and the Afghan Taliban remains the only way to end
Afghanistan’s long night of suffering.

16-3897117/29

A/71/PV.47

While the international community can help
in promoting the peace and reconciliation process,
the principal responsibility rests with the Afghans
themselves. Progress will be assured only when the
Afghan parties themselves conclude that there is no
military solution to the Afghan war, and work patiently
and persistently, through a meaningful dialogue
process, to achieve reconciliation and peace at home.
The recent agreement between the Afghan Government
and the Hezb-i Islami group confirms that negotiations
can succeed.
Pakistan is ready to assist in reviving the dialogue
process with the Afghan Taliban, which we helped to
facilitate in July 2015, at the express wish of President
Ashraf Ghani. Unfortunately, that process subsequently
stalled for reasons that are well known. However, this
setback, though disappointing, should not deter us
from renewing our efforts at reconciliation. Pakistan’s
endeavours to that end can succeed only if the Afghan
parties themselves are willing to pursue the path of
dialogue with the unequivocal support and participation
of all members of the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group, which includes the United States and China.
For over 35 years, war and strife in Afghanistan
have produced grave consequences for my country’s
security, stability and economic development. Pakistan
has been the major victim of terrorism originating from
Afghanistan. Through the determined operations of
our armed forces, the clear commitment of our political
leadership and the popular support of our people,
Pakistan has turned the tide against terrorism. Our
military operation against the terrorists, conducted by
over 200,000 troops, has been as large and effective as
any in the world. Our comprehensive national action
plan is being progressively implemented.
Unfortunately, Pakistan’s campaign against the
terrorists is being threatened by external machinations.
The Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) and its leader,
Mullah Fazlullah, continue to enjoy safe havens in
Afghanistan. We call on the Afghan Government to
take action against the TTP, deny them safe havens and
end their agencies’ collusion with Pakistan’s declared
adversary to foment terrorism in Pakistan.
To prevent cross-border attacks, Pakistan has
consistently urged the Afghan Government to cooperate
in instituting strict controls along the international
border, to finalize standard operating procedures that
address border management and to support Pakistan’s
18/29

17/11/2016

plan to fence vulnerable points on the border. I wish to
reiterate Pakistan’s readiness to work with the Afghan
Government through the high-level consultation
mechanism that was set up to address border issues.
The destinies of the people of Pakistan and
Afghanistan are intertwined and cemented by age-old
bonds of kinship, faith and shared history. Pakistan
has offered unprecedented hospitality and support to
the brave Afghan people in the past several decades of
their travail and tragedy provoked by foreign military
interventions. We have opened our hearts and homes
to over 3 million Afghan refugees and sustained them
for over 35 years with less than adequate support from
the international community. We wish to see their safe,
dignified and voluntary return to their homeland sooner
rather than later.
Pakistan will continue to extend economic and
other assistance to promote peace and development
in Afghanistan. Our pledge of financial assistance at
the recent Brussels Conference is but one indication
of our support. Despite the attacks and tensions it
faces on its eastern border, Pakistan has decided to
attend the Heart of Asia Conference in Amritsar to
confirm its commitment to Afghanistan’s security
and development. Unfortunately, this heart of Asia
continues to bleed also because of the stratagems of the
host of the forthcoming Conference.
Afghanistan and our region are at another crucial
juncture, which may require strategic adjustments.
At this moment, it is vital to objectively evaluate the
fundamental causes for the deteriorating security
environment in Afghanistan, and the nature and sources
of terrorism there and in the region. Today, there is need
to counter the terrorist threat from the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), from Al-Qaida and from
terrorist groups like the TTP that are associated with
these global terrorist movements. This is the challenge
we must address.
Reconciliation in Afghanistan is being frustrated
by local and regional interests that are marginal to the
global campaign against ISIS and Al-Qaida-sponsored
terrorism. These local interests must be pressed by
the international community in a concerted way to
negotiate peace and enable us all to defeat the global
threat of terrorism.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation welcomes the fact that again, for another
year, the resolution on the situation in Afghanistan
16-38971

17/11/2016

A/71/PV.47

(A/71/L.13) will be adopted by consensus. I wish to
acknowledge, at the outset, the splendid part played by
the delegation of Germany and the statement delivered
earlier by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Saikal.

consistent with the friendship between our two countries
and with the commitment made many years ago to
the stabilization and transformation of Afghanistan.
Spain’s commitment to Afghanistan is unwavering and
long term and will continue in the coming years.

In a few weeks Afghanistan will enter the third year
of the transformation decade. Much progress has been
made, and the situation is very complex. I therefore
encourage Afghanistan to continue to intensify the
reforms adopted, and especially to make progress
in creating an environment conducive to increased
economic activity. I wish to single out the importance
that the Afghan Government has been attaching to the
fight against corruption, which is absolutely essential
to ensuring development. I also want to underscore the
achievements made with regard to civil liberties and
human rights, and women’s rights. One example is the
National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security,
which was recently adopted.

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I associate myself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union,

Spain welcomes the success of the Brussels
Conference, which was convened on 5 October and
co-organized by Afghanistan and the European Union,
and the substantial financial commitments that were
made there.
Security remains a fundamental challenge in
Afghanistan. At the recent NATO Summit in Warsaw, the
international community’s commitment to Afghanistan
in this area was renewed until 2020. From this podium,
I wish to pay tribute again to the efforts and sacrifices
of the members of the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces. Spain — which in December, less than
a year ago, suffered terrorist violence at first hand, with
the loss of lives of two Spanish citizens in an attack
on the Spanish Embassy in Kabul — will continue to
support those efforts, as it has done to date, as well as
those of the Resolute Support Mission of assistance,
advice and training for Afghan national forces.
The end of the conflict in Afghanistan necessarily
involves a political solution. Spain has supported and
will continue to support Afghan-led efforts in favour
of peace and reconciliation. We trust that those efforts
will soon bear fruit.
In a few weeks, Spain will end another intense twoyear period of service to the international community
as an elected member of the Security Council. During
this period, my country has had the responsibility
and honour of acting as penholder on Afghanistan.
In assuming that responsibility, we were but being

I thank the Permanent Mission of Germany for its
remarkable facilitation work, thanks to which we are in
a position today to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.13, on
Afghanistan, by consensus. This adoption by consensus
is certainly not trivial. It attests to the solidarity of the
entire international community with Afghanistan and
its people.
Afghanistan has come a long way in
15 years — a difficult road, full of obstacles but also
marked by considerable progress. Examples of this are
the peaceful political transition two years ago, the
encouraging developments in primary school enrolment
and the decrease in infant mortality. We must recognize
the progress that has been made, even if it does not
offset the remaining challenges.
We know that the general framework is still fragile.
The security situation remains worrying. The series of
deadly attacks, including those on the German Consulate
in Mazar-e-Sharif and the Bagram base, attest to the
precarious state of the security environment. Belgium
condemns those terrorist attacks in the strongest terms,
and through me extends its condolences to the families
and relatives of the victims.
In that context, the support of the international
community is crucial. The continuous presence of
the United Nations in the country, through the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
the renewed commitment of NATO at its Warsaw Summit
on 8 and 9 July, and the confirmation at the 5 October
Brussels Conference of ongoing international financing
for Afghan development are concrete demonstrations of
the type of support that Belgium endorses.
But we also know that the help of the international
community, while crucial, cannot by itself bring
peace. That is why we encourage every effort aimed
at promoting the emergence of a peace process led by
Afghans for Afghans. In that regard, we call on all active
parties, with the cooperation of regional stakeholders,
to make a serious commitment to dialogue towards a

16-3897119/29

A/71/PV.47

17/11/2016

political settlement that will help attain lasting peace
and reconciliation.

victims. Protecting tomorrow’s adults is preserving
the future.

While the issues of security and reconciliation
are vital to the rebuilding of the country, human
development is another decisive factor for long-term
stabilization. Too many Afghans continue to live in
destitution. Can we be surprised that, when faced with
violence and poverty, so many of them, especially the
youth, choose to emigrate? The best way to staunch the
haemorrhaging of that life force is to offer the young
generation real prospects for the future. Belgium, for
its part, contributes to the United Nations programme
facilitating the lasting reintegration of Afghans into
their country.

In conclusion, I call for respect for international
humanitarian law, particularly the protection of medical
personnel and health facilities, as set forth in Security
Council resolution 2286 (2016), adopted on 3 May.
That resolution also applies to Afghanistan, where the
number of attacks on hospitals and health personnel is
unfortunately on the rise.

Achieving long-term stability will also depend on
respect for human rights, particularly women’s rights.
We welcome the efforts already carried out by the
Afghan Government to combat all forms of violence
towards women and girls. However, there is still a
considerable road to travel. In any event, women will
have to play a key role in all aspects of social, economic
and political life, as well as in the process of national
reconciliation, peacebuilding and transitional justice.
Belgium, for its part, seeks to partner with the Afghan
Government in its efforts to protect, empower and
integrate women, and contributes financially to the
UN-Women country-specific programme.
Another key issue for the future of the country is
the protection of children. The escalation of conflict
disproportionately affects children. While we recognize
the efforts of the Government in the framework of the
action plan aimed at curbing the use and recruitment of
children in the Afghan National Defnece and Security
Forces, we encourage ongoing cooperation with the
United Nations to fully implement the provisions of the
plan and its road map. In that connection, we call for
a general ban on child recruitment and for expanding
child protection groups in national police recruitment
centres throughout the country.
Finally, the rehabilitation and reintegration of
children affected by armed conflicts through suitable
programmes is another fundamental factor in ensuring
lasting peace and security. That element must not be
neglected, as it represents a preventive instrument
that will make it possible break the vicious cicrle of
violence. Moreover, we welcome all efforts towards
demining and the neutralization of explosive remnants
of war that, sadly, often claim children as their primary
20/29

Belgium reiterates its support for the people and
Government of Afghanistan. Today and tomorrow,
it will stand by their side in their efforts towards the
development and stabilization of their country.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): Let me start by
thanking our German colleagues for their excellent
work, as usual, on the draft resolution on the situation
in Afghanistan (A/71/L.13), which my delegation is
happy to co-sponsor.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union,
and in my national capacity I should like to make the
following points.
We welcome the successful conclusion of the
Brussels Conference in October. It renewed the
partnership for prosperity and peace between the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community, and endorsed the Afghan Government’s
ambitious reform agenda. Our collective commitment
to Afghanistan over the next four years will be
critical to ensuring that the country stays on the
path to political and economic stability. The unity of
Afghanistan’s leadership and broad consensus are
key to continuing the much-needed reforms, fighting
corruptioning, strengthening the protection of human
rights, reforming the electoral process, combating
trafficking and tackling the problems of displacement.
The latest report from the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the Afghanistan Opium Survey
2016 point to a reversal in efforts to tackle illicit drugs.
Since 2015, estimated opium production has increased
by 43 per cent. Given the impact on development,
health, and security, that is a serious cause for alarm
and a rallying call for more vigorous action.
As many colleagues have mentioned, building
Afghanistan’s future will require the inclusive
engagement of all actors, including women. Women are
increasingly involved in decision-making. We welcome
16-38971

17/11/2016

the progress achieved, including the reintroduction of
a 25 per cent quota for women in Parliament. Progress,
however, remains uneven, owing to limited institutional
capacity and the security situation in Talibancontrolled areas, as well as the lingering culture of
impunity. Women activists continue to be threatened,
targeted and killed. Physical punishment and even the
executions of women still occur, under the pretext of
so-called moral crimes. Further progress is obviously
needed in the implementation of the national strategy
on the elimination of violence against women and other
relevant legislation, as well as the national action plan
based on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
My delegation remains concerned about the
situation faced by journalists and other media workers
in Afghanistan. The country has made notable progress
in that area, yet it remains on the list of the 10 most
dangerous countries in the world to be a journalist.
Over the past year, the Taliban has assailed journalists
with threats, assaults, bombings and kidnappings. A
local journalist was beheaded. Freedom of expression
and information are integral parts of the democracy
that Afghanistan is building with such great sacrifice.
We encourage the Afghan authorities to strengthen
their efforts to investigate attacks against journalists
and related media workers and bring the perpetrators
to justice.
My delegation welcomes the peace agreement
signed by the Afghan Government and the High Peace
Council with Hezb-i Islami Gulbuddin on 26 September
and supports its efforts to engage with all armed groups
without preconditions. At the same time, as other
delegations have noted, the security situation in the
country continues to be worrying. Last year saw 11,000
civilian casualties, and the number is expected to be
higher this year. One in every four victims was a child.
In the first eight months of 2016 alone, Afghan forces
saw more than 5,500 of their own killed. Only recently,
within the span of a few weeks the Taliban attacked
the German Consulate in Mazar-e-Sharif, killing at
least 4 and wounding 120; the largest United States
military base in Afghanistan was attacked; a magnetic
sticky bomb exploded under a vehicle in Kabul near
the Ministry of Higher Education; and a suicide bomber
struck a Government vehicle in an attack claimed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Our thoughts
go out to all those who were affected by those and other
attacks, and we express our condolences for the loss
of life.

A/71/PV.47

The international community’s engagement in
assisting and supporting Afghanistan’s efforts to provide
security for its people could not be more important at
this stage. We welcome the agreement signed at the
NATO Summit in Warsaw to extend the presence of the
Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan beyond 2016.
Together with its allies, Lithuania continues to
assist Afghanistan in producing professionally trained
and equipped defence and security forces. This year,
we contributed $500,000 to the Afghanistan National
Army Trust Fund and intend to continue our support
to the Afghan National Army. Our military staff
is providing assistance within the framework of
the Resolute Support Mission in Kabul and Herat.
Lithuania welcomes the European Union’s commitment
to supporting civilian policing in Afghanistan beyond
the completion of the European Union Police Mission
in Afghanistan in 2016.
A stable, peaceful, and prosperous Afghanistan is
a shared priority and interest. Lithuania stands ready to
continue supporting the efforts of the Afghan people to
achieve that goal.
Mrs. Kanchaveli (Georgia): Georgia aligns itself
with the statement made on behalf of the European
Union earlier on today’s topic, and I would like to
take this opportunity to make a few remarks in my
national capacity.
At the outset, allow me to thank the other delegations
and the delegation of Germany for once again facilitating
negotiations on the draft resolution on the situation in
Afghanistan for this year (A/71/L.13). As one of the
sponsors of the draft resolution, Georgia looks forward
to its adoption by consensus at this meeting.
Georgia is privileged to be among those countries
that help Afghanistan rebuild the war-torn and
violence-plagued country. We remain committed to the
development of Afghanistan as a sovereign, democratic,
secure and stable State. In that context, we commend
the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan aimed at
establishing a secure and prosperous country that the
Afghan people highly deserve and is in the interest of
all of us. The struggle of that brave nation for peace,
stability and unity can leave no one indifferent. It is
with particular pride that Georgia, despite its small size
and the challenges to its own sovereignty and territorial
integrity, has contributed for more than a decade to
strengthening regional security through bilateral and
multilateral cooperation.

16-3897121/29

A/71/PV.47

17/11/2016

In recent years, Georgian soldiers have been a part
of international forces and have shown outstanding
courage, professionalism and dedication, which is
a clear demonstration of our nation’s commitment to
enhancing peace and stability in the region. We are
particularly glad to learn that during the recent attack
on the German Consulate General in Mazar-e-Sharif,
the attackers were successfully fought off by the
international security forces, with the Georgian
contingent at the forefront. Their professionalism and
courage saved many lives.

To conclude, let me reiterate that, in that spirit of
partnership and focusing on supporting peace, justice
and development, Georgia will continue to stand by
Afghanistan and the Afghan people in the years to come.

Georgia joined the counter-terrorist coalition
immediately after the horrendous 9/11 attacks,
providing its airspace and airports for the transit of
coalition forces and personnel to Afghanistan, and was
an integral part of the northern distribution network. In
2004, Georgia upgraded its engagement by committing
troops and becoming, within several years, the largest
non-NATO troop-contributor to the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and second-largest
per capita troop-contributor after the United States.
Even after completion of the ISAF mission in 2014,
Georgia continues to provide a sizable contribution
to the Resolute Support Mission. Moreover, Georgia
is determined to continue its support to international
efforts in Afghanistan beyond 2016. Georgia stands
ready to offer the Afghan side training and exercise
opportunities at Georgian military training centres
and to share its experience in defence transformation
and reforms.

The Brussels Conference on Afghanistan was
a significant opportunity to renew the partnership
between Afghanistan and the international community,
which is indispensable to assuring future development,
self-sustaining growth and prosperity for the country,
and in particular the people of Afghanistan. We are
all aware of how ambitious that goal is, but the stakes
are high and Afghanistan cannot afford to fail on the
road to reform. To that end, the determination and
effectiveness of the National Unity Government’s
actions are crucial. In the first two years of its term, the
Government has attained various encouraging results,
but it is absolutely necessary for further concrete steps
to be taken in that direction. The cohesiveness of its
leaders and the sense of responsibility of all Afghan
institutions in that regard are not an option but rather an
unavoidable condition.

Besides contributing troops, Georgia is committed
to continuing its fincancial support for the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces. Georgia has
already transferred $1 million to the fund supporting
the Forces and will allocate the last tranche of $500,000
in the fiscal year 2017, thereby fulfilling its pledge.
In July, Georgia also made a new pledge to continue
its financial contribution in support of Afghanistan’s
development from 2018 through 2020.
The road to peace and stability is not an easy one
to follow. Bearing in mind all the outstanding efforts
and sacrifices that have been made in Afghanistan, we
are confident that, with the continued determination of
the Afghan Government, the international community
should continue building on the gains and further
advancing the hard-won progress achieved thus far in
Afghanistan and tackle the challenges that remain.
22/29

Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, allow me to
thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for
his statement and the German delegation for facilitating
negotiations on draft resolution A/71/L.13 in a very
comprehensive manner. Italy is a sponsor of the draft
resolution and aligns itself with the statement made by
the Permanent Observer of the European Union.

The relationship of solidarity between the donor
community and Afghanistan, renewed in Brussels
and prior to that in Tokyo and London, is built on
that assumption. In other words, the framework of
mutual accountability must be fully respected in order
to declare the Afghan Government’s ambitious reform
and development programmes a success. Therefore,
we must make every effort to fight corruption, which
represents a formidable obstacle on the road to
development and engenders a dangerous public distrust
toward national institutions. Electoral reform must
be completed and economic governance made more
efficient. And a key priority is to improve the status
of Afghan women by promoting their rights and their
empowerment in every sector and at every level of
society. We appreciate that the Afghan Government
has expressed its strong commitment to those goals,
and in its actions it can continue to count on our full
support. Italy recently renewed its tangible support at
the Brussels Conference.
16-38971

17/11/2016

Security conditions are a decisive factor in meeting
the challenge of preserving and expanding the progress
achieved in the past 15 years in Afghanistan. Today
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
are deeply engaged in fighting the actions of hostile
terrorist insurgent groups, which are creating growing
numbers of civilian victims and internally displaced
persons. To help meet that difficult challenge, Italy
extends practical support to the Afghan Government’s
efforts to achieve the security and stability of the
country. At the Warsaw NATO Summit, we reaffirmed,
together with our NATO partners, our commitment to
assisting the Afghan Defence and Security Forces to
improve their capacities through our role as framework
nation in the context of the Resolute Support Mission.
To ensure a lasting peace in Afghanistan, the quest
for national reconciliation still remains the primary
political objective.
The start of a possible peace process would
certainly benefit from a cooperation and convergence
framework among those who can play a positive role
in achieving that goal. We therefore need to renew
diplomatic efforts so that, in particular, a constructive
collaboration among the main regional stakeholders
can significantly facilitate the conditions for a peace
process and trigger a virtuous cycle of stability and
development for the benefit of Afghanistan and of the
region as a whole.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Egypt commends the adoption by consensus of
the annual draft resolution entitled “The situation in
Afghanistan” (A/71/L.13), which is very important. As
always, we affirm the importance of the central role
played by the General Assembly and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in supporting
Afghanistan as it moves towards a brighter and more
prosperous future.
Central Asia and the Middle East have concomitant
interests and a common need for stability. Egypt has
always supported the Afghan Government in its fight
against terrorism and its efforts to establish sovereignty
across all its territory. We also support the Afghan
authorities in their political and social endeavours to
establish security across their territory and to achieve
development and prosperity for all the Afghan people.
Drug-trafficking
unquestionably
threatens
stability and security in Afghanistan and throughout
Central Asia. There is therefore a need for the close

A/71/PV.47

coordination of efforts at the regional and international
levels to combat drug trafficking, including by the
Afghan authorities Those efforts are an essential
part of the fight against terrorism, because drugtrafficking is one of the main sources of financing for
terrorist groups and armed militias. In that context,
we commend the efforts of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and relevant regional bodies to
support Afghanistan in resolving that problem, which
is thwarting efforts to achieve peace and development
in Central Asia as a whole.
The international community is acutely aware
of the growing threat that hovers over Afghanistan
as a result of the presence in that country of Da’esh,
a terrorist group that has extended its tentacles to the
eastern part of the country. In the context of national
and international counter-terrorism strategies, the
fight must be waged against that phenomenon and that
presence wherever they are found. Although it enjoys
no direct benefit in doing so, Egypt is ready and willing
to contribute to the specialized training of the Afghan
army and police force to help establish peace and
stability across Afghanistan by providing assistance
to the National Security Forces as they fight terrorist
groups. We hope that we will be able to establish
tripartite cooperation programmes under which donors
will provide the necessary financing to cover the costs
of the specialized security training to which I have
just referred.
Egypt welcomes the regional initiatives being
spearheaded in that field, especially the decisions
taken in the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process and the
regional endeavours and measures of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization. We also commend the
positive outcome of the ministerial-level Conference
on Afghanistan held last month in Brussels, whose
aim was and is to strengthen cooperation in order to
face up to the security threat to that strategic part of
the world. We emphasize that the interests of Central
Asia and the Middle East are inextricably linked, and
that we are anxious to continue supporting Afghanistan
in the quest for sustained security and stability in the
two regions. We will continue to support the Afghan
Government’s work.
Finally, Egypt, which closely follows security and
political developments in Afghanistan, is profoundly
convinced that it must assist the process of capacitybuilding in a country that has suffered so much for
decades. We want to support the Afghan Government

16-3897123/29

A/71/PV.47

as it addresses the difficult challenges of establishing
peace, stability, security and sustainable development
across the country.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Bangladesh
appreciates the sustained efforts being made to achieve
sustainable peace and development in Afghanistan,
which deserve the consistent and meaningful support
of the international community. It welcomes the
undertakings stipulated in the Afghan National Peace
and Development Framework and the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework for
2018-2020, as agreed at the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan held last month. We believe that those
forward-looking policy documents could help foster
further international partnership towards durable peace
and prosperity in Afghanistan.
My delegation welcomes the statement delivered
by the Ambassador and Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan this morning, in which he reaffirmed
his Government’s commitment to working towards an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and development
process, with a focus on national security, democratic
institution-building and sustainable development.
Bangladesh commends the Afghan National Unity
Government for its robust commitment to taking forward
its political reform agenda, including through electoral
reform, the fight against corruption, the promotion of
human rights and the protection of civilians.
Bangladesh shares the concerns over the
sustained threats posed by terrorists and violent
extremists, which take various forms. It is critical
that international terrorist groups and foreign terrorist
fighters be denied opportunities to gain footholds in
Afghanistan and thereby exert their influence across
the neighbourhood. We encourage the various regional
and plurilateral initiatives, including the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group, to work towards a common
agenda to effectively address the prevailing and
emerging threats of terrorism and violent extremism
in Afghanistan. We reiterate the crucial importance of
combating transnational organized crime, particularly
trafficking in illicit drugs, through enhancing regional
cooperation in surveillance, intelligence, investigation
and prosecution.
Bangladesh takes note of the progress made in
enhancing the recruitment, competence and morale of
the Afghan National Security Forces and appreciates
their commitment to discharging their responsibilities
24/29

17/11/2016

in the face of daunting challenges. We welcome the
multisectoral contributions of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan to strengthening the
security, law enforcement and judicial sectors. We also
welcome the commitments made at the NATO Warsaw
Summit towards further training, equipping, financing
and improvement of the operational capacity of the
Afghan Security Forces. We underscore the importance
of their being realized .
We remain concerned over the disproportionate
threats to women and children during armed conflicts
and violence, including by terrorists. We urge
the international community to extend support to
Afghanistan to address the threats posed by improvised
explosive devices and explosive remnants of war.
Under the guidance of Prime Minister Sheikh
Hasina, Bangladesh continues to attach the highest
priority to further widening and deepening relations
with our neighbours in the South Asian region. We
believe Afghanistan’s strategic potential to serve as a
regional connectivity hub should be leveraged with the
support of all regional countries. That can help revive
the historic linkages across our territories and unlock
further development opportunities for the 2 billion
people of South Asia.
Bangladesh considers itself to be a potential
development partner of Afghanistan and remains
willing to share its own development experiences.
We stand ready to assist Afghanistan in areas such
as women’s empowerment, non-formal education,
community health care, water and sanitation, human
resources development, judicial system reforms and
social and humanitarian programmes. Bangladesh
is also willing to develop customized training and
capacity-building programmes for relevant Afghan
professionals and experts in areas such as banking
and financial sector reform, disaster management,
agricultural extension and youth development, with a
focus on technical and vocational education. We have
offered to provide training to Afghan male and female
police personnel, including on peacekeeping. Our
two countries are currently working towards further
developing and evolving institutional arrangements
such as foreign office consultation, trade agreements,
cultural exchanges, visa facilitation and air services
agreements. Bangladesh offers some scholarships to
Afghan students in the field of medicine and other
areas of higher studies.
16-38971

17/11/2016

Building
Resources
across
Communities
(BRAC), the largest non-governmental organization
in Bangladesh, has been working in Afghanistan for
several years now and has contributed to development
efforts there. Its staff are working in all 34 provinces of
Afghanistan, with 389 offices reaching out to millions
of Afghan people. BRAC is also imparting training
to Afghan civil servants in various development
sectors, and our Government actively supports
BRAC’s contribution to Afghan development and
reconstruction efforts.
Bangladesh thanks the German delegation for
facilitating the work on draft resolution on the situation
in Afghanistan (A/71/L.13), and to reiterate our support
for it.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
wish to begin by thanking Germany for steering the
negotiations on draft resolution A/71/L.13.
As has been the case for several years, terrorist
groups have continued their subversive and criminal
activities in Afghanistan throughout the past year.
My people and Government strongly condemn the
perpetrators of the barbaric atrocities that culminated
in the bombings of peaceful demonstrations and
religious gatherings on 23 July and in mid-October this
year and led to hundreds of civilian deaths and injuries.
In committing these crimes, the terrorist groups, led by
the Taliban, Al-Qaida, Da’esh and their affiliates, are
doing everything in their power to prevent the country
from returning to normal and continuing on the path of
peace and development.
My Government continues to reiterate its support
for any Afghan-led peace process, acknowledges peace
talks between the Afghan Government and the Taliban
and deplores the continuing uncertainty in this regard.
At the same time, we condemn any cooperation with
the Taliban, as we believe that it will encourage them
and other terrorist groups in their odious behaviour
and will prove to be counterproductive to thr efforts to
establish peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Iran has warned and continues to warn about the
emergence of Da’esh and its affiliates in Afghanistan.
On 23 July, we witnessed the deadliest single incident
recorded by the United Nations in Afghanistan since
2001 — a terrorist attack against a demonstration by
ethnic Hazaras, for which the so-called Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province (ISIL-KP)
claimed responsibility. ISIL-KP and a spectrum of

A/71/PV.47

other terrorist and extremist groups, such as the Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan in the north and the East
Turkestan Islamic Movement, appear as an emerging
security threat in Afghanistan.
We support the Afghan National Unity Government,
as it is at the forefront of the fight against terrorism
and is undertaking efforts to stabilize the situation
in the country and to keep the people united in this
fight. It is imperative that the international community
remain steadfast in its support of the Afghan Unity
Government, as this continues to be critical if we wish
to bring the fight against terrorism and extremism to a
successful conclusion and address security, economic
and political challenges.
Today, as in the past, strengthening our regional
cooperation with Afghanistan is a priority for my
Government as a major pathway towards consolidating
peace and economic stability in the region. Over the
past decade, Iran has spent many millions of dollars
and engaged experts to help Afghanistan with the
completion of hundreds of projects, ranging from
infrastructure to training and capacity-building in
human resources, especially through offering hundreds
of scholarships each year.
Following the trilateral agreement among Iran,
Afghanistan and India to develop the Iranian port
of Chabahar, relevant coordination meetings at the
level of the governors of the border provinces were
held on 25 and 26 July to discuss security and new
trade opportunities involving the port. The Afghan
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs visited Tehran on
3 August for discussions on trade, infrastructure, and
the presence of Afghan nationals in Iran. The Afghan
National Security Adviser visited Iran on 6 and 7 August
to discuss border security and countering violent
extremism. The fifth Afghanistan-Iran Joint Economic
Commission was held on 10 August in Tehran. Iran
and Afghanistan are also committed to increasing their
transport connectivity, with special emphasis on the
Khaf-Herat Railway, a 78-mile railway project in Farah
and a second bridge over the Hirmand River.
Narcotic drugs continue to be a real threat to this
region and many other parts of the globe. It is a very
serious issue for my Government and Iranian society,
as it is for many other Governments and societies. We
therefore believe that it should be taken very seriously
by the international community and addressed in a
comprehensive manner. Any increase in narcotics is a

16-3897125/29

A/71/PV.47

17/11/2016

reflection of prevailing insecurity and poverty. Strong
support and commitment from international donors,
Afghan authorities and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime are essential to deterring the menace
of narcotics as a social health challenge and, more
important, as a major source of income for extremist
and terrorist groups.

on Afghanistan (A/71/L.13). As a sponsor of the
draft resolution, Kazakhstan reiterates its unfailing
commitment to enhancing peace, security and
development in Afghanistan. We believe that this
in turn will strengthen stability in the region, of
which Afghanistan forms an integral and extremely
important part.

Iran continues to participate in the work of
the Tripartite Commission in order to plan for the
voluntary, safe, dignified and gradual repatriation of
Afghan refugees. We welcome any effort to help to
overcome the current obstacles, including the main
reintegration challenges faced by returnees, and to
formulate a comprehensive voluntary repatriation and
reintegration strategy. Success in voluntary repatriation
depends first and foremost on fulfilling the reasonable
needs of repatriated refugees in Afghanistan, and
for that purpose it is essential to mobilize additional
international support.

My delegation acknowledges the important role of
the United Nations and of regional and international
stakeholders in contributing international assistance
to Afghanistan. My delegation therefore commends
the activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as well as of regional
organizations, which are aimed at achieving economic
stability, peaceful development, the rule of law and
good governance in Afghanistan.

Meanwhile, we continue to support hundreds of
thousands of Afghan refugees in Iran and to provide
them with access to education and medical services.
Last year, we enrolled 386,000 Afghan students in our
schools and universities, regardless of their legal status.
In the fields of health care and medical services, we
continue to provide services to hundreds of thousands
of refugees each year. In some areas, the number of
Afghan refugees receiving those services exceeds the
number of Iranians.
Iran continues to fully support the promotion of
security, stability and comprehensive and sustainable
development in Afghanistan, since we believe that a
peaceful and secure Afghanistan will greatly contribute
to the security of our borders and our neighbourhood.
We support the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the various United Nations
agencies in their efforts to provide development and
reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through a
genuine, committed and sustained partnership of the
United Nations with Afghanistan, as set forth in the
final report of the Tripartite Review Commission on the
United Nations in Afghanistan. We need to utilize the
UNAMA mandate and its good offices to strengthen
national institutions and capacities in priority areas,as
requested by the Government.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): First of all, we
express our gratitude to the delegation of Germany
for facilitating the negotiations on the draft resolution
26/29

The Government of Kazakhstan has always
contributed to peace, reconstruction and capacitybuilding in Afghanistan. It has pledged to increase its
cooperation with other actors and with the Government
of the country in the work of State-building, within
the framework of political, economic and social
advancement. We therefore support the Afghanistan
National Peace and Development Framework and
the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework, which strive to achieve structural reform
and to put in place an accountable and effective
Government, as agreed at the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan last month. We are deeply convinced that
Afghanistan’s high potential, in terms of both its human
capital and its natural resources, will transform the State
into a key country of the region. We therefore call on
the global community to support every effort to ensure
its stability, so that it will be able to attract foreign
investment and thereby boost the Afghan economy.
The threats posed by extremist groups in the
region compel us to be proactive in supporting the
Afghan Government and the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces. We believe that the fight against
drug trafficking, which is a key source for financing
terrorism, can be effective not only through enhanced
cooperation among our law enforcement agencies, but
also by providing market incentives for cultivating
agricultural products other than the opium poppy
in Afghanistan. We support the work of the Central
Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre
in combating the illicit trafficking of narcotic drugs,
psychotropic substances and their precursors, and call
upon Member States to cooperate closely in that regard.
16-38971

17/11/2016

Kazakhstan was among the first supporters of
the Northern Distribution Network’s New Silk Road
initiative and the Silk Road Economic Belt, which are
being implemented within the framework of the Asian
Development Bank’s Central Asia Regional Economic
Cooperation Programme. We are convinced that they
will provide greater access to Afghanistan for foreign
investors and will create favourable external conditions
for Afghanistan’s economic growth.
In that regard, we welcome the continued
commitment of the international community to
supporting the stability and development of Afghanistan
and further improving relations and interaction
between Afghanistan and its neighbours. We support
the framework of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process
on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure
and Stable Afghanistan. We are convinced that closer
cooperation of regional organizations will contribute to
the peace and security and development of Afghanistan.
In cooperation with Japan and the United Nations
Development Programme, in August 2016 we started
to provide policy support and capacity development for
gender equality in Afghanistan. On a bilateral level,
we provide humanitarian aid and technical assistance
to Afghanistan, as well as offering an extensive
scholarship programme for thousands of Afghan
students to study medicine, science, engineering and
public administration at universities in Kazakhstan.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Kazakhstan’s
consistent support for Afghanistan in its determination
to follow a path of stability, security and sustainable
economic development.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the President for having convened
this plenary meeting. We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement and the
delegation of Germany for facilitating the negotiations
on the draft resolution concerning the situation in
Afghanistan (A/71/L.13), which Azerbaijan is pleased
to co-sponsor.
Azerbaijan commends the efforts of the
National Unity Government of Afghanistan towards
implementing political, economic and social reforms
and addressing complex security challenges facing the
country. It is important to maintain the progress attained
so far, and that requires strong commitment on the part
of both Afghanistan and its international partners.

A/71/PV.47

Azerbaijan will continue to support the
stabilization, peaceful reconstruction and development
of Afghanistan through bilateral cooperation and the
relevant multilateral international and regional formats.
Azerbaijan has participated in the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) almost from its beginning
and has steadily increased its military contribution to
ISAF. Our efforts also include delivering assistance to
Afghanistan in the military, security, mine-action, lawenforcement and education spheres, among others, as
well as continuing to make a contribution to the Resolute
Support Mission by providing troops, multimodal
transport, transit, training and financial aid.
On 7 September, the President of Azerbaijan
approved an agreement between the Governments of
Azerbaijan and Afghanistan on military assistance.
Azerbaijan participates in relevant international and
regional political initiatives aimed at promoting peace
and stability in Afghanistan, including the Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process. We also support Afghanistan’s
efforts at integrating into the regional and global
economy and at reviving trade with its neighbours and
beyond through increased regional connectivity.
Over the years, Azerbaijan has fostered regional
cooperation and successfully developed transregional
infrastructure with multimodal capabilities along the
East-West and North-South axes. The Baku International
Sea Trade Port and the Baku-Tbilisi-Kars railroad, now
near completion — projects which the Central Asian
countries are involved in — will contribute to further
developing transport and transit capacities for use by
Afghanistan and other countries in the region.
The well-being and prosperity of Afghanistan,
economic growth and regional cooperation are
interlinked and dependent on the security situation in
the country and the region. We must demonstrate our
resolve and strong will to continue jointly addressing
the security challenges which the country continues to
face, and to enhance regional cooperation to that end.
Afghanistan’s strengthened dialogue and cooperation
with its immediate neighbours and other regional
partners on a wide range of issues — including peace and
reconciliation, regional security, economic development
and humanitarian assistance — are essential for the
peaceful and stable future of the country and the region.
Continued regional and international commitment and
assistance to Afghanistan are essential for fulfilling
its aspiration to achieve long-term peace, stability
and prosperity.

16-3897127/29

A/71/PV.47

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Azerbaijan’s
support for Afghanistan’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unity. We wish the Government of
Afghanistan every success in its efforts to achieve a
unified, peaceful and prosperous future for the country.
Mr. Panayotov (Bulgaria): Allow me to begin by
expressing my gratitude to the President for convening
this important annual debate on the situation in
Afghanistan. I wish to the Permanent Mission of
Germany for all its efforts, culminating in the consensus
draft resolution on the situation in Afghanistan
(A/71/L.13), which Bulgaria has co-sponsored. I also
thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Saikal, and his team for playing an active
role in achieving consensus on the resolution.
Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union and its
member States.
We reiterate the emphasis placed on the two
important international conferences that took place
in 2016: the NATO Warsaw Summit in July, and the
Brussels Conference on Afghanistan in October.
Both conferences reconfirmed our commitment to
Afghanistan beyond 2016, be it military, political or
through development assistance.
The Warsaw Summit sent a clear message of
continuity on the part of the allies and the NATO
operational partners regarding their support for longterm security and stability in Afghanistan. Bulgaria
remains committed to NATO efforts in Afghanistan,
including through participation in the Resolute Support
Mission beyond 2016 at current troop levels and
locations, as well as through financial contributions
to the Afghanistan National Army Trust Fund for the
period 2018-2020.
The Brussels Conference provided another valuable
opportunity to reaffirm the commitments of the Afghan
Government to reform and stabilization and endorsed
the National Peace and Development Framework. In
Brussels, we reconfirmed our political and financial
support for Afghan reconstruction and sustainable
development until 2020, at or near current levels,
depending on the pace of reforms in Afghanistan and in
compliance with the principle of mutual accountability.
Preserving unity within the Afghan Government will
be of crucial importance for the political stability of the
country and for delivering on the commitments made
in Brussels.
28/29

17/11/2016

The peace and reconciliation process remains a
major prerequisite for building a secure and stable
Afghanistan. We welcome the agreement between
the Afghan authorities and Hezb-i Islami, and we
hope it can serve as a stimulus for other groups to
engage in constructive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace talks. Regional cooperation is also essential,
since no sustainable progress can be achieved in the
reconstruction and reform process unless Afghanistan
and the regional actors engage in a credible manner
to solve the existing problems and develop mutually
beneficial links.
Bulgaria is considering enhancing its engagement
in initiatives aimed at countering the root causes of
conflicts and migration from Afghanistan. We believe
that that challenge should be addressed by stepping
up cooperation on the control and management of
migrant flows. Bulgaria attaches great importance to
the Joint Way Forward on migration issues between
the European Union and Afghanistan — an important
political document that will pave the way for finding a
solution to the migration problem.
Bulgaria has been a long-standing partner of
Afghanistan, having contributed significantly in the
fields of security, justice and development. Within
the framework of Bulgaria’s official development
assistance, we continue supporting Afghanistan as one
of our main partner countries, with a view to increasing
Afghanistan’s administrative capacity, combating drug
trafficking by training Afghan police officers, and
protecting the rights of women and children. These
are crucial elements for the sustainable socioeconomic
development of Afghanistan. At the Brussels Conference
on Afghanistan, Bulgaria announced that it was
considering new bilateral projects and commitments
beyond 2016. We will continue to support Afghanistan
and its people in that same spirit of partnership.
The Acting President:(spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on the issue.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/71/L.13, entitled “The situation
in Afghanistan”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
16-38971

17/11/2016

A/71/L.13, and in addition to those delegations listed
in that document, the following countries have also
become sponsors: Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican Republic,
Egypt, Finland, France, Greece, Indonesia, Israel, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, the Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, New Zealand, Pakistan, the
Republic of Korea, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab
Emirates and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.

A/71/PV.47

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/71/L.13. May I take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to adopt it?
Draft resolution A/70/L.13 was adopted (resolution
71/9).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 36?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

16-3897129/29
