UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional agenda (SIAgenda/2559) I , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , *. . . . .
Adoption of the agenda.. , . , . , . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (S/16776) , . . . . , . , . , . . , , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SIPV .2559

NOTE
Symbols.:& Unite&N&ohs
:documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mentiok of such a symbol indic’ates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in
quarterly Suppk~~ents of the Official Records of tlze Sccur’ity Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Secur’ify Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2559th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 12 October 1984, at 12.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Lbandre BASSOLE

(Burkina Faso).

and document S/16779, containing the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s consultations.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, France, India, Malta,
Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Zimbabwe.

3. It is my understanding that the Council is prepared
to take a vote on the draft resolution before it. If I hear
no objection, I shall now put the draft resolution to the
vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2559)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/16776)
Tlze meeting

In JavoLIr: Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, France,
India, Malta, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru,
United Kingdom ofGreat Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Zimbabwe.

of the agenda

Against: None.
Abstaining: Ukrainian
Union of Soviet Socialist

was called to order at 12.50 p.m.

Adoption

Soviet Socialist
Republics.

Republic,

of the agenda
The draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions [resolution 555 (1984)I.

The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (S/16776)

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Frenchl:
I call on the representative of Lebanon.
5.

Mr. TURK (Lebanon) [interpretation from Arame at the outset, Sir, to extend my congratulations to you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of October.
We are confident that your wide experience and ability are the best guarantee of the success of our proceedings.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter from the representative of Lebanon in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council.
At
anon)

bic]: Allow

6. I wish also to thank and express appreciation to
your predecessor, the representative of Zimbabwe,
for the competent and tactful way he guided the proceedings of the Council throughout the month of September.

the invitation of the President, Mr. Turk (Lebtook a place at the Council table.

7. Now that the Council has adopted the draft resolution on the extension for six months of the mandate of
UNIFIL,
I am happy to express to you, Mr. President,
and the members of the Council thanks and gratitude
for this support and for the understanding shown of the
overall situation in southern Lebanon and the urgent
need for the continued presence of UNIFIL.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
Members of the Council have before them the report of
the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
for the period from
10 April to 9 October 1984 [S/16776]. Members of the
Council also have before them document S/16772, containing the text of a letter dated 8 October 1984 from the
representative of Lebanon to the Secretary-General,

8. The report of the Secretary-General
indicates a
deep understanding of the situation and reflects realism
1

the first statement made by the Soviet delegation this
month, we wish first and foremost to express our profound satisfaction that the presidential Chair in the
Council is being occupied by the representative of
Burkina Faso, a country for which we have a great
feeling of genuine friendship and sympathy. The fact
that a representative of an African State is at present
leading two of the most important organs of the United
Nations, the Security Council and the General Assembly, is eloquent testimony to the growing role of the
African continent in the international arena. We are
persuaded, Mr. President, that under your skilful guidance the Council will be able to tackle successfully the
tasks before it.

and a genuine desire to tackle it. I wish to express to him
and to his assistants our thanks and gratitude. We reaffirm that we shall continue to work and co-operate with
the Secretariat, as well as with the Council, to contribute to the success of the functions entrusted to
UNIFIL.
9. We have carefully studied the observations in the
report. We wish to associate ourselves with the Secretary-General’s realistic depiction of the situation, his
forecast of expected developments, and his decision
concerning the measures that these developments may
make necessary. We see in the report and in the Secretary-General’s observations encouraging indications
that, if these measures are imposed and bring about the
complete withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanon’s
territory and proper security arrangements at the southern borders of Lebanon, a revision will be necessary of
the functions and task of UNIFIL and the number of its
troops, the extension of its area of deployment,
and
increased effectiveness. It will then be in a position to
contribute, together with the Lebanese army and the
internal security forces, to the extension of the authority of the State to the internationally recognized boundaries, so that the south may become a zone of peace
and security.
10. I must refer here to the fact that this new contribution of UNIFIL
will be necessary, but temporary, in the
period after the proposed Israeli withdrawal, until the
legitimate Lebanese forces can assume full and definitive responsibility for security.

15. I should like to take this opportunity to pay a
tribute to your predecessor, the representative of Zimbabwe, Mr. Mashingaidze, for the very able way in
which he conducted the work of the Council during the
month of September.
16. In view of the request of the Lebanese Government for the extension of the mandate of UNIFIL,
the
Soviet delegation has seen fit not to object to an extension. The Soviet delegation abstained for reasons which
have frequently been explained. At the same time, we
cannot fail to emphasize our growing concern at the
abnormal situation that exists, in that the Council is
obliged systematically
to extend the mandate of this
Force while conditions exist that prevent it from performing the functions entrusted to it. This concern is
shared by many other members of the Council, and by
States which have provided their own contingents to
UNIFIL.
It is also reflected in the report of the Secretary-General, which states: “I also feel obliged to state
that the existence of UNIFIL
should not be taken for
granted indefinitely”
[S/16776, par’a. 271.

11. I cannot end my statement without again thanking
and commending UNIFIL.
I commend its leadership,
its troops and its logistic assistance and express gratitude to the countries from which its men come and to all
the States that have contributed and will contribute to
the carrying out of the task of the United Nations in
Lebanon.
12. The objectives of the Lebanese State, headed by
President Amin Gemayel, are crystal clear. They were
defined by Mr. Rashid Karame, head of Government
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lebanon, in his
statement to the General Assembly.’ Those objectives
stem from the natural right of Lebanon to be the master
of its own territory and from its independent will and
decision to extend the authority of its State over every
inch of its territory. They also stem from the right of
the people of Lebanon to enjoy peace, security and a
decent, tranquil life, so that it may resume its rightful
role, make its creative contribution
and fulfil its mission, which goes back to time immemorial.

17. The reason for this dangerous and abnormal situation in Lebanon, which, in addition to everything else,
is making it impossible for UNIFIL to perform its task
as laid down in the relevant resolutions and decisions of
the Council, is well known. It is the continued illegal
occupation by Israel of southern Lebanon, which was
seized by Tel Aviv during the aggression perpetrated in
June of 1982. For two years now the notorious “Peace
for Galilee” has meant daily suffering and privation for
the populations of the occupied areas, whether they be
Lebanese or Palestinian refugees.
18. Just over a month ago the Council was considering
the question of the situation in southern Lebanon, and
in their statements the representatives of Lebanon and
of a number of other delegations painted a very graphic
picture of the systematic terror and violence which is
practised by the occupying Israeli forces against the
civilian population. It is true that at that time, the Council once again proved unable to take a decision which
would at least have called the occupiers to task and
that, as we are all aware, was because of yet another
veto by the strategic ally and patron of Israel, the
United States. Naturally, there was a kind of logic
underlying that veto. After all, Washington has done

13. I need not emphasize the fact that Lebanon, when
its sovereignty has been upheld, its strength restored
and the unity of its territory, institutions
and peoples preserved, will not be the only beneficiary. The
achievement of those goals will contribute also to
peace and stability in the region and perhaps throughout the world.
14. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
Republics) [interpretation

(Union of Soviet Socialist
,frwn Russian]:
Since this is
2

c
everything possible to provide political camouflage for
its protege from the very outset of the Israeli adventure
in Lebanon, even here in the Council. Was it not, after
all, the United States that, together with Israel, tried to
impose upon Lebanon a one-sided agreement, which
was quite properly rejected by the Lebanese people? It
is also well known who was shooting up Lebanese soil
at close range using high-calibre weapons in an attempt
to dictate a peace of capitulation, while at the same time
creating a further military-training
post in the Middle
East. Finally, we cannot fail to mention the fact that,
figuratively
speaking, the signatures of the United
States representative to resolutions 508 (1982) and 509
(1982), which were adopted unanimously by the Council, were hardly dry before they were declared obsolete
and inappropriate.

23. We believe that it is right that, as the SecretaryGeneral suggests, the machinery
of the United
Nations should be made available to the parties to
facilitate the reaching of agreements and to provide the
facilities for the necessary discussions if they so desire.
24. We interpret the resolution which the Council has
just adopted as endorsing further action by the Secretary-General on these lines. Like him, we believe that
the present opportunity must not be missed and that,
if it were, the consequences to peace could be very
serious.
25. We are grateful to those States which have provided troops for UNIFIL.
We hope that the appeal in
paragraph 28 of the Secretary-General’s
report to all
Member States to pay their assessments without delay
will be heeded. We note with pleasure that the representative of the Soviet Union has just said that the
Soviet Union wilt do everything in its power to help.

19. We are saying this not simply for the sake of
recalling the past but rather because the past is directly
relevant to .the present, since it sheds a very clear light
on the reasons why UNIFIL has so far not been able to
carry out its mandate. It is quite obvious that the implementation
of resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982),
and above all the requirement for the withdrawal of
Israeli forces forthwith and unconditionally
from all
Lebanese territory, are the most important prerequisites for the settlement of the situation in Lebanon.
These resolutions have never been abrogated. They
should be implemented, thereby making it possible for
the Force to carry out the tasks it has been given,

26. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands): May I at the
outset, Sir, extend my warm congratulations to you on
assuming the presidency ofthe Council for the month of
October. Your great diplomatic skills are well known to
all to us.
27. My delegation also wants to thank the representative of Zimbabwe for the excellent way in which he
conducted the work of the Council during the month of
September.

20. In conclusion, the Soviet delegation would like to
emphasize that the normalization
of the situation in
Lebanon is but one aspect of the broader task of establishing lasting peace in the Middle East. As the head of
the Soviet State, Mr. Chernenko, said in a statement on
9 October this year:

28. It is now the eighth time since Israel’s invasion
of Lebanon that the Council has been called upon to
extend the mandate of UNIFIL
for a further limited
period in circumstances which do not conform to the
original mandate as spelt out in resolutions 425 (1978)
and 426 (1978), or to the intentions of later Council
resolutions on the withdrawal of Israeli forces and the
restoration of the authority of the Lebanese Government in southern Lebanon.

“Peace will be brought to the peoples of the Middle
East not by intrigues and separate deals behind their
backs but by a comprehensive, just settlement. The
efforts of the Soviet Union are aimed precisely at the
achievement of just such a settlement. The Soviet
Union will continue to do everything in its power to
bring about that end.”
-.
21. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom): My deiegation is indeed glad to be sitting again under your
presidency, Sir. We have practical experience of the
efficient and brisk way in which you conduct the affairs
of the Council. We have always enjoyed also sitting
under the presidency of your predecessor, whose wit
and incisiveness are well known to all members of the
Council. We congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency.

29. As indicated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, however, in recent weeks there have been a
number of developments which offer prospects for a
more meaningful and strengthened role for UNIFIL
than the Force is able to fulfil at present.
30. In these circumstances, it is obvious that the
Council should expand the present mandate for a further limited period, pending the outcome of negotiations on the necessary practical arrangements which
will have to be made to realize the overall objectives.
We are glad to note that all parties now seem to recognize the important role which UNIFIL
could play in
these practical arrangements. I may recall that the main
reason for my country’s readiness to maintain a limited
contingent in UNIFIL
has been our conviction that
UNIFIL
still could and should play an important role in
changing the situation in southern Lebanon for the
better. The Netherlands has therefore again voted in
favour of an extension of UNIFIL’s
present mandate
for a further period of six months. Needless to say, we
shall continue to contribute a contingent to the Force.

22. Council members know that my Government has
Iong advocated an expanded United Nations presence
in Lebanon. We are pleased therefore that the Secretary-General,
in his report of 9 October, has once
again put forward proposals for the expanded deployment of UNIFIL in conjunction with the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from southern Lebanon.
3

31, At the same time we wish to underline with great
emphasis what the Secretary-General has said in paragraph 27 of his latest report. On many occasions my
delegation has stressed that the existence of UNIFIL
indefinitely should not be taken for granted and indeed
there is a limit to the patience of the countries which
have contributed to UNIFIL for more than two years in
difflcwlt and unsatisfactory circumstances. The future
of UNIFlL would be seriously jeopardized by a failure
of the parties concerned to agree in the coming months
on the practical arrangements necessary to attain the
objectives of Israeli withdrawal, peace and security in
the region and the restoration of Lebanese authority
and sovereignty in southern Lebanon. Or, in the words
of the Secretary-General, it would be unfair to “count
on the indefinite participation of the troop-contributing
countries, all the more so in view of the financial liability their participation entails” [ibid.].

exercised the presidency with remarkable
and ability.

37. I have asked to speak, and I shall be brief. Everyone knows that France is committed to the efforts being
undertaken within the framework of the United Nations
with a view to preserving and maintaining peace, and
everyone also knows of our interest in the various
proposals that have been made in this field. Here I wish
to pay a special tribute to the Secretary-General for his
efforts in this direction.
38. My delegation has just voted in favour of the
resolution which extends the mandate of UNIFIL
for
six months at the request of the Lebanese Government,
Once again France has thus indicated the support it has
never ceased to give to UNIFIL
since its inception,
in particular by making an important contribution to a
United Nations peace-keeping force, which is an essential factor, it seems, in the return to normal conditions
in southern Lebanon. By our vote we also wished IO
demonstrate our deep solidarity with Lebanon and our
concern for the interests of that country which has
suffered so much and continues to suffer.

32. We very much hope that it will be possible in the
near future to reach agreement on the necessary practical arrangements. We call upon all parties concerned
to resolve theirowtstandingdifferences
in a realistic and
constructive manner, bearing in mind that all stand to
gain if the overall objectives are attained. The Secretary-General has reiterated in his report a number of
useful and practical suggestions which would enable
UNIFIL
to play a more effective role in southern Lebanon in the wake of the withdrawal of Israeli forces
from that region. We are convinced that the SecretaryGeneral and his most able staff will have an important
role to play in the forthcoming negotiating process.

39. My delegation has studied with great interest the
observations of the Secretary-General in his latest report. In this connection, I wish to recall what we said on
this subject at the time of the last extension-that
is,
that we were ready to consider the new tasks which the
Security Council might, at an appropriate time, decide
to entrust to UNIFIL.
1 reiterate here our readiness to
do so.

33. Lastly, Mr. President, forgive me for once again
drawing the attention of the Council to the sad state of
affairs of UNIFIL’s
finances. The Secretary-General
has informed us that the accumulated
shortfall in
UNIFIL’s
financial account has now reached almost
$200 million. We are all aware that some Member States
consistently fail to honour their obligations,
thereby
creating major financial problems for the Organization
and for the troop-contributing
countries.

40. Mr. SCHIFTER
(United States of America):
Mr. President, I, too, should like to join our colleagues
in extending congratulations to you on your assumption
of the office of President of the Council for this month.
41. Furthermore,
I should like to extend our thanks
to Mr. Mashingaidze for the manner in which he conducted the proceedings during the month of September.

34. The problem will become even more acute if
UNIFIL’s
role is to be expanded under any future
secwrity arrangements in southern Lebanon. It could
even jeopardize UNIFIL’s
future. We therefore associate ourselves again with the Secretary-General’s
strong appeal to all Member States to pay their assessments without delay, We also hope that his appeal to
Member States to make available, as a practical measure, voluntary contributions to the UNIFIL
Suspense
Account will meet with a favourable response.

42. The issue before the Council today was the extension of the mandate of UNIFIL.
We have adopted a
resolution to that effect. Our action, we hope, will
contribute to the cause of peace and stability in the
region.
43. My delegation regrets that the Soviet Union could
not control the urge to use this opportunity to launch
a verbal attack on the United States. We reject that
attack as inappropriate and unjustified.

35. Mr. de La BARRE de NANTEUIL
(France)
[interpretationfrom
Fre&]:
First of all, Sir, I wish to
convey to you our congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council and to say how pleased
we are to see you fulfilling that important function, as
you have done before with great skill.

/

The meeting

r’ose clt 1.20 p.m.

NOTE

36. I wish also to pay a tribute to your immediate
predecessor, the representative of Zimbabwe,
who

’ OfJicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirry-ninth Sessim
Plenary Meetings, 22nd meeting.

4
I

competence

HOW

TO OBTAIN

CYnitrd Nations
world.

Consult

COMMENT

UMTED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS
ma!

SE PROCURER

Lrs publications

LES PUBLICATIONS

des Nations
Unies
mnnde cnrier.
Informez-vous
aupres
des ventes.
New York
ou Get&e.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES NATTONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
est&r en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00300

throughout
the
York of Geneva.

UNIES

sont en vente dans les librairies
et Its agences
de vo!re libraire
ou adressez-vous
6 : Nations

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas panes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva York o Ginebra.

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write IO: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
New

depositaims
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS
y casas disuibuidoras
en
Unidas,
Secciljn de Ventas.

90-61313-February

1993--Z,@‘)
