A /73/PV.18

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

18

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 10 October 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda items 14, 119, 125 (a) and (b) and 126
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Note by the Secretary-General (A/73/184)
Report of the Secretary-General (A/73/292)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/73/L.2)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
(a) Strengthening of the United Nations system
(b) Central role of the United Nations system in
global governance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/73/356)
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
Report of the Secretary-General (A/73/366)
Mr. El Ashmawy (Egypt): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of 77 (G-77) and China.
At the outset, allow me to commend the successful
convening of the third high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases (NCDs), which was held
on 27 September. The meeting garnered high-level
participation and resulted in the endorsement of a

comprehensive draft political declaration (A/73/L.2)
that encompasses actions expected at the national
and international levels. The meeting also included
a rich debate among a variety of stakeholders on
avenues to better prevent, control, diagnose and treat
NCDs. Of course, the final objective is to achieve
relevant goals and targets set out the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
I would like to express the appreciation of the
Group to the Permanent Representatives of Uruguay
and Italy and their staff for facilitating the process of
consultations on NCDs, starting from the scope and
modalities phase to the negotiations of the draft political
declaration itself. The negotiations were not easy, but
we should all be proud of our strong commitments in
the final text.
I would also like to express our gratitude to you,
Madam President, along with the President of the
General Assembly at its seventy-second session, for
your leadership in convening a successful high-level
meeting, including the very informative interactive
civil society hearings held on 5 July.
Finally, we would like to congratulate ourselves
and our fellow colleagues on the formal adoption of
the draft political declaration by the General Assembly
today — in a few moments, hopefully. I would like
to stress the priorities raised in the G-77 and China
statement delivered the day of the high-level meeting. It
is now time for all of us to deliver the actions necessary
to prevent and control NCDs.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-31253 (E)

*1831253*

A/73/PV.18

The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Parenti (European Union): I am honoured
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
member States.
On 27 September at the third high-level meeting
of the General Assembly on the prevention and control
of non-communicable diseases, Heads of State and
Government renewed their previous commitment to
stimulate further action to prevent and manage those
diseases. The draft political declaration (A/73/L.2)
that emerged from the high-level meeting is a concise
and action-oriented document that calls for an
accelerated response. We thank the co-facilitators,
the representatives of Italy and Uruguay, for their able
leadership in the negotiations.
The European Union is pleased with the draft
political declaration. We fully agree that more and
faster progress is needed in order to reach the agreed
goals. It is high time to act. We now need to pool all of
our efforts for the implementation of the actions set out
in that document. We are of course ready to do so. Let
me give members of the Assembly some examples.
The eighth session of the Conference of the Parties to
the World Health Organization Framework Convention
on Tobacco Control took a key decision last week to
advance work in respect to novel tobacco products,
cross-border advertising and other important issues.
The European Union is proud to have substantially
contributed to that effort.
At the European level, we work closely with our
member States, learning from each other, exchanging
positive experiences and further implementing best
practices. We recently established a Steering Group
on Health Promotion, Disease Prevention and the
Management of Non-Communicable Diseases to
provide guidance and identify best practices that can
be piloted and scaled up. For example, the Swedish best
practice on general practitioners prescribing physical
activity and the Italian cardiovascular screening
programme Cardio 50 will be shared with other member
States next year. I can also assure the Assembly that
the European Union is fully committed to realizing
target 3.4 of the Sustainable Development Goals and to
reducing premature mortality from non-communicable
diseases.
2/9

10/10/2018

Nevertheless, the high-level meeting confirmed
that we have to do more, and we have to do it quickly.
Non-communicable diseases are a global concern and
are exacerbated by poverty. We see time and again that
non-communicable diseases are associated with health
inequalities. We trust that this third high-level meeting
on non-communicable diseases and the resulting draft
political declaration that we are about to adopt today can
create further momentum. Let us grasp this opportunity,
redouble our efforts to tackle the global challenge of
non-communicable diseases and epidemics and further
invest in more effective health promotion, prevention
and management of non-communicable diseases. We
can expect high human and economic returns.
Mr. Rzheussky (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
United Nations plays, and will continue to play, its
part as an important tool for multilateral international
cooperation, because no other international body has
such multifaceted experiences, competencies and
coordinating potential for accomplishing global tasks.
For the United Nations to serve humankind as effectively
as possible, we must strengthen the Organization,
improve our multilateral dialogue and establish a rulesbased international order that is acceptable to all.
In accordance with the Secretary-General’s
initiative, the United Nations is currently undergoing
the largest-scale reform in its history, aimed at seeking
innovative ideas and making its response to challenges
and threats more nimble. While we appreciate the
Secretary-General’s reforms of its development system,
the United Nations must not be associated only with
pen-pushing by civil servants at Headquarters but
must be understood and called for by ordinary people.
We are therefore eagerly awaiting the launch of a new
generation of United Nations country teams, and we
hope that the new status of Resident Coordinators will
strengthen States’ capacity to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) at home.
Achieving the SDGs also require supporting
national efforts by ensuring favourable international
economic conditions. In that regard, it will be essential
to strengthen the ability of the United Nations to
establish reliable partnerships with international and
regional economic and financial institutions, in order to
enhance coordination and agreements that will ensure
that our global economic regulatory mechanisms
encourage the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
18-31253

10/10/2018

The United Nations administrative system is an
important element in the business of strengthening the
Organization, and in that context Belarus commends
the interim results of the management reforms
undertaken by the Secretary-General. For the reforms
to succeed, we must develop a straightforward, simple,
transparent system for delegating authority with the aim
of ensuring that responsibilities and accountability are
tied together. We also hope that establishing an annual
budget system will help to strengthen the capacity of
the United Nations and ensure greater flexibility in the
financing of its functions.
The question of the reform of the Security Council
has been a separate issue for a relatively long time.
In our view, one of the most significant achievements
of Council reform would be its budget neutrality. We
support the efforts of the States Members of the United
Nations to broaden the dialogue on ways to reform
the Security Council, taking into account current
global realities and the need to adapt the Council’s
configuration to changing conditions. In principle,
we support a broader representation in the Council of
individual regional groups, including the countries of
Eastern Europe, Asia, Africa, Latin America and others.
However, only a balanced, gradual and consensusbased approach to the issues related to reform of the
Security Council can ensure that our States’ joint
efforts can succeed. The process of revising the annual
report on “Revised Elements of Commonality and
Issues for Further Consideration” should not be based
on an arbitrary interpretation of States’ proposals. The
idea of imposing non-consensus solutions that do not
enjoy general support is counterproductive. Rushed or
artificially imposed timetables for reaching agreements
are unacceptable. Ultimately, we must keep in our
sights and not forget the true goal of our joint efforts,
which is improving the effectiveness of the Security
Council’s work. Any attempts to substitute other shortterm or opportunistic considerations for that goal
are despicable.
The microclimate within the United Nations itself
can also make a real contribution to improving the
effectiveness of the Organization in combating external
threats and challenges. A dialogue between the States
and the Secretariat is essential to ensure that United
Nations decisions are born of a joint dialogue, which
unquestionably strengthens the Organization and
enhances its standing in the world. As we all know,
agreement at home is the recipe for success. That is the

A/73/PV.18

way we must all strive for agreement within the United
Nations so that it remains a genuine forum in which
our States can work with international civil servants to
find answers to the global problems that they cannot
resolve separately.
Mr. Condor (Saint Kitts and Nevis): I have the
honour to take the floor to speak on behalf of the
14 member States of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM).
CARICOM greatly appreciates today’s forthcoming
formal adoption of the draft political declaration on the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases
(A/72/L.2). Having been credited with elevating the
issue of non-communicable diseases on the global
health agenda in 2011, CARICOM would like to express
sincere congratulations to you, Madam President, on the
General Assembly’s successful third high-level meeting
on the prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases, at which we witnessed the commitment
of national, regional and international stakeholders
through the endorsement of a comprehensive,
action-oriented draft political declaration. I would like
to take this opportunity to express our appreciation
to the Permanent Representatives of Italy and
Uruguay for their facilitation of the consultations
on non-communicable diseases that have led us to
today’s adoption.
Finally, we want to congratulate the wider United
Nations membership on today’s adoption of the draft
political declaration. We believe that now is the time
to deliver. We therefore fully commit to accelerating
our response in order to address non-communicable
diseases for the health and well-being of present and
future generations.
Ms. Frolova (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Today we would like to address the
report of the Secretary-General entitled “Shifting
the management paradigm in the United Nations:
comparative assessment of human resources structures”
(A/73/366), which we have studied with interest. It
gives a comparative assessment of the Secretariat’s two
proposed variations of the functioning of personnel
divisions. The alternatives are either to unite all of them
in one department or to split them between two new,
reorganized departments, one for management strategy,
policy and control and one for operational support.
We were unfortunately unable to reach a consensus
on this crucial aspect of management reform during

18-312533/9

A/73/PV.18

the seventy-second session. In our view, any changes,
if they are to be agreed by consensus, must ensure a
comprehensive approach to resolving the underlying
problems of improving and optimizing the work of the
United Nations in the area of human resources.
We want to particularly emphasize that the
report (A/73/411) of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ)
contains a reference to a previous recommendation
that supported the idea of a single structure subsuming
all human-resources issues. Besides that, we think it
is also important to consider section IV, paragraph 4,
of resolution 72/262 C along with the report on the
comparative assessment of human resources structures.
It requests that the Secretary-General submit a new
proposal for the global service delivery model no
later than the first resumed part of the seventy-third
session of the Fifth Committee. The ACABQ concluded
that the new global service delivery model could
have a direct impact not only on the functioning and
formation of human resources structures, but also on
issues of the delegation of authority and accountability.
For our part, we are in favour of retaining all human
resources functions under a single structure within
the Secretariat, for which the most appropriate choice
would be the Department of Operational Support.
In conclusion, we want to point out that the Russian
delegation is ready to work constructively on this
agenda item in the Fifth Committee.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate on these items.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/73/L.2.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): This oral
statement is made in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraph 50 of the political
declaration contained in draft resolution A/73/L.2,
the declaration requests the Secretary-General, in
consultation with Member States and in collaboration
with the World Health Organization and relevant funds,
programmes and specialized agencies of the United
Nations system, to submit to the General Assembly, by
the end of 2024, for consideration by Member States, a
4/9

10/10/2018

report on the progress achieved in the implementation
of the political declaration, in preparation for a highlevel meeting in 2025 for a comprehensive review of
the progress achieved in the prevention and control
of non-communicable diseases and the promotion
of mental health and well-being. With regard to the
request for a high-level meeting in 2025 contained in
paragraph 50, it is understood that all issues related
to the meeting, including the dates, venue, format,
organization and scope, are yet to be determined.
Accordingly, in the absence of modalities for the
meeting, it is not possible at the present time to estimate
the potential cost implications of the requirements for
meetings and documentation. Upon the decision on the
modalities, format and organization of the meeting,
the Secretary-General would submit the relevant costs
of such requirements in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Furthermore, the dates of the meeting will have to be
determined in consultation with the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution
A/73/L.2 will not give rise to any budgetary implications
under the programme budget for the biennium 20182019.
A copy of this statement will be made available on
the PaperSmart portal.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.2,
entitled “Political declaration of the third high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention and
control of non-communicable diseases”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/73/L.2?
Draft resolution
(resolution 73/2).

A/73/L.2

was

adopted

The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted, May I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Italy.
Mrs. Zappia (Italy): Ambassador Elbio Rosselli
Frieri, the Permanent Representative of Uruguay,
and I, continuing the work done by my predecessor,
had the honour to co-facilitate the negotiations
18-31253

10/10/2018

A/73/PV.18

on the political declaration of the third high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention
and control of non-communicable diseases, held in
New York on 27 September. Let me congratulate
you, Madam President, on your successful leadership
on that occasion. In addition, on behalf of my fellow
co-facilitator, I want to warmly thank all Member States
for their active and constructive engagement during the
negotiations, which enabled us to reach consensus on
a draft text, which was then approved during the highlevel meeting and today is reflected in resolution 73/2,
which we have just adopted. The result, which we can all
be proud of, is a concise, balanced and action-oriented
document that builds on the opportunities and
challenges presented by the implementation of previous
commitments and highlights some key concrete areas
of action for the achievement of target 3.4 of the
Sustainable Development Goals, such as the importance
of healthy lifestyle choices for the effective prevention
of non-communicable diseases.

Agenda item 119 (continued)

I would like to remind the Assembly that today
is World Mental Health Day, and that the declaration
that we just adopted addresses that issue extensively
and concretely. While the Organization’s discussions
and activities related to non-communicable diseases
will continue mostly in Geneva, we are confident that
the outcome of our efforts in New York will be able
to effectively guide the action of the membership at
the international, national and local levels in the fight
against non-communicable diseases, keeping in mind
the review of the related targets scheduled for 2025.

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/73/L.4.

Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Specific meeting focused on development
(resolution 60/265)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I have been
informed that no Member State has requested to take
the floor under this item.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 119.
Agenda item 129
Global health and foreign policy
Draft resolution (A/73/L.4)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
remind members that the debate on agenda item 129
is scheduled to be held on Thursday, 13 December,
as announced in the programme of work set out in
document A/INF/73/3.

I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to express my sincere thanks to Ambassador Elbio
Rosselli Frieri of Uruguay and Ambassador Maria
Angela Zappia of Italy, the co-facilitators of the
informal consultations, who showed great ability
and patience in their conduct of the discussions and
complex negotiations on the draft of resolution 73/2. I
also want to thank all Member States for their valuable
contributions to reaching a substantive agreement on
the resolution.

Under the terms of paragraph 53 of the draft
political declaration contained in draft resolution
A/73/L.4, the Secretary-General is requested, with the
support of the World Health Organization, to provide a
progress report in 2020 on global and national progress,
across sectors, in accelerating efforts to achieve agreed
tuberculosis goals within the context of achieving the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including
on the progress and implementation of the present draft
declaration towards agreed tuberculosis goals at the
national, regional and global levels, which will serve
to inform preparations for a comprehensive review by
Heads of State and Government at a high-level meeting
in 2023.

The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 14, 125 and its sub-items
(a) and (b), and 126.

It is anticipated that the request in paragraph 53
for documentation related to the progress report in
2020 will constitute an addition to the documentation

18-312535/9

A/73/PV.18

10/10/2018

workload of the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management of one document of 8,500
words to be issued in all six languages. That would
entail additional requirements in the amount of $26,000
for documentation services in 2020.
With regard to the high-level meeting in 2023
referred to in paragraph 53, it is understood that all
issues related to the meeting, including the venue,
format, organization and scope, are yet to be determined.
Accordingly, in the absence of modalities for the
meeting, it is not possible at the present time to estimate
the potential cost implications of the requirements for
meetings and documentation. Upon a decision on the
modalities, format and organization of the meeting,
the Secretary-General would submit the relevant costs
of such requirements in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Furthermore, the dates of the meeting will have to be
determined in consultation with the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
the draft resolution A/73/L.4, additional requirements
of $26,000 under section 2, “General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs and Conference
Management”, would be included in the proposed
programme budget for the year 2020.
Copies of this statement will be made available on
the PaperSmart portal.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/73/L.4, entitled “Political declaration of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the fight
against tuberculosis”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/73/L.4?
Draft resolution
(resolution 73/3)

A/73/L.4

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. El Ashmawy (Egypt): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of 77 (G-77) and China.
Allow me, at the outset, to welcome the successful
convening of the first high-level meeting of the
6/9

General Assembly on tuberculosis, which took place
on 26 September. The meeting garnered high-level
participation and resulted in the endorsement of a draft
political declaration with clear and bold commitments.
The meeting also included a rich debate with diverse
stakeholders on avenues to better prevent, diagnose
and treat tuberculosis (TB) in order to end TB by
2030, as we all committed to in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
I would like to express the appreciation of the
Group to the Permanent Representatives of Antigua and
Barbuda and Japan, as well as their staffs, for facilitating
the process of consultation on ending tuberculosis,
starting from the scoping modalities resolution through
the negotiations on the draft political declaration. The
negotiations were not easy, but we should all be proud
of our strong commitments in the final text.
I would also like to express our gratitude to you,
Madam President, along with the President of the
General Assembly at its seventy-second session, and
the respective teams for the leadership in convening
a successful high-level meeting, along with the
informative interactive civil society hearings held on
4 June.
Finally, we would like to congratulate ourselves
and fellow colleagues for the political declaration
adopted today by the General Assembly (resolution
73/3). We would like to stress the priorities raised in the
G-77 and China statement delivered during the highlevel meeting. We believe it is now time for all of us to
deliver the actions set out in the political declaration in
order to end TB by 2030, in accordance with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Mr. Charwath (Austria): The European Union and
its member States, on whose behalf I have the honour
to speak today, welcomed the draft political declaration
of the first high-level meeting on tuberculosis, held
on 26 September, as a concise and action-oriented
document that calls for an accelerated response and
renewed commitment. First and foremost, I would like
to congratulate the co-facilitators — the representatives
of Antigua and Barbuda and Japan — for achieving
consensus on the draft declaration.
We should now concentrate all our efforts to address
the actions proposed in the declaration (resolution 73/3)
and work on their implementation. In the European
Union there are countries with very low tuberculosis
(TB) incidence that are close to eliminating TB and
18-31253

10/10/2018

countries with high TB incidence. Many countries
also face additional challenges, including multi-drug
resistance and particular vulnerabilities faced by
people infected with HIV or hepatitis. Despite recent
progress, especially in the EU, sustained efforts are
needed if Europe as a region is to meet the 2030 targets
and eradicate TB.
Tuberculosis continues to disproportionately affect
the most vulnerable — the poor, the homeless and the
socially marginalized, including people infected with
HIV. As such, health and social policies must work
hand in hand and we must work to reach those most at
risk. Strengthening public health systems is paramount.
We welcome the development of national and regional
TB strategies that address the challenges and capacities
of each country, as well as the acceleration of plans to
achieve universal health coverage. We recognize that
multi-drug-resistant TB is a global health threat.
Resistance to antimicrobial therapies greatly
increases the risk of death or serious complications
and is associated with approximately 5.5 times higher
treatment costs. We must urgently tackle antimicrobial
resistance through a one-health approach in human
and animal health, while ensuring the prudent use
of antibiotics. Investment in research is critical and
involves developing effective and affordable medicines,
including those that address drug-resistant forms of TB
and child-friendly formulas.
We also need new rapid diagnostic tools. It is crucial
that we invest more in new prevention tools, such
vaccines, and in applied research to increase existing
and new tools for maximum impact. The European
Union’s contribution to research through our current
research programme so far amounts to €150 million.
We will continue to invest in that area and ensure that
new tools for tuberculosis are rapidly made accessible
to all.
The European Union is at the forefront of the
fight against TB in partner countries. The EU and
its member States are the largest contributors to the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
The support of the Global Fund has led to impressive
results. During 2017, in countries where the Global
Fund invests, 5 million people with TB were treated
and 102,000 people with drug-resistant TB went on
treatment. Consequently, we commit to supporting a
successful replenishment of the Global Fund in 2019.

A/73/PV.18

Tuberculosis can affect everyone, but every
country’s capacity to respond might vary. We must
approach this epidemic from all angles — funding,
research, prevention, treatment and education. We need
to increase solidarity with the vulnerable among us. In
that regard, the European Union is contributing with
almost €2 million in the early detection and integrated
management of tuberculosis in Europe for irregular
residence and people who inject drugs. The European
Union will continue to support action to address
tuberculosis at home, in the European neighbourhood
and globally, while using the financial, technical and
political instruments available to it.
Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): Thailand fully endorses
and welcomes the adoption of the political declaration
of the first-ever high-level meeting on the fight against
tuberculosis (resolution 73/3). It is our hope that the
political declaration will serve to scale up our efforts to
further reach out the ones left behind.
Thailand also wishes to express its appreciation
to Ambassador Webson, Permanent Representative
of Antigua and Barbuda, and Ambassador Bessho,
Permanent Representative of Japan, as co-facilitators of
this very important process. It was a challenging task,
but indeed a successful one. The same appreciation
also goes to Ambassador Cardi, former Permanent
Representative of Italy, Ambassador Rosselli Frieri,
Permanent Representative of Uruguay, as well as
Ambassador Rattray, Permanent Representative
of Jamaica, for their stewardship of the process on
non-communicable diseases.
Our work does not end here, rather it is only a
push from where we began three years ago. Thailand
is strongly committed to achieving Sustainable
Development Goal 3 and all other Goals. We also
eagerly look forward to the high-level meeting on
universal health coverage to be held next year, where
members can be sure of our constructive role. Universal
health coverage is something we appreciate, as it is
truly the key to good health and well-being for all.
Ms. Bhengu (South Africa): South Africa wishes to
congratulate you, Madam President, on the successful
convening of the historic high-level meeting on the fight
against tuberculosis (TB). Equally, we wish to thank
the Permanent Representatives of Japan and Antigua
and Barbuda for facilitating the entire process.
Tuberculosis is not just a medical condition, it
has many social determinants. They include poverty,

18-312537/9

A/73/PV.18

unemployment, poor nutrition, overcrowding and social
stigma, which fuel the spread of diseases. That means
that the poor and marginalized carry a disproportionate
disease burden. Africa bears a significant burden of
disease related to TB, in Southern Africa in particular,
and it is fuelled by the HIV epidemic.
Linked to the antimicrobial resistance global
problem is the threat and seriousness of multi-drugresistant TB, which will exacerbate the high incidence,
prevalence and related mortality per capita in Africa.
Despite the strides made by the South African
Government, drug-resistant TB remains the leading
cause of death in our country, especially among HIVpositive patients. It is for that reason that South Africa
joins and welcomes the adoption of resolution 73/3,
which comprehensively addresses the challenge.
We see this as a historic opportunity to generate
effective change and offer a concrete way forward.
But this is only the beginning. We need to intensify
our efforts at the national, regional and global levels,
with accountability at the core at all levels. Investing in
research and development is critical if we are to develop
new diagnostics, vaccines and medicines and find
innovative ways to deal with the social determinants of
tuberculosis and its transmission.
To succeed, we need to ensure that drugs are
affordable. Therefore, the principle of delinkage as
agreed in the political declaration of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on antimicrobial
resistance is essential. We must adhere to the World
Trade Organization Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) as
well as to the 2001 Doha Declaration on the TRIPS
Agreement and Public Health, which recognizes that
intellectual property rights should be interpreted in a
manner that supports public health and promotes access
to medicine for all.
Please be assured of our commitment to ensuring
that we do everything possible to end tuberculosis as a
public health threat by 2030, if not earlier.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): On behalf of His
Excellency Ambassador Alfonso Webson, Permanent
Representative of Antigua and Barbuda, and myself
as co-facilitators of the high-level meeting on the
fight against tuberculosis (TB), I would like to express
sincere appreciation to all the Member States and
observers for the commitment and spirit of flexibility
exhibited while we jointly worked to draft the first
8/9

10/10/2018

ever political declaration (resolution 73/3) by the
General Assembly on the fight against tuberculosis.
Thanks to their constructive engagement, we were
able to agree on a strong groundbreaking declaration,
which was endorsed unanimously by Heads of State
and Government and Ministers during the high-level
meeting convened on 26 September and formally
adopted by consensus today.
We would like to thank you, Madam President,
and the President of the General Assembly at its
seventy second session, the Office of the President of
the General Assembly, the Office of the SecretaryGeneral and the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy on
Tuberculosis, the World Health Organization and other
key partners, notably the Global TB Caucus and the Stop
TB Partnership, for their strong support and assistance.
As we prepared for the negotiations on the final
document while building on the Moscow Declaration
on Tuberculosis, we were able to listen to the voices
of many stakeholders, including, most important, those
of TB survivors and their families and supporters.
The process included mission briefings, civil society
hearings organized by the President of the General
Assembly and bilateral meetings — all of which
profoundly enriched the consultations concerning the
political declaration.
This first-ever political declaration on tuberculosis
by the General Assembly includes some key
commitments: treatment target figures of 40 million
people and preventive treatment target figures of
40 million people, commitments to mobilizing
$13 billion for tuberculosis response, as well as
$2 billion for research and development. The declaration
also highlights important issues in the fight against
tuberculosis, including special attention to children
and vulnerable populations, gender and human rights,
access to affordable medicines, resilient health systems
and incentives to research and development.
In order to measure our progress, the declaration
requests the Secretary-General to prepare a progress
report in 2020 and to convene a high-level review meeting
in 2023. It also highlights important linkages to HIV/
AIDS and in microbial resistance, non-communicable
diseases and, most notably, universal health coverage.
We must now implement the commitments made
by our leaders to end tuberculosis. Member States
will convene the high-level meeting on universal
health coverage next September. We must capitalize
18-31253

10/10/2018

on this opportunity to accelerate our efforts to end
tuberculosis in a way that synergizes with our efforts
to address both communicable and non-communicable
diseases, thereby contributing to the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals.
As part of our contribution, Japan will convene
a series of relevant meetings next year, including
the Summit of the Group of 20 in Osaka and the
seventh Tokyo International Conference on African
Development, which will promote our collective efforts
in those areas. Let us also work together to make next
year’s high-level meeting on universal health coverage
an important milestone in following through on our
pledge to end tuberculosis so that no one will be left
behind from the highest attainable health, which
everyone deserves.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of position.

A/73/PV.18

I would like to express my sincere thanks to
Ambassador Walton Alfonso Webson of Antigua and
Barbuda and Ambassador Koro Bessho of Japan, who
served as co-facilitators of the informal consultations
and demonstrated great skill and patience in
conducting the deliberations and complex negotiations
on resolution 73/3, which, as has been said, is a historic
resolution — the first General Assembly resolution
on tuberculosis. I would also like to commend the
involvement and commitment of the civil society
organizations whose purpose and objective is the
fight against tuberculosis. I also thank Member
States for their valuable contributions, flexibility and
commitment in reaching agreement on the resolution.
The Assembly has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of agenda item 129.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

18-312539/9
