178

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

7 November 1977, 33/101 of 16 December 1978 and 34/26
of 15 November 1979,
1. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneraFº on the status of the lnternational Convention
on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination;2'
2. Expresses its satisfaction with the increase in the
number of States which have ratified the Convention or
acceded thereto;
3. Reaffirms once again its conviction that ratification of or accession to the Convention on a universal
basis and implementation of its provisions are necessary for the realization of the objectives of the Decade
for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
4. Requests States which have not yet beco~e parties to the Convention to ratify it or accede to 1t;
5. Appeals to States parties to the Convention to
study the possibility of making the declaration provided
for in article 14 of the Convention;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
submit to the General Assembly annual reports concerning the status of the Convention, in accordance with
Assembly resolut10n 2106 A (XX) of21 December 1965.

73rd p/enary meeting
25 November /980
35/39.

Status of the lnternational Con\lention on the
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid

The General Assemb/y,
Recalling its resolution 3068 (XXVlll) of 30 November 1973, by which it adopted and opened for signature
and ratification the International Convention on thc
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, and its resolutions 3380 (XXX) of 10 November
1975, 31/80 of 13 December 1976, 32/12 of7 November
1977, 33/103 of 16 December 1978 and 34/27 of
15 November 1979,
Recalling a/so Commission on Human Rights resolutions 13 (XXXIII) of 11 March 1977, 22 7 (XXXIV) of
22 February 1978, 23 10 (XXXV) of 5 March 1979 24 and
12 (XXXVI) and 13 (XXXVI) of 26 February 1980, 25
Convinced that the Declaration and the Programme of
Action adopted by the World Conference to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination 26 as well as the
programme of activities to be undertaken during the
second half of the Decade for Action to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination, adopted by the General
Assembly in its resolution 34/24 of 15 November 1979,
are an important and constructive contribution to the
struggle against apartheid, racism and ali forms of racial
discrimination,
211

A/35/196.
Resolution 2106 A (XX). annex.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Sixtysecond Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/5927), chap. XXI, sect. A.
13
See Officia/ Records of the Economic and Social Council. /978,
Supplemenl No. 4 (E/ 1978/34), cha p. XXVI, sect. A.
24
lbid., /979, Supplement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. XXIV, sect. A.
"!bid., /980. Supplement No. 3 (E/1980/13 and Corr.l),
chap. XXVI, sect. A.
"Report ofthe World Conference to Combar Racism and Racial Discrimina/ion, Geneva, 14-25 August 1978 (United Nations puhlication.
Sales No. E.79.XIV 2), chap. 11.
21

22

A ware that the commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the
Granting of Inciependence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(X V) of 14 December 1960, will encourage ali Sta tes to
intensify their efforts in supporting the colonially and
racially oppressed peoples in their legitimate struggle to
gain self-determination and independence, and to put an
end to ali practices of segregation and discrimination.
Reaffirming its conviction that apartheid constitutes a
total negation of the purposes and principies of the
Charter of the United Nations and is a gross violation of
human rights and a crime against humanity, seriously
disturbing and threatening international peace and
security.
Deeply concerned that the racist régime in South
A frica has stepped up its policy of apartheid, repression,
"bantustanization.. and aggression and its continued
illegal occupation of Namibia, thereby perpetuating on
Namibian territory its odious policy of apartheid, racial
discrimination and fragmentation,
Condemning the continued collaboration of certain
States and transnational corporations with the racist
régime of South Africa in the politif _], economic,
military and other fields, thus encouraging it to persist
in and intensify the brutal suppression of the people in
South Africa,
Underlining that ratification of and accession to the
Convention on a universal basis and the implementation of its provisions without any delay are necessary for
its effectiveness and would be a useful contribution
towards achieving the goals of the Decade for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination.
Taking into account Security Council resolution 418
(1977) of 4 November 1977 as a useful step towards
achieving the purposes of the Convention,
Firmly convinced that the legitima te struggle of the oppressed peoples in southern Africa against colonialism,
racism and apartheid and for the effective implementation of their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence demands more than ever ali necessary
support by the international community and. in particular, further action by the Security Council,
1. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral27 on the status of the I nternational Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid:
2. Expresses its satisfaction with the increase in the
number of Sta tes which have ratified thc Convention or
acceded thereto;
3. Commends the States parties to the Convention
that have submitted their reports under article VII of the
Convention and urges other States to do so as soon as
possible, taking fully into account the guidelines"
prepared by the Working Group on the lmplementation of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid established in accordance with article IX of the Convention;
4. Strongly appeals once again to those States that
have not yet become parties to the Convention to ratify
it or to accede to it without delay;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts through appropriate channels to disseminate information on thc Con vention and its implementation
-

·" Ai35.'197andAdd l.
"E/CN.411286, "nnex.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

with a view to further promoting ratification of or accession to the Convention;
6. Ca/Is upon ali States parties to implement fully article IV of the Convention by adopting legislative,
judicial and administrative measures to prosecute, bring
to tria! and punish, in accordance with their jurisdiction, persons responsible for, or accused of, the acts
defined in article II of the Convention;
7. Again ca/Is upon ali States parties and the competent United Nations organs to consider the conclusions
and recommendations of the Working Group contained
in its reports 29 and to submit their views and comments
to the Secretary-General;
8. Expresses its appreciation to the Ad Hoc Working
Group of Experts of the Commission on Human Rights
for the compilation of the list of individuals, organizations, institutions and representatives of States deemed
responsible for crimes enumerated in article 11 of the
Convention 30 and calls upon ali States parties to give
this list the widest possible dissemination:
9. Welcomes the efforts of the Commission on
Human Rights to undertake the functions set out in article X of the Convention and invites the Commission to
intensify, in co-operation with the Special Committee
against Apartheid, its efforts to compile periodically the
list of individuals, organizations, institutions and representatives of States deemed responsible for crimes
enumerated in article 11 of the Convention, as well as
those against whom or which legal proceedings have
been undertaken;
10. Requests the Commission on Human Rights, in
preparing the above-mentioned list, to take into account
General Assembly resolution 33/23 of 29 November
1978 as well as the docurnents on this subject prepared
by the Commission and its suborgans reaffirming, inter
alia, that States giving assistance to the racist régime in
South Africa become accomplices in the inhuman practices of racial discrimination and apartheid;
11. Ca/Is upon the competent United N ations organs
to continue to provide the Cornmission on Human
Rights, through the Secretary-General, with inforrnation relevant to the periodic compilation of the abovementioned list as well as with information concerning
the obstacles which prevent the effective suppression
and punishment of the crime of apartheid;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to distribute the
above-mentioned list among ali States parties to the
Convention and ali States Members of the United
Natioqs and to bring such facts to the attention of the
public by ali means of mass communication;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
next annual report under General Assernbly resolution
3380 (XXX) a special section concerning the implementation of the Convention, taking into account the views
and comments of States parties to the Convention called
for in paragraph 7 above.
73rd plenary meeting
25 November 1980
35/40.

Report of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34 /28 of 15 N overnber 1979
on the report of the Committce on the Elimination of
"E/CN.4/ 1328, sect. VI, and E/CN.4 l ~58, sect. IV.
rn E/CN.4/1366, annex 111.

179

Racial Discrimination and 34/26 of 15 November 1979
on the status of the I nternational Convention on the
Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination, as
well as its other relevant resolutions on the implementation of the Programme for the Decade for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, 11
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its twenty-first
and twenty-second sessions, J} submitted under article 9,
paragraph 2, of the lnternational Convention on the
Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination, i i
Emphasizing the obligation of ali States parties to the
Convention to take legislative, judicial and other
measures in order to secure full implementation of the
provisions of the Convention,
Convinced that ali Member States should take effective measures, at the national and international levels, to
combat acts or practices of racial discrimination, including the vestiges and manifestations of racist
ideologies wherever they exist,
A ware of the importance of the contribution of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination to the implemcntation of the Programme for the
Decade, through its activities within the framework of
the implementation of the Convention,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its twenty-first and twenty-second sessions;
2. Welcomes the readiness of the Committee to continue to contribute to the implementation of the
Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination by, inter alia, intensifying the monitoring of the implementation of the provisions of the lnternational Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination, preparing
relevant studies on the Convention and expanding cooperation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the lnternational
Labour Organisation and other relevant bodies within
the United Nations system:
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to invite the Committee to take, within the context of its activities on the implementation of the Convention, active
part in the preparations for the work of the second
World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination in the manner the Committee finds appropriak:
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide necessary assistance to the Committee regarding its activities
connected with its contribution to the implementation
of the Programme for the Decade, as referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 abovc;
5. Commends the Committee for paying greater attention to the question ofthe elimination ofthe policy of
apartheid in South Africa and Namibia, as well as to the
elimination of acts and practices of racial discrimination in Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories and in
ali other Territories to which General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 applies;
6. Further commends the Committee for paying due
attention to the protection of the rights of national or
ethnic minorities and indigenous populations, as well as
the rights of migrant workers, and calls upon ali Member States to take effective measures in protecting fully
" Resolution 3057 (XXVIII), ~nnex.
'' Ofjicial Records ol rhe General Assemhly, Thirry-fifth Session,
Supplement No. 18 (A/3.\ 18).
'Resolution 2106 A (XX), ,mnex.
