United Nations

S/PV.4911

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

4911th meeting
Tuesday, 17 February 2004, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wang Guangya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (China)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Antonio
Mr. Zinsou
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Muñoz
Mr. de La Sablière
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Khalid
Mr. Mercado
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Konuzin
Mr. Arias
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
Security Council mission
Progress report of the Secretary-General on the recommendations of the
Security Council mission to Central Africa (S/2004/52)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-24136 (E)

*
0
4
2
4
1
3
6
*

S/PV.4911

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Progress report of the Secretary-General on the
recommendations of the Security Council
mission to Central Africa (S/2004/52)
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Burundi, Egypt, Ireland, Japan,
Rwanda and the Syrian Arab Republic, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/52, which contains the progress
report
of
the
Secretary-General
on
the
recommendations of the Security Council mission to
Central Africa.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

2

Mr. Kalomoh: Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for organizing this meeting and for
allowing me to introduce the progress report of the
Secretary-General on the recommendations of the
Security Council mission to Central Africa
(S/2004/52), which is before members. The report
summarizes advances attained in addressing the
recommendations made on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, on Burundi and on preparations for an
international conference on the Great Lakes region.
With regard to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as Council members are aware, the transitional
Government was established in June 2003, at about the
same time as the Council mission was visiting the
region. The transitional Government’s comprehensive
programme of work for the transitional period was
approved by the new Parliament in December, and the
implementation of that work programme is well under
way.
Progress has also been made in normalizing
relations between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its neighbours, but much needs to be done
in that area, with the support of the international
community.
The
pace
of
the
disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or
repatriation of Rwandese, Ugandan and Burundian
armed elements has accelerated beyond even our own
expectations. The International Committee in Support
of the Transition has been meeting in Kinshasa on a
regular basis, under the chairmanship of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. The
Committee has been instrumental in resolving several
deadlocks that had arisen between and among the
parties.
With regard to the situation in the Ituri district,
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) assumed
responsibility
from
the
Interim
Emergency
Multinational Force on 1 September 2003, following
the adoption by the Council of resolution 1493 (2003).
In Bunia, MONUC has been enforcing a weapons-free
policy, and the first phase of the Mission’s military
expansion outside Bunia is now under way. It should be
recalled that MONUC’s military deployments in Ituri
are intended to stabilize the region to enable the Ituri
Interim Administration to begin functioning and to
facilitate its integration into the national transitional
process.

S/PV.4911

Concerning support for the reconstruction of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, a Consultative
Group meeting of the country’s development partners
was held on 17 and 18 December 2003 in Paris. At that
meeting, donor countries and organizations pledged
more than $3.9 billion in assistance to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the period 2004-2006.
I now turn to the situation in Burundi. As
described in the report before the Council, significant
progress has been achieved towards implementation of
the recommendations of the Council mission. The
deployment of the African Mission in Burundi (AMIB)
was completed in October 2003, and the Mission has
been carrying out outstanding work. However, in spite
of the vital support and financial contributions
provided by a number of donors, AMIB continues to
face serious financial and logistical difficulties. United
Nations agencies in Bujumbura, with political guidance
from the United Nations Office in Burundi, are
assisting AMIB within their respective mandates. In
the area of donor assistance for economic recovery, at a
forum of the development partners of Burundi held in
Brussels in mid-January this year, donors pledged a
total of $1 billion to support Burundi’s socio-economic
recovery in the period 2004-2006.
The prospects for peace in Burundi improved
considerably with the conclusion of a comprehensive
ceasefire
agreement
between
the
transitional
Government and the Conseil national pour la défense
de la démocratie — Forces nationales pour la défense
de la démocratie (CNDD-FDD) of Pierre Nkurunziza
and the subsequent integration of FDD representatives
into the transitional institutions. The implementation of
the agreement has so far proceeded well.
As Council members may be aware, since the
publication of the report, President Ndayizeye of
Burundi and a high-level Forces nationales de
libération (FNL) (Rwasa) delegation met, for the first
time, in the Netherlands from 18 to 21 January 2004,
thus providing further grounds for optimism. The
Secretary-General urged the parties to pursue these
discussions with a view to having the FNL join the
peace process as soon as possible, thus paving the way
for the establishment of a full-fledged peacekeeping
operation in Burundi.
As noted elsewhere in the report, the challenges
that lie ahead in Burundi are enormous, as the
transitional period is expected to end in November

2004. I take this opportunity to inform the Council that
the United Nations multidisciplinary reconnaissance
mission is set to arrive in Bujumbura today to examine
the situation on the ground and assess how the
transitional Government can best be supported in order
to ensure the successful conclusion of the peace
process — bearing in mind that this process will end
with the elections in November 2004.
As noted in the report, advances achieved in the
peace processes in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Burundi over the past six months have
created a new momentum in favour of convening an
international conference on the Great Lakes region. In
this connection, since the launching of the conference’s
preparatory process in June 2003, a number of
important steps have been taken with the support of the
United Nations, the African Union and donor countries.
The core countries’ National Coordinators have
so far held three meetings to discuss the objectives,
themes and structure of the conference. As a result, the
outline of the conference has started to take shape.
Another important development was the setting up of
the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes region, which
will be an important partner throughout the preparatory
process and the actual holding of the conference.
Under a revised timetable approved by the
National Coordinators of the core countries last month,
the conference’s first summit is scheduled for
November 2004, in the United Republic of Tanzania.
However, as noted in the progress report, the increased
level of activities in the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region requires additional staff resources for
that Office. The preparatory process risks being
delayed, or even seriously affected, by any lack of
necessary budgetary provisions for staff and other
resources for the Office of the Special Representative.
As described fully in the Secretary-General’s
progress report and reflected in my remarks today,
substantial progress has been made in the peace
processes in both Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo since the Security Council
mission to the region last June. However, much
remains to be done to consolidate these historic
advances and to build sustainable peace in the region
as a whole. The international community’s commitment
to continue supporting peace efforts in the subregion is
therefore as critical as ever.

3

S/PV.4911

The reports we have received from the region
indicate that the parties greatly appreciate the visit of
the Security Council mission to the region, as it
provided an added impetus encouraging the parties to
fulfil their commitments to the peace process in both
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The parties, as well as countries visited by the mission
such as South Africa, the United Republic of Tanzania
and Uganda, welcomed the mission as an
encouragement to the parties and Governments in the
countries involved to continue to support the peace
process in both Burundi and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Kalomoh for his statement.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes, in accordance
with the understanding reached among Council
members and in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate their text in
writing and to deliver a condensed version when
addressing the Council.
Mr. de La Sablière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Kalomoh for his briefing and the SecretaryGeneral for his report. In a short while Ireland will be
making a statement on behalf of the member States of
the European Union, and we completely support that
statement.
The Security Council mission to Central Africa
and the Great Lakes region last June, which I had the
honour of leading, was in the region at a decisive time
for the two peace processes. I think it can be said that
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as in
Burundi, in the space of eight months considerable
work has been accomplished. I will refer to both
situations, starting with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
At the time of our visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the problems in that country
were particularly grave. The transition agreement was
threatening to unravel, the eastern part of the country
was once again the scene of violence and armed
offensives, and peace was at risk. Thanks to the efforts
of all, major progress was accomplished. The
transitional Government of national unity was
established on 30 June 2003, in accordance with the
solemn commitment undertaken by President Kabila

4

before members of the Security Council. The question
of high military command was resolved and the
relations of the Democratic Republic of the Congo with
Uganda and Rwanda considerably improved. That was
a point to which members of the Council had given
particular attention. Thanks to Operation Artemis and
to the strengthening of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), hostilities have, to a great extent, come to
an end in the east.
Nonetheless, insecurity does remain. Last week a
Kenyan MONUC observer was murdered in Ituri in the
exercise of his duties. I wish to reiterate France’s
condolences to his family, to his loved ones and to the
Kenyan Government. Everything must be done so that
the perpetrators of this crime do not go unpunished.
MONUC, which now has a robust mandate, must make
the militias understand that such actions will no longer
be tolerated. Furthermore, in this context it is essential
to strengthen the monitoring of the arms embargo. An
end must be put to the trafficking thanks to which
armed groups keep the region in a state of instability.
However, this tragic event must not obscure the
results that have been obtained in recent months in
disarmament and in the repatriation of foreign
combatants. True, much of the road still remains ahead
of us. We must succeed in particular in the
reintegration of Congolese combatants, who in some
cases will rejoin civilian life, and in other cases, the
new armed forces and the police. In that regard, I pay
tribute to Belgium, which for several weeks now has
been conducting in Kisangani the training of the first
integrated brigade of the new Congolese army.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is
entering a new and delicate period. The war is
officially over, but a great deal remains to be done to
complete national reconciliation. Elections must be
held in June 2005 as scheduled. It is at times such as
these that we must be careful that our attention does
not wane. The Congolese must continue their efforts,
and the international community must help them and
support the efforts of Mr. Swing, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who was with
the Council last week. We greatly appreciate his
efforts, and his briefing and the action he is taking.
The Council mission returned from Burundi with
high hopes. It seemed to us that all the parties to the
transition were filled with a sincere desire for peace,

S/PV.4911

reconciliation and reform. Despite the hardships that
hit the country hard during the summer, that desire
prevailed in the end. The agreement that the
international community urged was concluded with Mr.
Nkurunziza’s Forces pour la défense de la démocratie,
which has now taken its place in the transitional
authorities. For their part, the Forces nationales de
libération of Mr. Rwasa have begun to evince a
constructive attitude, and initial discussions took place
last month in the Netherlands. Of course, that progress
remains to be solidified, but it is encouraging. To
facilitate those talks, we are counting very much on the
efforts of the States of the facilitation and regional
peace initiative and, in particular, on the involvement
of South Africa.
We pay tribute to the remarkable mobilization
that Africa has demonstrated. The African Union
decided to deploy to Burundi its first peacekeeping
mission. That operation, which has support from the
European Union, will be crucial to consolidating the
ceasefire. In due course, we will have to study the
conditions under which a United Nations operation
could carry on from it.
I wish to refer briefly to the question of the
international conference. The crises in Central Africa
and in the Great Lakes region cannot be understood in
isolation. Borders have they stopped neither armed
rebel movements nor military interventions by States.
Nor have they stopped trafficking weapons or in
natural resources. We know that an effective and
lasting solution to the problem must be regional in
scope. That is also the objective of the international
conference now being prepared. As we have already
said, to be successful, this conference must be open to
the participation of all neighbours of the Congo and
Burundi, without exception. It must thus include, we
believe, Angola, the Central African Republic, the
Republic of the Congo and the Sudan. It must also
focus on the fundamental issues of security and
regional economic cooperation. It is essential that the
first summit produce concrete results in the fields of
peace, security and good-neighbourliness; those results
will consolidate the peace and reconciliation processes.
I believe that the Council mission to Central
Africa, whose results we are assessing today, was
useful in a number of ways. It helped Council members
in their work by giving them concrete knowledge of the
processes under way. It encouraged the Council’s unity
and strengthened the Council’s message to the parties.

Mr. Kalomoh has told us that the mission was warmly
welcomed in the region. I believe it has also helped the
Council more effectively to support the work of the
Secretary-General and his special representatives. I pay
tribute to them and to all United Nations personnel
who, with them, are working for peace in the region.
Mr. Antonio (Angola) (spoke in French): We too
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s
meeting on Central Africa. We also thank Mr. Kalomoh
for the briefing he has just given the Council. We
believe that this meeting is being held at a crucial time
and that we should seize the opportunity offered by the
hope for peace in Central Africa.
This meeting is being held not long after we had
the privilege of hearing Mr. Swing brief the Council on
the progress made in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The peace process in that country has now
gained speed: the efforts of the international
community and the political will now being
demonstrated by the transitional Government of
national unity are cause for hope.
Nevertheless, with respect to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as was stated by the
representative of France, there are still some grey areas
that are cause for concern. I refer to areas in the east of
the country, where there is still instability, violence,
human rights violations and violations of the rights of
women in particular. I think many of us have seen
reports in the press about the situation of women in the
eastern part of the country. We think that this very
important, even crucial question requires our further
attention.
As the representative of France stated, we need to
see how to stop this violence, which could jeopardize a
process that is moving in a positive direction. The
representative of France mentioned the murder of a
Kenyan observer. We think all these elements require
us to formulate a strategy with respect to the armed
groups in the east of the country. Perhaps the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) should focus on this,
as was done in Ituri and, in West Africa, in Côte
d’Ivoire. There, a strategy had to be designed for a
given area in order to provide the proper response to a
specific situation.
The arms embargo is another aspect deserving the
Council’s attention. We know that weapons are not
free; they are bought with the very resources of the

5

S/PV.4911

Democratic Republic of the Congo. Those two aspects
are closely linked and deserve the Council’s attention.
When the Council adopted resolution 1522
(2004), it stated that reform of the security and defence
sectors was crucial to the process. We welcome that
fact that some countries are already extending
assistance. We also welcome the efforts of MONUC.
We think that this question as well is decisive for the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
With respect to Burundi, we all recall the appeal
made in the Council Chamber by Deputy President
Zuma of South Africa. We recall that he specifically
requested the deployment of a United Nations force to
Burundi. We think that such a proposal is of interest at
a time when we are overseeing this risk-filled
transitional period. Such support is crucial.
We welcome the fact that the Council mission
visited Burundi, and hope that it will now make
recommendations that can respond to all the questions
we are now asking with respect to the deployment of a
United Nations force. But at the same time, we need to
remember that the African Union force has confronted
enormous problems — without the support of the
international community. The difficulties encountered
by the force could have a negative impact on the
process itself.
As is always the case with regard to situations of
conflict, the return of peace to Burundi has given rise
to new economic and social problems. We again call
upon the international community to ensure that the
appeal that has been launched is properly supported
and that resources are provided to the Government of
Burundi. We must also encourage a positive attitude on
the part of the Bretton Woods institutions and the nongovernmental organizations and United Nations
agencies which are currently involved in seeking
solutions in Burundi.
With regard to coordination within the United
Nations, we believe that the question of Burundi still
merits attention and that cooperation between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
could make a difference there. Such was the case in
Guinea-Bissau, and we believe that we could take
advantage of the efforts of the Economic and Social
Council, which has set up an Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Burundi, chaired by the representative of South
Africa. We believe that that is an important instrument.

6

It, too, carried out a mission to the region and made
some important recommendations. Instruments such as
the Advisory Group and the Security Council Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa could prove useful in this situation.
Members may recall that when it analysed the
interim report of the multidisciplinary assessment
mission to Central Africa headed by Assistant
Secretary-General
Kalomoh
(S/2003/1077),
the
Council concluded that a regional approach was
important with regard to Central Africa. Thus, our
ongoing discussions about West Africa are of
importance as we consider the question of Central
Africa. It is a region where the majority of countries
are in a post-conflict situation — or have experienced
conflict fairly recently — and thus need an appropriate
approach to be taken. That said, however, our
discussions, and the recommendations of the Security
Council mission, should not be isolated from the
recommendations made by the multidisciplinary
mission headed by Mr. Kalomoh.
Furthermore, regional efforts are under way with
regard to integration and the quest for political
solutions. The eleventh summit meeting of the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) was held last month in Brazzaville. That
summit was seen as a turning point for the revival of
ECCAS. We believe that the summit took some
important steps, including the establishment of a free
trade zone. It also decided to establish a regional
brigade to tackle threats to peace. The implementation
of that decision will be carried out by Angola, Gabon,
the Congo and Sao Tome and Principe. We believe that
those initiatives need our support.
We also welcome the preparations for an
international conference on the Great Lakes region. As
is well known, Zambia has been admitted as the
seventh core country and Angola, the Central African
Republic and the Republic of the Congo have been
admitted as co-opted countries, while Egypt has been
admitted as an observer country. We continue to hope
that the neighbouring countries of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi will play an active
role with regard to the conference.
At this stage, we believe that, in the light of the
conclusions that have been arrived at through the
regional approach and given the link between
development and the quest for peace, United Nations

S/PV.4911

attention to the question of Central Africa is of great
importance. During the public debate that was held on
the interim report of the multidisciplinary mission to
Central Africa (see S/PV.4871), the representative of
ECCAS welcomed the proposal to appoint a special
representative for the region and expressed the hope
that discussions would continue, that the time would
come when the United Nations presence would be
strengthened in the region — for all the reasons we
have outlined, taking advantage of the window of
opportunity — and that such discussions would lead to
the establishment of a United Nations office there.
Those are some of the points that we wanted to
share with the Council at this stage. We have spoken at
some length, but we have been speaking from our heart
as well as from our head. We share in the problems of
the region — we are a member of the Economic
Community of Central African States — so our
statement today has been somewhat longer than those
of other speakers.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): Africa is
on the Security Council agenda for the fourth time in
February — the fourth time in less than three weeks.
That frequency — testimony to the importance that the
Council attaches to African issues — is to the credit of
the Council, and, in particular, to the credit of China,
your fine country, Sir, which is known to be a good
friend of Africa.
We would like to thank Mr. Kalomoh, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
outstanding briefing, as well as the Secretary-General
for the comprehensive report that he has submitted to
us (S/2004/52). That timely report paints a realistic
picture of the situation in Central Africa and of the
relevant actions undertaken to implement the
recommendations of the Security Council mission.
Since the return of the mission, we have observed
significant progress in the transition process both in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Burundi, as
well as tangible signs of peace and reconciliation that
show the political will of the two Governments and of
others involved in the peace process to break the cycle
of missed opportunities and make a real commitment to
peace.
We welcome the peaceful changeover that took
place in Bujumbura, which made it possible to begin,
without incident, the second part of the transition
period, as provided for in the Arusha Peace Agreement,

as well as the inauguration in Kinshasa of a
Government of national reconciliation in accordance
with the comprehensive and inclusive agreement.
Those major events were a decisive turning point in the
peace process in those two countries. The obstacles
that remain to be overcome are considerable. They
require that all the parties redouble their efforts to meet
the timetables established, in order to put a definitive
end to the conflict.
At this current crucial stage, those two countries
deserve to be encouraged and supported in their efforts
to build a lasting peace for the well-being of their
respective populations. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in Burundi, referendums under
conditions of transparency and credibility are the
cornerstone of the peace process and require that the
agreed measures be implemented quickly, in particular
the establishment in both countries of national armies
under unified command, and improvement of the
security situation, which is necessary in order to
organize the elections.
We welcome the commitment undertaken by the
transitional Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to make considerable progress, before the
first anniversary of its establishment, in the
establishment and functioning of the various elements
of the security forces, including the police, the close
protection corps and the army. If respected, that
commitment should provide even more encouraging
results with regard to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) in the country, the progress of
which is not meeting our expectations.
We encourage the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to define clear priorities, in
spite of the many measures it must undertake in order
to make more visible the country’s progress towards
holding the scheduled elections. We are also pleased to
see the renewed commitment of donors to continue
their support for the transition process, through various
programmes in identified sectors, in agreement with
the transitional Government.
In that regard we welcome the very efficient role
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), and in
particular its redeployment in eastern Congo to
improve the security situation there. We are gratified
by the constant improvement in relations between the
Congo and its neighbouring countries, and in particular

7

S/PV.4911

by the creation of bilateral structures of cross-border
cooperation to resolve shared security problems.

Great Lakes region, and in particular the establishment
of the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes region.

Concerning Burundi, while there are grounds for
hope in the recent peaceful transition and the admission
into the Government in December 2003, of the Conseil
national pour la défense de la démocratie-Forces
nationales pour la défense de la démocratie (CNDDFDD), the situation, in our view, remains of great
concern due to continued fighting around rural
Bujumbura and in the north-western part of the
country, in spite of the decision taken in early January
2004 by officials of the Palipehutu-FNL (Rwasa) to
enter into direct talks with the transitional Government.
Today we urgently appeal to the rebel forces to lay
down their arms and to join the peace process taking
place in Burundi so that it can succeed according to the
established timetable.

My delegation supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendations on strengthening the resources
available to the Office of his Special Representative for
the Great Lakes region to allow him to complete
preparations for the conference as soon as possible. It
is important today to take the opportunity of the
progress already made in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Burundi and the hopes for national
reconciliation that it raises to expedite the holding of
this long-awaited international conference on the Great
Lakes region. We are of the view that the conference
will help to capitalize on the current dynamic of peace
to achieve the stabilization of the whole subregion in
order to promote integrated regional development
through the rational use of its resources to bring wellbeing and prosperity to its peoples.

We urge the international community, which has
shown remarkable generosity in its solidarity with
Burundi within the partners development forum which
took place in Brussels in early January 2004, to use all
of its influence to attain a comprehensive ceasefire in
Burundi as soon as possible.
In that regard, it is important that the help
promised to Burundi be promptly mobilized in order to
support the peace process as a whole, and that such
help, above all, contribute to financing the
implementation of DDR programmes that are now
under way in liaison with the African Mission in
Burundi (AMIB). We welcome the constructive role
played by AMIB, which has concretely proven the
determination of the African Union to work resolutely
to solve the conflicts that are afflicting the continent.
With regard to the deadlines and the need to speed up
the peace process, it is urgent that the Security Council
consider the request of the Government of Burundi and
of the facilitation and regional initiative for Burundi to
transform AMIB into a United Nations peacekeeping
operation.
All the efforts to stabilize the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi cannot assure a
sustainable peace in those countries unless they are
accompanied by a comprehensive improvement in the
situation among the countries of the Great Lakes
region. We therefore welcome the considerable
progress already made in the framework of
preparations for an international conference on the

8

Mr.
Sardenberg
(Brazil):
Thank
you,
Mr. President, for your initiative in convening this
meeting. I also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Tuliameni Kalomoh for introducing the progress report
of the Secretary-General (S/2004/52).
The situation in Central Africa has been one of
the main concerns of the Security Council over the
years. More recently, there have been several positive
developments in the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in Burundi.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
transitional Government has been working steadily for
more than seven months, the transitional Assembly is
now operational and the International Committee in
Support of the Transition is meeting regularly. The
Security Council authorized a strengthened presence
and mandate for the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), which has been supporting the rule of law,
police reform and the organization of elections. The
Council has also authorized the transitional
Government to deploy its armed forces to Kisangani,
which is a further step towards extending national
authority over the territory, and has agreed to impose
an arms embargo in the Kivu and Ituri regions. We
certainly welcome those developments.
Last week, we had the opportunity to listen to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador William Lacy Swing, on the latest events
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As a result,

S/PV.4911

we were better able to assess recent achievements and
to weigh the series of measures still required for
stabilization.
In that connection, my delegation is deeply
saddened by the tragic death of a Kenyan MONUC
military observer in an ambush in Ituri. We urge the
United Nations, in cooperation with the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to strive to
bring to justice all those responsible for that criminal
act.
In Burundi we were pleased to note that the
delegation of Palipehutu-FNL (Rwasa) and President
Ndayizeye met in the Netherlands last month. Though
not conclusive, that initiative clearly confirms that
dialogue is the only way to solve differences in the
country. It sets the path for Agathon Rwasa’s
movement to join the “camp of peace”, as stated in
paragraph 62 of the Secretary-General’s report.
My delegation must nevertheless express serious
concern over the human rights situation in Burundi.
Too many violations continue to be reported, and the
Security Council has not been sufficiently responsive.
It has been well over a year since the Council was
requested by the Burundian President to consider
establishing an international commission of judicial
inquiry, and it was only in January that the terms of
reference of the assessment mission were agreed upon
by the Council.
Despite difficulties on the ground, the mission
deployed by the African Union in Burundi is working
very effectively with the Government institutions and
United Nations agencies. We commend its work and
call upon the international community to provide
further technical and financial support to the mission.
This need will be made even clearer when we receive
in the near future the report of the multidisciplinary
United Nations mission that is expected to arrive today
in Burundi to assess the needs of the country in all
fields.
Since the Council has been considering the
individual situation of each country in Central Africa, I
wish to concentrate the last part of my remarks today
on two points: development and regional dialogue.
We consider that initiatives to create a healthy
economic environment are central if a peace-building
process is to be sustainable in the long run. We cannot
commit massive international efforts to the quest for

peace only to see them crumble for lack of enough
attention to economic stability and sustained
development. In this connection, the rule of law in the
exploitation of natural resources and the improvement
of trade opportunities in the region cannot be
overlooked.
As regards the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we concur with assessments made by the Panel
of Experts that the time has come for institutional
reforms to be undertaken in the area of regulation and
control of natural resources now that the country is
unified. “Illegal exploitation”, as stated in the
Secretary-General’s report,
“remains one of the main sources of funding for
groups involved in perpetuating the conflict”.
(S/2004/52, para. 19)
In Burundi, the Economic and Social Council Ad
Hoc Advisory Group was impressed by the initiatives
of the Burundian Government on sustainable
development. My delegation is, however, disappointed
that only 10 per cent of pledges made in 2000 and 2001
by the donor community have been disbursed to the
country so far, as is mentioned in the report before us
today. At this juncture, the Security Council should
reinforce the Secretary-General’s appeal for donor
countries to accelerate disbursement.
The United Nations has an important role to play
in conducting long-term initiatives on the road towards
stabilization and development. That includes the
Security Council, as well as its coordinated efforts with
the Economic and Social Council. The cases of
Guinea-Bissau and Burundi are good precedents that
should be further developed. Moreover, the common
efforts of countries of the region towards improving
trade are a major step and we welcome initiatives that
are being taken bilaterally by Uganda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s transitional
Government.
That brings my delegation to the second point —
regional dialogue. The Secretary-General has pointed
out that prospects for convening the conference of the
Great Lakes have significantly improved. Indeed, the
organizational meeting held last month in Addis Ababa
resulted in the decision to hold the first summit at the
level of head of State in Tanzania in November this
year and a second one in mid-2005. We commend the
Special Representative of Secretary-General, Ibrahima
Fall, and all the seven core countries for this important

9

S/PV.4911

development. We are confident that this dialogue will
develop into a pact around the four main thematic areas
targeted by the conference: peace and security,
democracy
and
good
governance,
economic
development
and
regional
integration,
and
humanitarian and social issues.
We are also pleased by the interest shown by
other countries in the initiative. Angola, the Republic
of the Congo and the Central African Republic are now
working together with the core countries in the
preparatory process for the convening of the
international conference. The participation of
neighbouring countries can only add to the success of
the event. In addition, we welcome the comments made
by the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General that any other country outside the
region that has shown interest in the process can be
present as an observer — as Egypt is doing — so long
as the core countries agree to the request made by the
country concerned. Broadening participation beyond
the subregional framework, without affecting the
decision body, will certainly enhance the impact of the
conference worldwide.
As we have seen when discussing the individual
peace processes in Central Africa, the challenges ahead
are enormous, but major accomplishments should not
be discounted. To pave the way for sustainable peace in
the region, we must pay due attention to its
development component and give due support to
African ownership and regional dialogue in postconflict stabilization. This is where our cooperative
action is most needed.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh for his
introduction to the Secretary-General’s report on the
Security Council mission to Central Africa.
My delegation considers this exercise to be
timely and necessary because the Council’s missions
have become a fundamental instrument in its decisionmaking process and a clear demonstration of our
interest in the processes under way in the countries we
visit. In the case of Central Africa, the mission that was
headed by Ambassador de La Sablière in June 2003
was the fourth since the Security Council resumed in
1999 its practice of sending missions to the field.
As some of the preceding speakers have already
indicated, since the dispatch of the mission to Central
Africa there have been encouraging signs of progress

10

in the region. We welcome the progress made in the
process of establishing the transitional Government in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Striking
advances have also been made in the establishment of
good-neighbourly relations and in the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement process
for the armed Ugandan, Rwandan and Burundian
elements in the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
In spite of the progress made at the national level,
as we know, the situation in the Ituri district and in the
Kivus has been characterized by instability and by
ongoing grave abuses of human rights committed by
various rebel movements. As has been noted here, the
recent murder in Ituri of a Kenyan staff member of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo reminds us that
instability and violence still prevail in the north-eastern
part of the country. My country vigorously condemns
acts of violence, murder and other such crimes
perpetrated in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in particular against the civilian population. Such acts
must not go unpunished and the perpetrators must
sooner or later answer for them. This is a challenge to
the entire international community, but more
fundamentally to the Congolese themselves and
especially to the transitional Government.
We support the report’s conclusions regarding the
need for the transitional Government to establish clear
priorities in order to ensure the political transition. In
this context, the reform of the security sector, the
consolidation of the rule of law, respect for human
rights and the preparation for future general elections
are priority objectives.
The situation in Burundi, for its part, has also
seen important progress and the prospects for lasting
peace have improved. Since the Council mission’s visit
to Bujumbura, we have witnessed the incorporation of
the rebel movements Conseil national pour la défense
de la démocratie-Forces nationales pour la défense de
la démocratie, headed by Pierre Nkurunziza, into the
institutions of the provisional Government. It is our
hope that the statement recently made by Agathon
Rwasa, the leader of the Palipehutu-Forces nationales
de libération movement, that he would enter into
negotiations with the Government of President
Ndayizeye will lead to the prompt incorporation of that
movement into the Arusha peace process.

S/PV.4911

The challenges of Burundi’s transition process
continue to require the full attention and support of the
Security Council and the rest of the international
community. In that connection, the recommendations
made by the mission remain fully valid — particularly
the appeal to donor countries to honour the pledges
made at the Paris and Geneva conferences. That is all
the more necessary since there is a serious risk that the
signs of peace that we are seeing on the horizon could
recede if they are not accompanied by an improvement
in the living conditions of Burundi’s population.
The significant progress of the peace processes in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Burundi
provides an important impetus for the idea of holding
an international conference on the Great Lakes region.
We note with satisfaction the progress made over the
past six months in designing and elaborating a process
to promote substantive dialogue among the countries
central to such a conference, the United Nations, the
African Union and the donor community. The
commencement of the preparatory process for a
conference has led to an increase in the activities of the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region — an office that
unfortunately has neither the staff nor the budget
necessary to meet the tasks that lie ahead. That requires
that the Council analyse in detail the mandates of the
various offices and missions in Central Africa in the
light of the new scenario before us and that it
determine whether adjustments are needed to improve
their efficiency.
A firm and lasting peace in the region is today an
inescapable imperative. An African continent that has
economic stability and that invests in the development
of its people would be a major contribution by the
United Nations system. In the context of the United
Nations, Chile has always supported solutions and
initiatives aimed at promoting the interests of the
African
continent,
first
by
promoting
the
decolonization process, later through the bodies created
in the United Nations towards that end and, more
recently, by providing troops from our country’s armed
forces for peace efforts in the region.
I take this opportunity to reaffirm the need to take
the integrated approach with respect to Africa
promoted by the Secretary-General. In that context, my
country believes that the Security Council should
consider in the coming months the possibility of
organizing another mission to the Central African

region. The objective of such a mission would be to
assess on the ground the most urgent needs of the
provisional Governments of Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with respect to
security sector reform, the establishment of the rule of
law and the preparations for general elections at the
end of 2004, at the beginning of 2005 and in June
2005.
Finally, we trust that the progress we have seen
will be consolidated and improved upon with the full
cooperation of the Organization.
Mr. Mercado (Philippines): My delegation joins
other delegations in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this public meeting to pursue continuity and
follow-up with regard to the work of the Security
Council in Central Africa. My delegation also
expresses its appreciation to Assistant SecretaryGeneral Kalomoh for his introduction of the SecretaryGeneral’s progress report (S/2004/52).
The Central African subregion is the heart of the
continent, and its peace and stability have considerable
impact on the entire region. The report of the
Secretary-General is fittingly titled, since there has
been significant progress in the implementation of the
recommendations of the mission in the past seven
months. The international community should capitalize
on that positive momentum and should continue to
build upon the achievements to date.
My delegation wishes to preface its statement by
concurring with the view expressed by the
multidisciplinary assessment mission that visited the
Central African region from 8 to 22 June 2003 and
concluded that
“the prospects for positive change remain high,
especially if the international community
maintains and intensifies its partnership with
subregional organizations, Governments and civil
society groups to address the problems
confronting Central Africa.” (S/2003/1077, p. 3)
The Security Council mission led by France set
out the direction and provided the impetus for progress
in Central Africa. Despite the present challenges, the
Council and the international community must sustain
their efforts in the subregion. It is in that light that my
delegation wishes to highlight the following.
Concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we wish to commend the Congolese, the United

11

S/PV.4911

Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the African
Union, particularly the Troika — Mozambique, South
Africa and Zambia — for the establishment of the
transitional Government last June and for the
subsequent actions undertaken to build the foundations
for security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
notably the establishment of integrated army and police
forces, as well as the formation of the National DDR
Commission. Efforts to consolidate the authority of the
transitional Government in the entire country,
particularly in the eastern part, need to be accelerated.
My delegation also hopes that efforts to halt the
proliferation of arms and the illegal exploitation of
natural resources will be intensified, given that those
activities account for the continuation of conflict in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that
regard, my delegation is confident that the Council will
be able to adopt a resolution addressing those concerns.
My delegation agrees with the assessment made
last week by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, William Lacy Swing, that the
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo set
for 2005 can be carried out if the international
community provides its robust support, particularly to
the United Nations, which would be organizing its
largest elections ever. Those historic elections would
also be an opportunity to lay the groundwork for a
positive political environment in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in which the electorate would
be able to make educated choices.
Concerning Burundi, my delegation is pleased to
note that the prospects for peace in that country have
improved. In that regard, we urge the transitional
Government, the Burundians and the United Nations
Office in Burundi to persevere in their efforts to further
the peace process. The general insecurity and human
rights abuses need to be addressed. Continued signs of
peace are necessary to encourage the international
community to accelerate the disbursement of pledges
made at the Paris and Geneva conferences. As it is, we
welcome the European Commission’s announcement of
the approval of $19 million in humanitarian aid for
Burundi. We hope that that will encourage other donor
countries to fulfil their pledges.
Application of the regional approach has never
been more relevant than it is in the Great Lakes region.
For years, the idea of an international conference on
the Great Lakes region has been put forth, with no

12

action being taken until now. It is thus gratifying to
note from the Secretary-General’s report that
developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in Burundi have created new momentum in favour
of such a conference, which could be held at the
ministerial level by October of this year and at the
summit level the following month. We hope that the
change in the schedule for the conference, which was
tentatively planned for June will provide enough time
for the participating countries to consider the substance
of the conference and to come up with concrete
proposals to address the interlocking tragedies in
Central Africa.
We commend the Group of Friends, co-chaired by
Canada and the Netherlands, for its important role in
providing political, diplomatic, technical and financial
assistance in support of the preparatory process for a
conference. We hope that all those efforts will lead to a
security pact that will in turn lead to lasting and
durable peace and stability in the Great Lakes region.
We must not forget that more than 3 million
people have already died as a result of the conflict in
Central Africa and that the complexity of the situation
has hampered its effective resolution for far too long.
In that regard, my delegation would support the
additional allocation of resources to the Office of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region to ensure
that it can effectively carry out its mandate and the
regional tasks entrusted to it.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of the Philippines is the only speaker so
far today who made his statement in less than five
minutes.
Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): First of all, Mr. President,
we would like to commend your initiative in convening
this meeting. We would also like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Kalomoh for presenting the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2004/52).
Since the Security Council mission visited
Central Africa, a number of positive developments
have taken place. These include an improvement of the
political and security situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and, in Burundi, progress in the
implementation of the Arusha Agreement, with the
participation of the Conseil national pour la défense de
la démocratie — Forces nationales pour la défense de
la démocratie (CNDD-FDD) in the transitional
Government. There has also been an improvement in

S/PV.4911

the relations of the countries in the region, with the
explicit desire of many of their leaders to move
towards peace and reconciliation.
While we welcome these positive developments,
we must also be aware that much more needs to be
done to consolidate peace in the region. In this context,
we condemn the brutal killing of a Kenyan military
observer last week, and it is our hope that the
perpetrators of this crime will be brought to justice.
It is obvious that in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo progress is still required in the areas of
security sector reform and the rule of law, as well as in
the functioning of interim administrations, particularly
in Ituri. While we welcome the holding of elections in
May 2005, this must not be seen as an end in itself, but
a means to an end.
Similarly, in Burundi, the peace process will not
be complete without the inclusion in that process of all
the factions, in particular the Forces nationales de
libération (FNL) (Rwasa) faction. There is also a need
to support the efforts of the African Union in Burundi,
address the issues of transitional justice, which are a
part of the Arusha Agreement, and help the badly
battered Burundian economy stand on its feet.
The international community’s goal in both
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
must remain the consolidation of peace and stability.
One way to achieve this is by assisting both countries
in the following areas: first, in extending their State
authority; secondly, in carrying out meaningful security
sector reform through the creation of a truly general
national army and police; thirdly, in facilitating the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of combatants, both local and foreign; fourthly, in
strengthening the rule of law and putting an end to
impunity; fifthly, in addressing humanitarian issues;
and sixthly, in promoting national economic
reconstruction and rehabilitation.
The recent tragic history of the region has clearly
demonstrated how easy it is for instability and conflict
in one country to spill over into another. Borders are
porous and do not make countries immune from the
free flow of arms and fighters and worsening
humanitarian situations. Such issues cannot be handled
by any one country alone. A regional approach is,
therefore, indispensable. However, such an approach
must aim at improving the political relations between

States and at helping them jointly resolve the
challenges they face.
As part of this regional approach, Pakistan
supports the convening of the international conference
on the Great Lakes region proposed for later this year.
The conference, however, must yield tangible results.
This can only be accomplished if the countries of the
region and their partners outside the region can work
together a priori to identify realistic objectives, themes
and structures. At the very least, this conference must
yield agreement on confidence-building measures to
help consolidate regional peace and stability.
At the same time, there are underlying issues of a
cross-cutting nature that will have to be addressed, and
not only within national or regional frameworks. Those
issues are the following.
First, one of the root causes of instability in the
region is poverty. There cannot be any peace without
poverty alleviation. The humanitarian situation, the
success of DDR and the consolidation of peace are not
possible without sufficient generation of sustainable
economic activity. The international community must
continue to assist not only the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Burundi, but also other countries in the
region, to promote long-term socio-economic
development.
Secondly, while greed may not have been the
cause of conflict, it has been responsible for
perpetuating it. There is an obvious and wellestablished link between the illegal exploitation of
natural resources and the fuelling of conflicts in the
subregion. The Secretary-General’s report clearly states
that “Illegal exploitation remains one of the main
sources of funding for groups involved in perpetuating
the conflict” (S/2004/52, paragraph 19). We must find
those who finance these wars by buying, trading and
engaging in the production and illegal exploitation of
the region’s natural resources. The extension of State
authority and institutional reforms are imperative, as is
the need for full disclosure of revenues earned from
natural resources. We need a national, regional and
global approach to address those issues.
Thirdly, the success of the peace process thus far
has largely hinged on successful peacekeeping
efforts — in the Democratic Republic of the Congo by
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), and in
Burundi by the African Mission in Burundi (AMIB).

13

S/PV.4911

Both missions these need to be supported and, if
necessary, augmented by the United Nations. Pakistan,
as a major United Nations troop-contributor, will
continue to support such activities in the region.
Finally, on a policy level, the United Nations
itself needs to act coherently in Central Africa in
addressing the diverse requirements for consolidating
peace and stability in the region. It is imperative to
achieve greater coordination and synergy between the
endeavours of the three principal organs of the United
Nations — the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council — in addressing
the complex issues confronting the region. At the same
time, the active engagement of non-governmental
organizations, other United Nations agencies and, in
particular, the international financial institutions is
needed to bolster the whole effort. The idea suggested
by Pakistan of ad hoc composite committees could be
one means of building a comprehensive and coherent
approach by the United Nations and the international
community to complex crises.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful to Mr. Kalomoh for having introduced this
very interesting report from the Secretary-General
(S/2004/52), on which I would like to make a few brief
comments.
Regarding the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the progress made in the peace
process since the Security Council mission is
encouraging. Nonetheless, it is essential that the
transitional authorities make progress without delay in
key areas such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants. They must also
restructure the armed forces and undertake judiciary
reform in order to put an end to impunity. All of this,
of course, is with a view to holding free and
democratic elections in June of next year.
With regard to Burundi, we welcome the progress
made in recent months. We believe that the time has
come to apply, without delay, the process of
demobilization and disarmament and to tackle the
restructuring of the armed forces. It is equally
important that the necessary measures be taken for the
establishment of the truth and reconciliation
commission.
In connection with the future international
conference on the Great Lakes region, we are pleased
to note that during the meeting held in Addis Ababa,

14

decisions were taken on participation in that
conference and that progress is being made in
clarifying its objectives, desired results and timetable.
We thus encourage the participants in that process to
continue their work, including the establishment of
national preparatory committees by all participating
States and the convening, as soon as possible, of an
initial regional meeting of these committees, which
will make it possible to further the preparations for the
conference. Convening that conference and improving
bilateral relations between countries of the region are
positive initiatives that promote confidence-building
measures and cooperation and strengthen the dynamic
of peace being consolidated in the region.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Kalomoh for his excellent introduction of the
progress report of the Secretary-General on Central
Africa (S/2004/52). When we considered the report of
the Secretary-General on West Africa (see S/PV.4899),
I could not help drawing a parallel with Central Africa
and noting the striking similarities between those two
parts of the African continent. At that time, I stressed
the importance of a regional approach, which we feel is
the only one that can encourage the emergence of a
climate of lasting peace and stability able to lift the
countries of the region from the crises that undermine
them and whose transborder ramifications are obvious.
I do not need to dwell on the considerable
progress made in restoring peace and security in the
countries of Central Africa, in particular in Burundi
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Last week,
we had an opportunity to assess the progress made
towards national reunification and the establishment of
the authority of national Government in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to note the encouraging
signs of the normalization of that country’s relations
with its immediate neighbours.
In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
efforts made to help the transitional authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to speed up the
establishment of an integrated and unified national
army and to establish a national police force. But at the
same time, we voice our concern at the absence of
clarity and progress in creating a national plan defining
the modalities for achieving this twofold objective,
which is closely linked to the fate of the process of
demobilizing and reintegrating Congolese combatants.

S/PV.4911

My delegation also expresses its concern at the
delay in completing the work on the legislation that is
essential for the future of the peace process and the
transitional institutions, in particular with regard to the
establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission,
the drawing up of electoral districts — which is of
prime importance for the elections scheduled for June
2005 — media laws, the fight against corruption,
human rights and combating impunity.
With respect to the situation in Ituri and the
Kivus, which continues to poison relations between the
various protagonists in the peace process in the
country, my delegation welcomes the redeployment of
the forces of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to
that triangle where Congolese and foreign combatants
are concentrated. We are encouraged by the results
achieved in a relatively short span of time, in particular
with respect to the return of foreign combatants to their
countries of origin. We believe that strengthening the
arms embargo will greatly contribute to efforts to
pacify that part of the country. We take note of the
links among arms trafficking, the illegal exploitation of
natural resources and the continuation of the conflict
and support the three-tier mechanism now before the
Council for monitoring the embargo against arms
flowing to that part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
In Burundi, after the signing and gradual
implementation of the ceasefire agreement, new
prospects for the return of peace and security have
emerged. The African Mission in Burundi (AMIB) has,
in particularly difficult circumstances, helped greatly to
stabilize the situation in the country. Important
progress has been made, but numerous challenges
remain before the holding of elections scheduled for
next November at the latest.
It is high time the United Nations took on a role
in Burundi. We believe that this should take the form of
a peacekeeping mission to replace AMIB and support
the peace process in the country until it is completed.
The example of
MONUC’s outstanding
contribution to peace-building in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Mission’s assistance in
the process of preparing for elections and establishing
rule-of-law institutions encourages us to advocate a
greater international presence in Burundi, where the
progress made in restoring peace remains very fragile

because of the precarious economic and social
situation, which is exacerbated by the flow of refugees
and displaced persons and by the repatriation of
combatants.
My delegation therefore welcomes the holding of
the forum of the development partners of Burundi, held
in Brussels on 13 and 14 January 2004. We hope that
donors will speed up the release of pledged funds so
that the transitional authorities can undertake reforms
for restoring and strengthening peace in Burundi.
My delegation welcomes the initiative of the
Secretary-General which on 25 September 2003
brought together heads of State and senior
representatives of countries of the region, and we
welcome the adoption by the participants in that
meeting of a declaration on the principles of goodneighbourly relations and cooperation. That initiative
strengthens our conviction that efforts should be made
in the framework of a regional action strategy,
something which has not so far been adequately
explored by the international community.
From that perspective, my delegation considers
the planned international conference on the Great
Lakes region to be an irreplaceable framework for
seeking solutions to the conflicts and the instability of
the countries of Central Africa and for consolidating
the peace process under way in the region.
My delegation expresses its satisfaction at the
progress made towards holding this important event in
November 2004 in Tanzania, and it encourages the
countries of the region to continue their efforts to
create the best conditions for success, including by
initiating a substantive debate enabling the conference
to achieve the desired results. My delegation welcomes
the progress made at the meetings of the country
coordinators for the countries concerned, in particular
the progress made at the 19 December 2003 Nairobi
meeting, which established the conference’s structure,
composition, objectives and topics. My delegation
shares the opinion that the four themes of the
conference are interdependent and of equal importance,
and that they deserve to receive equal, priority
treatment in the preparatory process.
Finally, I welcome the establishment on 4
December 2003, under the chairmanship of Canada and
the Netherlands, of the Group of Friends of the Great
Lakes region and express my support for the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to provide additional

15

S/PV.4911

resources for the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region.

an important tool on the ground to help identify
concerns and urge solutions.

Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Kalomoh for his
presentation. I associate myself with the remarks to be
made later by the representative of Ireland on behalf of
the European Union and, especially, express the
condolences of the British Government to the
Government of Kenya, to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and especially to the family of
the Kenyan military observer killed in Ituri on 12
February.

We also need to continue to tackle the violence in
the east. The arms embargo imposed by resolution
1493 (2003) cannot put a perfect seal on the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. How
could it, given the length of the border? But it can have
a real deterrent effect and make clear that we are
serious. We hope, therefore, that we can reach early
agreement on an arms monitoring mechanism.

Last year’s Great Lakes mission was a valuable
initiative at a critical moment: critical for the peace
process in Burundi and especially for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and for the future of the region.
It is right that we should put the situation in a regional
context. The efforts of the transitional national
Government and the Governments of Rwanda and
Uganda to improve relations are indeed very welcome.
Turning to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, I congratulate MONUC on its work. It is
striking that the attack last week took place during a
MONUC mission to stop harassment of the civilian
population. All the parties in Ituri must put an
immediate end to such violence. I rally readily to the
argument put forward by Ambassador de La Sablière
that there is a strong case for MONUC to take a more
robust posture with the militia in Ituri. The failure to
do that at the beginning of conflict always pays us
badly at the end.
The transition process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo — in particular, election
preparations, security sector reform and the political
and economic reunification of the country — poses
huge challenges. For that, we need a transitional
national Government-owned strategy and a real
national Government — one which then coordinates
fully with the donors. The United Kingdom will
continue to step up its engagement on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as long as the transition remains
on track.
The Security Council can support the process by
keeping the situation under regular review and
commenting, including publicly, as necessary. The
International Committee in Support of the Transition is

16

Turning to Burundi, the African Mission is doing
a very good job under difficult conditions and serious
financial constraints. The African Union, South Africa,
Mozambique and Ethiopia are to be congratulated on
their significant contribution to supporting the peace
process in Burundi. The United Kingdom has made, is
making and will continue to make substantial sums
available, especially to the African Mission in Burundi.
We are also open to the idea that this force might in
due course be replaced by a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Burundi.
We look forward to the report of the Secretariat
mission that is due to travel to the region this week —
one of the three United Nations missions currently, or
soon to be, in the country.
Lastly, turning to impunity, we remain concerned
about the continuing and recent human rights abuses in
Burundi. In this context, we welcome and strongly
support the projects developed by the Burundi Field
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Progress towards establishing a truth and reconciliation
commission has been too slow. We hope that the
disagreement between political groups, which so far
has held up parliamentary adoption of the law on truth
and reconciliation, will soon be overcome, and the law
adopted.
In our view, it is important that the question of
impunity and post-conflict justice be addressed at an
early stage. That is necessary if there is to be lasting
peace in Burundi based on democratic principles
fostering truth and reconciliation and, at the same time,
achieving justice.
I have a lot more to say, but as others have made
similar points and as you, Mr. President, have imposed
a five-minute time limit, I will willingly stop.
Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Central Africa remains one of the crisis-

S/PV.4911

ridden subregions of the African continent and requires
the ongoing attention of the Security Council. We have
studied in detail the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the recommendations of the
Security Council mission to Central Africa
(S/2004/52), and on the whole we agree with the
assessments and conclusions it contains.
With regard to specific situations in the
subregion, we would like to highlight a number of
issues. The overall situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains generally stable. The
process of resolving the crisis in that country is gaining
ground. Some positive trends are emerging in the areas
of achieving national reconciliation, extending State
authority to the entire territory of the country and
preparing for the general elections to be held in
2005 — although all of these processes are
encountering significant difficulties. Steps to create the
first integrated army brigade in Kisangani effectively
marked the beginning of the formation of a unified
armed force in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Thanks to active international intervention, there
has been an obvious improvement in the security
situation in the eastern part of the country. Steps are
being taken to end impunity for war crimes, although
much remains to be done. It is important that all parties
participating in the peace process remain fully
committed to their obligations and that the forces that
are resisting the peace process be prevented from
continuing their activities. Additional efforts are
required to disarm and repatriate foreign combatants.
Some progress has been made in the resolution of
the situation in Burundi. State structures for the
transitional period are functioning and contacts are
continuing with the forces that have not yet laid down
their weapons. An end to violence must be achieved in
the provinces. The progress achieved in the repatriation
of Burundi combatants from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo should be further developed. The African
Mission in Burundi deserves our appreciation. We hope
that the transitional period will end, on time, with the
holding of presidential and parliamentary elections.
The situation in Central Africa has been
positively influenced by the overall improvement in the
regional situation. We take note of the trend towards
normalization in relations among Kinshasa, Kigali,
Kampala and Bujumbura, which signed, in September
2003, a declaration of principles on good-neighbourly

relations and cooperation. All of these developments
encourage the creation of a context that is more
conducive to efforts by the interested parties to prepare
the way for an international conference on peace,
security, confidence-building measures and economic
development in the Great Lakes region.
Given the effective role played by United Nations
structures in establishing good-neighbourly relations
and settling crises in Central African countries, we
express support for the efforts of the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mr. Swing, his Representative
for Burundi, Mr. Dinka, and his Special Representative
for the Great Lakes region, Mr. Fall.
Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): We,
too, welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2004/52) and its introduction by Assistant
Secretary-General Kalomoh.
We appreciate the particular insights offered by
participants in Security Council missions. We believe
that these missions provide an opportunity to learn the
situation on the ground and that they are an invaluable
means of informing Council deliberations. It has been
almost nine months since the Council mission under
discussion took place. Much of what has transpired —
thanks to the efforts of the United Nations and the
peoples and Governments of the region — has been
positive. Nonetheless, the peoples of Central Africa
continue to endure significant suffering.
In general, my delegation endorses the
conclusions of the Secretary-General’s report. We
would wish to highlight certain points. With regard to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, my delegation
was deeply saddened by the death last week of a
Kenyan member of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). He lost his life in a violent attack, while
carrying out his duties on behalf of peace and justice,
in Ituri. His family and his country have our
condolences.
Despite continued insecurity in parts of the
Central African region, there is cause for hope. Since
the mission travelled to the Congo, a transitional
Government and its administrative arrangements have
been established. The Security Council adopted
resolution 1493 (2003), which gave MONUC a more
robust mandate and authorized the expanded force
level required to carry it out.

17

S/PV.4911

The Council remains united in its determination
to stop the flow of illicit arms into the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and Member States should be
reminded of their obligation under resolution 1493
(2003) to halt the supply of arms to factions in the
Congo from their territories or by their nationals. The
adoption of resolution 1493 (2003) also allows the
United Nations to build on the impressive work carried
out by the French-led European Union intervention.
Operation Artemis successfully addressed the serious
violence then occurring in Bunia.
Last week, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Ambassador William Lacy Swing, focused our
attention on the many tasks that remain to be
completed by the 2005 election date set by the
Congolese themselves as the end of the transition.
These tasks include a commitment to continued
improvement in the relations between Governments of
the region.
We thank the Secretary-General and his
Representative for their efforts to create better relations
among Central African nations, and in that connection
we look to the Great Lakes conference now scheduled
for November 2004 as a forum to solidify and endorse
improvements in regional relations. We would ask
fellow Member States not to wait for the conference to
establish stronger ties with their neighbours, but to
arrive at the conference with those stronger ties already
cemented as an achievement. The Secretary-General’s
report refers to increased resource requirements related
to the preparations for the Great Lakes conference. We
hope that the friends of the conference will direct
sufficient resources to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, Mr.
Fall, to prepare for, and carry out, that important
meeting.
Recent months have seen a trend in Burundi
towards greater peace and stability. Burundi’s people
have experienced violence and insecurity for too long.
The success of the peace process is critical to pave the
way for a normal democratic process and much-needed
economic development. We welcome the Conseil
national pour la défense de la démocratie-Forces
nationales pour la défense de la démocratie (CNDDFDD) joining the ceasefire and the Government and
urging the remaining rebel group, the Forces nationales
de libération (FNL) also to join the ceasefire.

18

We agree with the Secretary-General’s report that
the African Mission in Burundi has been doing
outstanding work in Burundi, despite the serious
challenges it faces. The work of the African Mission in
Burundi is indispensable to the success of
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes and to the overall peace process. We
applaud the efforts of the troop-contributing
countries — Ethiopia, Mozambique and South
Africa — and we would highlight in particular the
invaluable role of South Africa in furthering Burundi’s
peace process and its leadership during the November
summit of the Great Lakes Regional Initiative on
Burundi.
We would also recognize the contributions made
to the African Mission in Burundi on a bilateral basis
by the United Kingdom, Italy, the Netherlands and
Germany, in addition to that of my own country, as
well as the more recent generous European Union
contribution. However, the African Mission in Burundi
continues to face a funding shortfall. We are looking
for additional funds to support that Mission, and we
urge others to provide financial support as soon as they
can. Burundi has been an excellent example of an
African solution to an African problem and of the
African Union’s contribution to peace and stability on
the continent. The international community should
therefore do everything possible to support the
Mission’s efforts.
My delegation looks forward to continued
engagement by the Council on the problems of Central
Africa, and to cooperation between the Council and
States of the region.
Mr. Motoc (Romania) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
detailed report (S/2004/52). My thanks go also to the
Council presidency for having convened this meeting
to discuss the Security Council mission to Central
Africa, which is an excellent opportunity to assess the
implementation of its recommendations. Mr. Kalomoh,
as usual, gave us an outstanding introduction to the
report. I would like to pay special tribute to the
enlightened leadership of Ambassador de La Sablière
as head of mission.
Romania associates itself fully with the statement
to be made by the Irish presidency of the European
Union. I take this opportunity to say that we very much

S/PV.4911

appreciate the efforts made by the European Union for
the stabilization and development of Central Africa.
We take note of the overall progress in the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which could signal a new favourable context for peace
and stability throughout the region. In our view, the top
priority for the success of the transition in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is to strengthen the
capacity of the transitional Government of national
unity and the extension of its authority throughout the
territory, beginning with its capacity to control all of its
borders. Furthermore, the Government must speed up
the formulation and adoption of legislation essential for
the electoral process, and must implement the process
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
Congolese combatants.
We echo the appeal made in the report of the
Secretary-General for the Council to continue to
support the peace process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in particular concerning the elimination
of arms trafficking, a condition which is essential for
the stability and development of the country.
When we look at the report, we must note that it
does not consider in detail the human rights situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That aspect
should be addressed in greater detail in future reports.
Turning to the situation in Burundi, Romania, like
other Council members, welcomes the considerably
improved prospects for peace in that country. Here, we
welcome the discussions that took place recently in the
Netherlands between the President of Burundi and a
delegation of the Forces nationales de libération (FNL).
We very much encourage the parties to continue their
discussions in order to achieve concrete results and to
consolidate the peace process.
Without doubt, there is now a real chance for a
return to normalcy in that country. But the Burundians
themselves, as well as the international community,
need to take advantage of the favourable context. Much
remains to be done, since the peace process will soon
enter the crucial phase of elections. The parties must
make sure that the ceasefire is fully implemented. We
also hope that political progress will lead to improved
living conditions for the people and an improvement in
the humanitarian situation. Urgent and substantial
support by the international community will be
essential to ensure that peace in Burundi is irreversible.
From that standpoint, the work done by the United

Nations Office in Burundi as well as the important role
played by the African Mission in Burundi (AMIB) are
commendable.
It would be logical to mention, at this point, the
timeliness of an international conference on the Great
Lakes region, given the progress made in the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in Burundi. Romania unreservedly supports the
organization of such a conference. We are encouraged
by steps recently taken, both nationally in the countries
concerned and regionally, to prepare for the
conference. In this context, we welcome the convening
of a preparatory meeting in Addis Ababa on 14
January, with the participation of the representatives of
the subregional organizations of the Great Lakes
region.
I take this opportunity to stress the need for
regional coordination, which would make it possible to
implement political and economic confidence-building
measures that are vital to the development of the entire
Great Lakes region. The strengthening of a climate of
trust and the capacities of the countries of the region to
develop regional cooperation projects is an important
condition for guaranteeing concrete results and the
success of the international conference on the Great
Lakes region.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I would like to join
other delegations in thanking Mr. Kalomoh for his
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General. We
would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
important meeting, because we welcome this
opportunity for an in-depth discussion of the situation
in the Central African subregion. The current political
climate in Central Africa offers the region the historic
opportunity to claim at last its rightful place as a major
economic and political force on that continent.
In addition to the statement that Ambassador
Ryan of Ireland will shortly deliver on behalf of the
European Union presidency, which we fully endorse,
allow me to highlight four short points that we believe
to be of major importance in this context.
First, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
making great strides towards political stability. During
President Kabila’s visit to Berlin on 6 February, the
German Government acknowledged the efforts of the
transitional national Government in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and underlined its willingness
to continue to support the peace process there

19

S/PV.4911

bilaterally as well as within the frameworks of the
European Union, the United Nations and the
international financial institutions.
Still, there are many obstacles that must be
overcome before sustainable peace is achieved in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Security in the
eastern Congo has improved following the success of
Operation Artemis and the subsequent increase of the
strength and capabilities of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Let me say that we are deeply saddened by
the death of a Kenyan military observer in Ituri. We
express our condolences to the Kenyan Government
and we hope that those responsible for the crime will
be brought to justice swiftly.
One decisive element of peacekeeping in eastern
Congo is the weapons embargo for North and South
Kivu and Ituri, set forth in Security Council resolution
1493 (2003). The arms embargo must be strengthened
in order for it to have a deterrent effect. We hope that
the Security Council will soon be in a position to reach
a decision on this matter.
With regard to the security sector throughout the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the high-level
meeting in New York a week ago developed a common
understanding on the way forward and identified the
most urgent tasks for the transitional national
Government in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the international donor community to ensure that
the transition stays on track and that elections can be
held on schedule.
Secondly, the peace process in Burundi seems to
be on the right course with the opening of a dialogue
between the Burundian Government and the
Palipehutu-Forces nationales de libération. The
Security Council has welcomed this development and
is looking forward to its next stage. In due course, the
Council will have to decide on the question of an
enlarged United Nations role in the Burundian peace
process.
The African Mission in Burundi (AMIB) has
contributed tremendously to the stabilization of that
country. Germany has supported AMIB bilaterally, in
addition to its share of the European Union’s €25
million for the Mission. We commend the role AMIB
has played in stabilizing the country. South African
Vice-President Zuma reminded the Council, at the open
meeting in December, that one of the objectives of the

20

African Mission in Burundi was to help create
conditions that are favourable for the establishment of
a United Nations peacekeeping operation. My
Government believes that the deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation in Burundi must now
be given serious consideration.
Thirdly, from a regional perspective, efforts to
normalize relations between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and neighbouring States are being
stepped up with the declaration of principles of goodneighbourly relations and cooperation of September
2003, subsequent high-level visits between Rwanda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
agreements on the reopening of embassies. Such
confidence-building measures are indispensable
building blocks for the Great Lakes region conference.
This brings me to my fourth point. The initiative
for a Great Lakes region conference under the auspices
of the United Nations and the African Union is finally
taking shape. In this context, let me say that we are not
at all discouraged by the recent adjustment to the
conference’s timetable. On the contrary, we are pleased
with the decision to shift the first summit to a date that
allows for careful and thorough preparation of the
substance, format and structure of that important
process.
Despite these encouraging developments, the
process of the political and economic stabilization of
the Central African subregion remains vulnerable and
is not yet irreversible. Many of the problems afflicting
the region can be dealt with effectively only at the
regional level. The disarmament, demobilization and
successful reintegration of former combatants into
regular armies or civilian life is a cross-cutting issue,
as are the illegal exploitation of natural resources and
the illegal flow of arms to belligerents.
All of these challenges can be met only through
joint efforts by the countries in the region and the
international community as a whole. Strong regional
involvement will remain a decisive factor. That means
strengthening existing subregional mechanisms,
supporting promising developments within the African
Union, and further coordination between mechanisms
as well as cooperation with the United Nations, the
international
financial
institutions
and
other
stakeholders.
Cooperation
organizations also

among
requires

mechanisms
and
the identification of

S/PV.4911

respective strengths and areas of responsibility. Further
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council, in particular, in our
view, will be of benefit.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of China.
I, too, wish to thank Mr. Kalomoh for introducing
the progress report of the Secretary-General on the
recommendations of the Security Council mission to
Central Africa. We are pleased to note that, since the
Council mission’s visit to Central Africa last June, the
overall situation in that region has witnessed
encouraging changes. The transitional Government and
the legislative bodies of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are functioning well. The security
environment in the East has been enhanced. Relations
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
neighbours have improved to varying degrees.
The peace process in Burundi continues to make
progress. The Conseil national pour la défense de la
démocratie-Forces nationales pour la défense de la
démocratie have entered the peace process. The leaders
of Palipehutu-Forces nationales de libération met with
the President of Burundi last month. The disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme in
Burundi has been fully launched.

We appreciate the outstanding role played by the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in the
peace process in that country, and we shall continue
actively to support its work. We also support the
United Nations in providing effective assistance to
facilitate the settlement of the Burundi issue, and we
urge the Parti pour la libération du peuple hutu-Forces
nationales de libération (Palipehutu-FNL) to enter the
Burundi peace process expeditiously.
We think that, under the current circumstances,
the convening of an international conference on the
Great Lakes region is of great significance for further
enhancement of the peace processes in both countries,
for friendly relations among all countries of the region
and for lasting peace, stability and development in
Central Africa. We look forward to the holding of the
conference as scheduled and to its positive outcome.
We endorse the Secretariat’s recommendations on
increased resources for the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Burundi. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

Events have demonstrated that the Council
mission’s visit and recommendations are useful in
advancing the situation in Central Africa, including in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi.
Naturally, the peace processes in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi still face many
uncertainties. Both countries have much to do in the
areas of security sector reform, the rule of law and
preparations
for
general
elections.
National
reconciliation awaits further consolidation. The
economies of both countries are extremely precarious
due to the effects of the long war. The proper handling
of the issues in those areas is of vital importance to
achieving sustainable peace in both countries.

Mr. Nkingiye (Burundi) (spoke in French): It is a
real pleasure for me to see you, Sir, presiding over the
Security Council during the month of February. China,
which you represent, is indeed a sincere friend to
Burundi and to all of Africa. The brief time you have
spent in the presidency suffices to confirm your
unfailing devotion to the cause of the United Nations.
Your outstanding performance is a source of pride for
your country and for us. I should also like to pay a
well-deserved tribute to your predecessor for the
excellent work accomplished last month. In addition, I
want to take this opportunity to thank Mr. Kalomoh for
his excellent introduction of the progress report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/52).

The international community should continue to
follow the situation in both countries and encourage all
parties to keep the peace, while adopting a
comprehensive and integrated strategy to facilitate
national reconciliation there and to help them achieve
economic reconstruction.

Thanks to the efforts of the States and the peoples
of Central Africa, supported by the international
community, the destructive wars and the tensions
among neighbours that have characterized the past 10
years are beginning to fade. In their place,
normalization processes are making undeniable
progress, giving fresh hope to populations that have

21

S/PV.4911

endured unspeakable violence and suffering, including
genocide.

process can be totally inclusive and can make steady
progress.

As pointed out by the Secretary-General’s report,
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
Burundi, although still fragile, is no longer an
unattainable objective. Since the last Security Council
mission, in June 2003, new institutions have been
established in both countries. They are guiding the
transition — with some difficulties, to be sure, but
also, and above all, with an unfailing determination to
stop the war, to reconcile the populations, to build
democracy and respect for human rights, to rebuild the
nation and, finally, to rebuild regional solidarity on
new foundations of trust, mutual respect and
complementarity.

Concerning support for the African Mission in
Burundi (AMIB), it is important first of all to stress
that it has done remarkable work since its
deployment — work carried out under very difficult
conditions related to the lack of logistical and financial
resources, a situation that still persists. AMIB had been
deployed initially to protect leaders returning from
exile, to monitor the ceasefire, to assist in the first
demobilization and disarmament activities and thus to
create an environment conducive to the deployment of
a United Nations peacekeeping mission.

Here, I should like to elaborate on the steps taken
by my country, Burundi, and on the challenges still to
be met. During its visit in early June 2003, the Security
Council resolved to continue its political support for
the process of negotiation with the armed groups, to
mobilize donors and to contribute to the fight against
impunity.
On the first point, much progress has been made,
since the principal rebel movement — the Conseil
national pour la défense de la démocratie-Forces
nationales pour la défense de la démocratie (CNDDFDD) — has signed with the Government a ceasefire
agreement now respected by both parties and has
joined the transitional institutions. Therefore, all that
remains is to canton its combatants and to begin
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
repatriation (DDRR) operations. Their cantonment,
together with the formation of a joint protection unit
for the institutions, should begin this very week.
The other movements are also in the process of
gathering their combatants, most of whom are returning
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo with the
support of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
Only the Parti pour la libération du peuple hutu-Forces
nationales de libération (Palipehutu-FNL) movement
remains outside the peace process. But there has been
real hope of bringing it to the negotiating table since
the meeting held from 18 to 21 January 2004 in the
Netherlands between the President of the Republic and
a delegation from that movement. Pressure by the
international community on Mr. Agathon Rwasa, leader
of the movement, is still urgently needed so that the

22

Members will recall that the South African
Deputy President, a mediator in the Burundi conflict,
came before the Security Council on 4 December 2003
to advocate the dispatch of a United Nations
peacekeeping mission, given the progress made in the
peace process in my country. The time has come to
meet that request; the Government of Burundi very
much insists on this. We are not asking for the
impossible; we ask only for what the Council provides
to other countries in similar and sometimes even more
complicated situations.
The sending to Burundi of a fact-finding mission
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations last
weekend, in accordance with the Security Council
presidential statement dated 22 December 2003
(S/PRST/2003/30), is a first step in the right direction.
The Government is sincerely grateful to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kofi Annan, and to the members of the
Council for that decision, and we trust that it will soon
lead to the deployment of a true peacekeeping mission.
If such a mission does not arrive in the coming weeks,
the situation could swiftly deteriorate, both politically
and in terms of security. Important reforms such as
those of the security services and of the judiciary
would be jeopardized, as would the demobilization and
disarmament operation.
On the ground today, armed rebel movements —
even those in the Government — are moving about in
the country. They constitute a parallel administration
and police force, holding the population hostage and
intimidating
supporters
of
different
political
movements. One spark could re-ignite the fire at any
time in a country where civilian populations also bear
weapons. Pre-electoral fever will undoubtedly
accompany the debate on drafting an electoral code, a

S/PV.4911

body of common law and a post-transition constitution,
which will begin soon and will be followed by local,
legislative, senatorial and presidential elections before
1 November 2004.
As one can see, such a heavy programme for a
country still traumatized by war and by hateful
violence of every sort requires an international
presence that can reassure the population and the
national and international actors. We need such a
mission to truly monitor ceasefire compliance, to
conduct the DDRR operation with the well-known
expertise of the United Nations, to cleanse the
atmosphere for the work of the two Commissions on
judicial inquiry and reconciliation provided for by the
Arusha Peace Agreement, to facilitate the access of
humanitarian workers to disaster victims, to allow for
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
and to chart the course towards the holding of peaceful,
free and transparent elections.
Clearly, the arrival of a United Nations
peacekeeping mission, provided with an adequate
mandate, is considered urgent and vital to the success
of the Burundi peace process. Furthermore, such a
mission in Burundi will help, in cooperation with
MONUC, to stabilize the Great Lakes region, ensuring
that the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement
for Burundi and the Lusaka and Sun City accords for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will eliminate
once and for all the tension at the borders caused by the
transborder movement of rebels, refugees and members
of the former Forces armées rwandaises and
Interahamwe militia. My delegation would have
preferred the report of the Secretary-General to
mention the request made by Deputy President Zuma
on behalf of the regional initiative.
I shall not dwell on the paramount importance of
the fight against impunity; my delegation discussed
that point enough in the debate on “Post-conflict
national reconciliation: role of the United Nations” (see
S/PV.4903). It will suffice for me to recall that the
international judicial commission of inquiry is a pillar
of the peace and reconciliation process and that the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission alone will not be
sufficient unless it is based on a minimum of justice,
on individual and sincere repentance and on the
psychological and physical rehabilitation of the
victims. Here again, we ask that the United Nations
support Burundi, as it has done in other situations of
the same kind.

We are pleased that the Council has already asked
the Secretary-General to dispatch a fact-finding
mission to Burundi with a view to establishing the
international judicial commission of inquiry; we hope
that such a mission will be deployed as soon as
possible. In that way, we will be able to build on a
solid foundation, the possibility for reconciliation will
be genuine and the resources promised in Brussels on
13 and 14 January for the reconstruction of Burundi
will indeed serve that purpose.
The Government of Burundi, through the
President of the Republic, pledged in Brussels to lead
the process to a successful conclusion, and in
partnership with the donors to manage in full
transparency the assistance pledged in support of the
process. Of course, the amounts promised must indeed
be disbursed, and efforts must be made to alleviate the
debt burden.
We sincerely thank the United Nations for having
mobilized the international community to help
Burundi. We are delighted at the role played by the
Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Burundi, and we welcome the cooperation between
the Economic and Social Council and the Security
Council in helping African countries emerging from
conflict.
With regard to the international conference on the
Great Lakes region, Burundi supports the preparatory
process that is under way and hopes that it will be
completed as soon as possible. We believe that this
international conference will undoubtedly help us
attain the desired objectives: stabilization, cooperation
and peaceful coexistence among the signatories of the
declaration of principles on good-neighbourly relations
and cooperation, signed on 25 September 2003, in New
York, under the auspices of Secretary-General Kofi
Annan.
We ask the friends of the Great Lakes region of
Africa to generously provide the resources needed by
the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to start the preparatory work for the
conference, so that it can be a success for everyone.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
representative of Burundi for his kind words addressed
to me and to the country I represent.
Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the very beginning of the transitional

23

S/PV.4911

period in Burundi, a law was adopted providing
temporary immunity for political crimes. I would like
to ask the representative of Burundi for what kind of
crimes immunity is granted. Is it the intention to return
to a consideration of these crimes at a later stage? I ask
this because the Burundian experience could be useful
in other country’s situations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the
floor to the representative of Burundi.
Mr. Nkingiye (Burundi) (spoke in French):
Indeed, in the context of the political resolution of the
peace process in Burundi, a decision was taken and a
law was adopted to provide political amnesty to some
leaders. This decision was political only in scope: the
law clearly states that crimes of genocide and crimes
against humanity are not within its ambit. It also says
that the text remains open, and that national courts —
and international courts, once they are established —
must have every prerogative to conduct investigations
into any suspicious cases, and that any immunity
should be withdrawn when necessary. In other words,
this is not a law that provides de facto amnesty to those
who have committed horrendous crimes in Burundi.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Thank you, Sir, for having convened this
meeting. We would like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We would also like to congratulate the
representative of Chile on the way in which he
conducted the presidency last month.
My delegation welcomes the work of the Security
Council mission to Central Africa, in which we
participated. The mission’s report was clear proof of
the importance of such Security Council missions.
These missions truly play an important role,
particularly when they are followed by real efforts to
implement their recommendations.
We welcome the implementation of many of the
recommendations of the mission that visited Central
Africa from 7 to 16 June 2003, in particular those
related to the establishment, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, of transitional institutions in a
number of crucial and sensitive areas. We welcome the

24

appointment of members of the transitional
Government representing the eight components and
entities of the inter-Congolese dialogue. We also
welcome the adoption by the Council of Ministers of a
set of important policy goals, in particular the
formation of a national army and a national police
force. The Council of Ministers also adopted a series of
draft decrees on reorganizing the Government and the
various ministries.
The Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral have made commendable efforts, in particular
in rehabilitating the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in reforming the security sector. While we
congratulate them on their efforts, we would like to
recall that the road ahead is long, particularly when it
comes to reforming the security sector and extending
the authority of the Government throughout the
country. There must be an end to impunity; here, of
course, the rule of law needs to be strengthened. To
achieve this, the transitional Government must play its
role, particularly in strengthening the rule of law and
creating institutions and entities that can reinforce that
principle.
We all know that the regional dimension of
conflicts in Africa is of crucial importance. Meetings in
which heads of State of the region participated have
made it possible to ease tensions in the region and
strengthen
understanding
among
neighbouring
countries. We believe that such efforts should be
continued in order to strengthen good-neighbourliness
and to implement such agreements as the declaration
signed by heads of State or Government in New York.
My delegation believes that special attention
should be paid to disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and resettlement or repatriation (DDRRR)
programmes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
since these will have an important impact on peace in
the region. That country should also make every effort
to put an end to the illegal exploitation of its natural
resources.
It is important that the work of the African
Mission in Burundi (AMIB), in which South Africa and
other countries participate, be completed. We agree
with the Secretary-General that AMIB faces difficulties
that possibly could jeopardize its significant
contribution to the peace process. We also support the
Secretary-General’s appeal to the donor community to
generously provide funds to the mission.

S/PV.4911

The Government of Burundi has taken some
positive steps to carry out the DDR programme. United
Nations agencies in Bujumbura have also supported the
efforts of the African Mission in Burundi and of the
transitional Government. Top priority should be given
to disarming child soldiers. During the Council
mission’s visit to Bujumbura, President Ndayizeye said
that his country sorely needed financial support to
cover all areas. Funds promised by donors at the
conferences in Paris and Geneva must be disbursed in
order to tackle the priority matter of establishing
programmes and projects to restore peace in Burundi.
We also support the appeal of the Secretary-General to
bring about reconciliation between the transitional
Government of Burundi and the Conseil national pour
la défense de la démocratie-Forces nationales pour la
défense de la démocratie.
My delegation believes that the international
conference on the Great Lakes region will be a unique,
historic opportunity that will make it possible to bring
about peace and end the conflict in the region and to
achieve the subregion’s integration. We believe that the
efforts of Mr. Ibrahima Fall in this connection deserve
all support and appreciation. At the end of his report,
the Secretary-General made a number of observations
that the Security Council and the relevant parties
should take into consideration.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Ireland. I
invite her to take a seat at the Council table and to
maker her statement.
Ms. Murnaghan (Ireland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia; the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and
Montenegro; and the European Free Trade Association
countries members of the European Economic Area,
Iceland and Norway, align themselves with this
statement.
On behalf of the European Union, Mr. President, I
would like to thank you and the Security Council for
scheduling this meeting today, which is an opportunity
for the international community to demonstrate our

commitment to the Central African region. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his progress
report on the recommendations of the Security Council
mission to Central Africa last year (S/2004/52). I also
thank Assistant Secretary-General Kalomoh for his
briefing this morning.
Although Central Africa has the potential to be
one of the richest subregions in Africa, its potential has
not been realized. Many of the subregion’s countries
are either in conflict or in post-conflict situations, and
the subregion as a whole continues to suffer from the
proliferation of small arms and armed groups, high
unemployment
among
young
people,
an
underdeveloped infrastructure, great numbers of
displaced persons and refugees, poor human rights
records and the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Those are
significant challenges that demand our attention. The
European Union is convinced that tackling those shared
problems also demands that we develop a regional
approach which is in concert with our efforts in each of
the individual countries concerned.
In considering a regional approach — and in
particular the convening of the international conference
for the Great Lakes region — it is encouraging to note
that the Secretary-General has said that the prospects
for success in the region have improved significantly,
most notably in Burundi and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
The European Union believes that the success of
the Great Lakes conference will depend primarily on
the common political will of the countries involved in
achieving shared objectives. In that regard, we
welcome the important progress made in the
preparatory process to date, including the outcomes of
the most recent meeting in Addis Ababa.
The European Union suggests that the conference
will be all the more successful if an agreed time frame
for clear and realistic goals based on concrete
operational agreements or projects can be defined early
on. In that regard, it is now important that all the
national preparatory committees take immediate steps
to enable the agreed timetable for the holding of the
conference to proceed on schedule.
The EU welcomes the Secretary-General’s call
for the first regional meeting of national preparatory
committees to be convened as soon as possible. As the
Secretary-General notes in his report, it is during that
first regional preparatory meeting that detailed

25

S/PV.4911

discussions on substance and priority programmes
expected from the international conference will be
initiated at the regional level. In addition, coordination
and consistency with other existing processes such as
the New Partnership for Africa’s Development are also
important.
As preparations continue throughout the year
towards the first summit of the conference, the
European Union stands ready to engage as a committed
and supportive partner to the countries of the region, as
a member of the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes
region, through the good offices of the EU Special
Representative for the Great Lakes, Mr. Aldo Ajello,
and by our efforts to strengthen more effective
subregional cooperation and integration through
mechanisms such as those set up by the Economic
Community of Central African States.
As I mentioned previously, the prospects for the
international conference on the Great Lakes region are
much improved due to the progress made in the peace
processes in the region.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
European Union is encouraged by the significant
improvements achieved. Those include, inter alia, the
improved security situation, signs of national
reunification such as increased transport links and
improving commerce, better relations between that
country and its neighbours, and progress in security
sector reform. The EU commends the transitional
Government in its implementation of the Sun City and
Pretoria agreements. Difficult decisions have been
taken, and the commitment of the parties is
encouraging. Nevertheless, the situation remains
fragile, and the European Union urges President Kabila
and his Government to continue their work and put in
place the legislative framework and establish the
national institutions required for the holding of free
and transparent elections at all levels, the formation of
restructured and integrated military and police forces
and the implementation of a national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme.
The European Union is committed to
underpinning peace, security and democracy in
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Operation Artemis
and the EU’s support for the Integrated Police Unit are
clear demonstrations of that commitment. The EU
stands ready to support concrete initiatives for the
rebuilding of a stable Congolese State able to guarantee

26

the safety of the Congolese people, national
reconciliation and stability in the region. In that regard,
the European Union commends the Secretary-General
for his initiative last week in calling a high-level
meeting to consider a strategy for the international
community’s support of the security sector reform
effort.
The European Union is greatly encouraged by
recent progress in Burundi. Since we last had the
opportunity in the Council Chamber to discuss the state
of the peace process there, a significant milestone has
been reached with the convening of talks between
President Ndayizeye and a delegation from the Forces
nationales de libération (FNL). The European Union is
pleased that those talks took place in a constructive and
cordial atmosphere. We also welcome the parties’
recognition of the need to end violence in Burundi and
their willingness to continue the dialogue.
The European Union hopes the proposed followup meeting between President Ndayizeye and the FNL
takes place at the earliest opportunity. The EU calls for
the cessation of all hostilities in Burundi and for the
conclusion of an agreement for the inclusion of the
FNL in Burundian State institutions. The EU remains
willing to assist the parties in their quest for a peaceful
solution, and we reconfirm our readiness to support
Burundi in its reconstruction efforts, which remain
severely hampered by the ongoing violence in the
absence of an all-inclusive peace agreement.
The European Union is committed to working
closely with our African partners to strengthen African
capacities in the area of conflict resolution and
peacekeeping. In this regard, the European Union
commends the African Union for establishing the
African Mission in Burundi (AMIB) — the first force
of its kind in the history of the African Union. The
European Union fully supports this initiative and is
contributing €25 million to AMIB. In addition, a
number of EU member States have also made
significant national contributions, both in advance of
and in response to the Secretary-General’s recent
appeal for support.
Notwithstanding the success and importance of
AMIB, the European Union believes, as stated last
November in this Chamber, that the option of a United
Nations operation in Burundi, authorized by the
Council, will have to be considered in due course. In
this regard, the EU welcomes the fact that the

S/PV.4911

Secretary-General is sending an assessment mission to
Burundi later this month, and we look forward to its
reporting in due course.
The wind of peace is blowing across the African
continent. Africa and its people deserve our full
support in their quest for peace, democracy and
sustainable development. Nowhere is this more true
than in Central Africa. The European Union recognizes
this obligation, and Africa, the United Nations and the
whole international community will find the EU to be a
willing and eager partner for peace and development
for all the African peoples.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Japan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): It is regrettable that the
situation in Central Africa and the Great Lakes region
remains tense and fragile, and therefore requires the
continuing
involvement
of
the
international
community. It is important to recognize that conflicts
in that region often involve neighbouring countries,
which obliges us to seek their resolution from a
regional perspective. I therefore welcome your
decision, Mr. President, to convene this meeting, which
will enable us to address the issues from a region-wide
perspective.
At the Third Tokyo International Conference on
African Development (TICAD III), held last
September, Japan indicated that the consolidation of
peace is one of three pillars of our assistance to Africa
and that great emphasis is to be placed on the
promotion of human security. We consider the Great
Lakes region to be a priority subregion — one in which
efforts for the consolidation of peace and the
promotion of human security are definitively required.
Regarding the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, I would first like to express our deep sorrow
over the killing in the Ituri region of one of the Kenyan
military observers from the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). That occurrence demonstrates
that, despite the progress in the peace process since the
establishment of the transitional Government, the
situation in the eastern part of the country remains
insecure and precarious.

Japan fully supports the focused redeployment of
MONUC troops to the eastern areas. In order to further
strengthen the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, it goes without saying that
reform of the security sector is of vital importance.
Japan thus decided last October to extend assistance in
the amount of approximately $4 million for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
Congolese soldiers. We are also considering extending
additional assistance in this area, in coordination with
the United Nations and other donors.
I understand that the Security Council is
discussing measures to enhance the arms embargo
imposed in the eastern part of the territory, such as the
establishment of a group of technical experts to
conduct preliminary investigations and of a sanctions
committee to make recommendations to the Council
based on the findings of the expert group, as proposed
by the Secretary-General. We would like to stress in
this connection that any measures introduced by the
Council must be based on a careful study of their costeffectiveness, in order to ensure that they are both
feasible and effective.
As for Burundi, Japan welcomes the meeting that
took place in the Netherlands between the
representatives of the Forces nationales de liberation
and President Ndayizeye, and their agreement to
continue their talks. We strongly hope that, although
the situation is still fragile and the outcome difficult to
predict, those talks will eventually lead to lasting peace
in Burundi. At the same time, we are very much
encouraged to note that African initiatives for conflict
resolution and peace consolidation are also under way
in Burundi. The efforts of South Africa and Tanzania to
facilitate and mediate a peace agreement, the summitlevel initiative of the Great Lakes region, and the
African Mission in Burundi (AMIB) — the first
peacekeeping operation of the African Union (AU) —
all represent the crystallization of the main principle
underlying the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development and TICAD — that is, African
ownership — and we greatly appreciate those efforts.
We welcome the entry into force of the Protocol
on the Peace and Security Council of the AU, which
will enable African countries to deal with conflict in
the region more effectively. Japan is convinced that
conflicts in Africa can be more effectively addressed
by African countries themselves, as they naturally have
greater knowledge and cultural sensitivity, as well as a

27

S/PV.4911

strong sense of ownership, with regard to conflict in
the region. Also, Japan believes that the success of
such AU activities, including AMIB, will be of
decisive importance for conflict resolution in Africa in
the future. Japan appreciates the contribution of South
Africa, Ethiopia and Mozambique in this connection
and strongly hopes that, given sufficient international
support, the activities of AMIB will continue to be
conducted effectively.
As a member of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
Burundi established by the Economic and Social
Council, I had the valuable experience of participating
in the international effort to conduct a needs
assessment exercise in the areas of humanitarian and
economic assistance, as well as in the formulation of
advice
on
the
coordination
and
effective
implementation of such assistance. I found that
Burundi needs international assistance in a number of
areas. In order to promote the post-conflict peace
process in Burundi, Japan intends to support that
country, in coordination with other countries, the
United Nations and the international organizations
concerned. More concretely, we will consider
extending appropriate assistance for improving human
security for the people, promoting disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and implementing
elections in accordance with specific requests by the
Government
of
Burundi
and
international
organizations, once relevant national programmes have
been finalized.
I am aware that a United Nations reconnaissance
mission is now on the ground to assist in the effort to
consolidate the peace in Burundi. Japan intends to send
a concurrent mission to Bujumbura next week to have
discussions with our partners on future cooperation
between our two countries. To date, the Security
Council has assessed the situation among its 15
members only and made important decisions without
consulting the major non-member financially
contributing countries — although the Council
certainly expects to share the financial burden of its
decisions with the non-members.
Japan therefore welcomes the fact that on this
occasion the Secretariat is providing major donors and
contributors with the opportunity to send concurrent
missions to conduct assessments alongside the United
Nations mission. We hope that this will become a
precedent for the future. We would also like to see
Burundi, in the process of its transition from the post-

28

conflict stage to reconstruction and development,
become a model for the promotion of human security
in Africa.
As a member of the Group of Friends of the Great
Lakes Region, Japan finds it regrettable that the
international conference has been postponed until the
end of this year. Naturally, we are hoping that the
conference will be a success, but at the same time we
are concerned about the overly broad themes and
agenda. We would like to emphasize that the focus of
the conference should be the consolidation of peace.
In order to consolidate peace, it is essential to
demonstrate the dividends of peace to the people in the
local community and to advance the peace process,
humanitarian and reconstruction assistance and security
in a comprehensive and integrated manner. Relying on
this conviction, we remain strongly committed to the
consolidation of peace in the region.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Egypt. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
report of the Secretary-General on the progress
achieved
in
the
implementation
of
the
recommendations of the Security Council mission to
Central Africa (S/2004/52) reflects something that my
delegation would like to emphasize today before the
Security Council, namely, that despite the signs of
positive developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Burundi, there are still challenges to the
restoration of peace in its full sense to those two
countries. Conditions in the Great Lakes region in
general are still extremely serious, and we must exert
more effort to confront them. In this context, my
delegation would like to make the following remarks.
First, it is important to recognize that the postconflict phase in Central Africa requires partnerships
between the transitional Government, the United
Nations, the concerned regional and international
parties, the African Union, subregional organizations
and the community of international donors. Those
partnerships must be based on the principle of
integrated and balanced responsibilities among the
partners.
and

We now have a clearer understanding of the needs
requirements of the different phases of

S/PV.4911

peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building in the
region. Those requirements go beyond the very limited
concept of peace to a much broader list of inter-related
and overlapping political, humanitarian, economic and
social elements. Such elements require an integrated
package of assistance, incentives and obligations,
which could be difficult to turn into practical measures
if the required partnerships are not achieved.

call for the United Nations and the community of
international donors to provide all forms of political,
technical and financial assistance to the African Union
in Burundi, as an emerging model reflecting the desire
of Africans to undertake an ever-growing role in
peacekeeping and to gradually fulfil their participation
in the international partnership to bring peace and
security to Africa.

Secondly, because addressing those elements in
one State acquires specific importance based on the
nature, specificity and aspects of that State’s ongoing
conflict, we urgently need a more comprehensive
regional vision of the broad-based issues which extend
beyond the national borders of any individual country
and impact regional stability and peace. Such issues
include, in particular, the status of refugees,
repatriation of ex-combatants to their original countries
and social and economic development.

Fourthly and finally, the relative progress
achieved in the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is an indicator of what can be
achieved by a partnership between the United Nations
and the national, regional and international powers
during one of the most difficult and intractable crises,
provided that the parties have the necessary political
will.

We therefore look forward to the continuation of
the current preparatory process for an international
conference on peace, security and democracy in the
Great Lakes region, under the joint auspices of the
United Nations and the African Union. The idea of
holding the conference is a practical translation of the
concept of partnership to which we aspire, as well as a
manifestation of the comprehensive vision of the
organic link between the concepts of security, on the
one hand, and development, on the other hand,
including its political, economic and social elements.
In that context, my delegation would like to
express its appreciation for the invitation extended by
the seven core countries to Egypt to participate in the
conference as an observer, a matter which reflects the
strong natural and strategic links between the peoples
of the Nile Valley and those of the Great Lakes. Here I
note that we aspire to contribute to that process by
providing the necessary political and technical
guidance to make the conference successful and to
reach its goals and objectives.
Thirdly, the Central African region, and
particularly Burundi, is witnessing the beginnings of
the evolution of the role of the African Union in
peacekeeping efforts in the continent. We would like
today to note our appreciation of the African States that
are participating in the first peacekeeping mission that
the African Union has successfully implemented, in
Burundi, despite the well-known financial and
logistical difficulties that the mission faces. Here, we

One of the most significant challenges facing the
partners in the forthcoming stage is how to deal with
the continuing illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
how to channel the revenues from its natural resources
towards efforts to bring peace and reconstruction,
instead of using those resources to destabilize the
eastern and northeastern areas of country. Those
resources must serve, as well, in the rehabilitation and
reform of the security sector as preparation to gradually
extend the authority of the transitional Government to
all parts of the country.
In that context, we look forward to the Security
Council taking specific steps to deal with the link
between the illegal exploitation of natural resources
and the flow of arms to the forces and factions which
resist and obstruct efforts to bring about peace and
reconstruction in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
We look forward to the transitional Government
and the international donors being committed to their
agreements concerning the measures and steps
necessary to reform the national security sector. We
believe that the members of this Council should
recognize that the huge efforts already invested in the
restoration of stability to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo deserve all ways and means possible to
overcome the challenges that still threaten that country
which is considered a cornerstone of stability in the
Central Africa region as a whole.
Finally, I would like to express to you, Sir, our
deepest thanks for organizing this meeting.

29

S/PV.4911

The President (spoke in Chinese): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Rwanda. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Kamanzi (Rwanda): This being the first time
my delegation has taken the floor in the Security
Council in the month of February, I would like to begin
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council.
I would also like to thank you, Sir, for calling a
meeting to discuss the progress report of the SecretaryGeneral on the recommendations of the Security
Council mission to Central Africa (S/2004/52). Further,
I thank the members of the Security Council for their
continued interest in and concern for the Central
African subregion.
Last week a Kenyan military observer serving in
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), Major
Peter Wachai, was killed while on duty in a village near
Bunia in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. My
Government joins others in expressing its condolences
to the Government and the people of Kenya on that
loss, and in calling for the killers to be brought to
justice.
Rwanda witnesses with much encouragement and
interest the ongoing peace processes in which its
neighbouring countries of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Burundi are engaged, despite the many
challenges they still face. In this regard, Rwanda
wishes once more to pledge its unwavering support for
these processes and is looking forward to the
renaissance of the two countries as stable nations.

and security and to promote development in the region.
Prior to this, at the invitation of the Government of
Rwanda, two Congolese Vice-Presidents, Mr. Arthur
Zaidi Ngoma and Mr. Azarias Ruberwa, attended
President Kagame’s inauguration in September and the
Congolese Minister for Regional Cooperation,
Mr. Mbusa Nyamwisi, visited Kigali for talks in
October. Rwanda believes that these meetings are the
building blocks for the normalization of relations
between our two countries.
With respect to the situation in Ituri, my
Government is greatly concerned by the continued
lawlessness and violence in the province, which result
in suffering for the ordinary people. We welcome the
Security Council’s decision to deploy the MONUC
Ituri Brigade with a Chapter VII mandate, as well as
the Mission’s military expansion outside Bunia.
The continued presence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo of armed and dangerous former
Rwandan Army (ex-FAR) and Interahamwe militia will
be a threat to the security of Rwanda, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the entire region until they
are effectively disarmed and demobilized. In this
connection, however, we welcomed the voluntary
repatriation to Rwanda last year of about 100
commanders and men of ex-FAR. They were well
received and resettled in their villages in a spirit of
reconciliation and also with the intention of
encouraging others still in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to return to Rwanda.

My Government hailed the establishment of
transitional institutions in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo last year. We believe that this not only
fulfils an important requirement of the Lusaka
Agreement, but also paves the way for a genuine
reconciliation process. My Government has since
begun the process of normalizing relations with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We are, however, concerned by reports that
hundreds of other would-be returnees are being
prevented from doing so by extremist elements among
them. We appeal to the Security Council and to the
international community as a whole urgently to address
this issue. We also appeal to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to provide
maximum cooperation to ensure that those who would
like to return to Rwanda are able to do so and that
those who choose to remain in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo do not present a security threat
to Rwanda.

As highlighted in the report, the Rwandan
Foreign Minister visited Kinshasa last October to meet
with President Kabila and other Congolese officials to
express the Rwandan Government’s support for the
transitional Government and to express our desire that
the two countries work collaboratively to restore peace

The Government of Rwanda commends the
tireless efforts of the Government of Burundi, and
President Ndayizeye in particular, to restore peace and
security and to reconcile the people of Burundi. We
welcome the signing of the comprehensive ceasefire
agreement between the Government and the Conseil

30

S/PV.4911

national pour la défense de la démocratie-Forces
nationales pour la défense de la démocratie of
Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza in Dar es Salaam last November.
We also welcome the recent talks in the Netherlands
between the Government and members of Agathon
Rwasa’s branch of the Forces nationales de libération.
These are encouraging developments, which should be
recognized and welcomed by the international
community.
In his report, the Secretary-General stresses that,
despite the encouraging developments in the peace
process, there is a risk that hopeful signs could be lost
if there is no peace dividend in the form of improved
living conditions. Rwanda agrees entirely with that
assessment. We therefore call upon the international
community expeditiously to make the required funds
available for economic recovery and humanitarian
activities in Burundi.

On the final point of the Great Lakes conference,
my Government commends the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ibrahima Fall, for the
preparations undertaken so far and once again
reiterates its full support for the process. Preparations
for the conference are already under way at the
national level in Rwanda. Consultations by the national
coordinator and the national preparatory committee in
preparation for the conference are already under way.
Rwanda looks forward to the conference in the hope
that it will enable us to conduct frank and productive
discussions on the four main topic areas.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
representative of Rwanda for his kind words addressed
to me.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

31
