General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Sessio~-. _ _ _ _ _ _ __

134

(i)

Feasibility studies and concre.te recommendations for the implementation of the additional
means of financing deemed practicable by the
Secretary-General, including those providing
for a predictable flow of funds;
(ii) The detailed modalities of obtaining resources
on a concessionary basis;
· •·)
~ JI r
•
d
k'
l f
h
( 111
A iu ieasibihty study an war mg pan or t e
establishment of an independent operational
financial corporation for the financing of desertification projects;
(b) To report on the results of the above-mentioned
studies to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
10. Calls upon the United Nations Environment
Programme, in its co-ordinating and catalytic role, to institute, in co-operation with the organs, organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system, specific
programmes of research and training at the national,
regional and international levels, and to invite private
foundations and other grant-making institutions to cooperate financially and technically in the implementation of those programmes;

11. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to continue to report
every other year to the General Assembly, throuih the
Economic and Social Council, on the over-all 1mplementation of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification.
83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/74.

International co-operation in the field of the environment

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on
the work of its eighth session 129 and the proposals of the
high-level group of experts on the interrelationships between population, resources, · environment and development, annexed tbereto,
Taking into account the note by the SecretaryGeneral on international conventions and protocols in
the field of the environment, 130
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution
1980/49 of 23 July 1980 concerning international cooperation in the field of the environment,
Endorsing that resolution in which the Economic and
Social Council reaffirmed that environmental considerations should be viewed in the context of national plans
and priorities and the development objectives of all
countries, in particular the developing countries,
Having in mind the importance which the International Development Strategy for the Third United
Nations. Development Decade attaches to an ecologically
sustainable development process, 131
L Takes note of the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme on the
work of its eighth session-and of the decisions contained therein;
"' Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session,
Supplement No. 25 (A/35/25).
llO
31

'

A/35/359.
See resolution 35/56 above, annex, para. 41.

2. Takes note with appreciation of the efforts and
progress made in the development of a broad SystemWide Medium-Term Environment Programme and a
Perspective Document; 132
3. Requests all appropriate organs, organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system to continue to
co-operate with the United Nations Environment
Programme in the preparation of the System-Wide
Medium-Term Environment Programme and the Perspective Document;
4. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to take into consideration in its programme activities the provisions of the
International Development Strategy for the Third United
Nations Development Decade and, through its coordinating and catalytic role, to continue to promote the
concept of sustainable ecological development, in particular through the promotion and further elaboration
of ways and means for the integration of environmental
concerns in development programmes and projects;
5. Endorses the recommendations of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on the work of the United Nations system on the
interrelationships between resources, environment, peopie and development, as they appear in the annex to its
report on the work of its eighth session, as well as those
put forward by the Economic and Social Council in its
resolution 1980/49, and requests the Secretary-General
to take the requisite steps for their implementation~
6. Stresses the importance of the United Nations
Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy,
to be held in 1981, and calls upon the United Nations
Environment Programme to contribute actively to and
participate in the preparatory work for the Conference:
7. Welcomes the growing co-operation between the
United Nations Environment Programme and the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) and
urges them to intensify that co-operation through, inter
a/ia, joint meetings of their bureaux with the Executive
Directors of both organizations on an annual basis;
8. Also welcomes the decision of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment Programme to convene, prior to its tenth session, an ad hoe
meeting of governmental experts in environmental law,
welcomes the offer by the Government of Uruguay to
serve as host for the meeting and urges Governments
and the Governing Council to take all the necessary
measures for the preparation of that meeting, including
the provision of adequate consultancy;
9. Further welcomes the launching, in March l 980,
of the World Conservation Strategy and urges all Governments and international organizations, as well as
organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system, to take it into account in developing their
policies and programmes;
10. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to take the necessary
measures, in particular within the context of the systemwide medium-term environment programme, to safeguard, inter alia, the efficient use of the Fund of the
United Nations Environment Programme and the
stimulating, co-ordinating and catalytic role played by
the United Nations Environment Programme in reviewing the financial support to ongoing activities and
through its careful and selective policy with respect to
new commitments for a balanced progrnmme;
"' Oj]lcial Records of the General Assemb/p, T/1ir1y-.[ljilt Session,
Supp/eme/11 No, 25 (A/35/25), paras. 171 and 172.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

11. Strongly appeals to all contributing Governments to make every effort to pledge, in 1980, substantial increases in their contributions for 198 I and to those
Governments that have not yet contributed to the Fund
of the United Nations Environment Programme to
pledge to do so in 1980, in order that the agreed target
for the period 1978-1981 may be reached;
12. Invites Governments to consider proposals
whereby additional contributions to the Fund of the
United Nations Environment Programme would be
used for measures dealing with serious environmental
problems in developing countries, taking into account
the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolution
34/ I 88 of 18 December I 979, and requests the Governing Council of the Programme to report thereon to the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of 1981;
13. Decides to convene, in I 982, a session of a
special character of the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme, open to all States,
to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment, held
at Stpckholm from 5 to 16 June 1972, at the same place
and immediately prior to the tenth regular session of the
Governing Council, and invites Governments to be represented at that session at a high political level:
14. Decides that at the session of a special character
the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme should review the major achievements in the implementation of the Action Plan for the
Human Environment, adopted at Stockholm, 133 and
make recommendations with respect to the major envi:
ronmental trends to be addressed by the Programme
over the forthcoming ten years;
15. Invites the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme to proceed, in consultation with Governments, with the preparation of the
above-mentioned session and to present to the Governing Council, at its ninlh session, a comprehensive report
on all matters relevant to the organization, agenda and
financial implications of the session, including proposals
as to the dates and venue of the two sessions.

83 rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/75.

Living conditions of the Palestinian people

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Vancouver Declaration on Human Settlements, 1976, 134 and the relevant recommendations for
national action 135 adopted by Habitat: United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements,
Recalling also resolution 3, entitled "Living conditions of the Palestinians in the occupied territories",
contained in the recommendations for international cooperation adopted by Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human Settlementsm and Economic and Social
Council resolutions 2026 (LXI) of 4 August 1976 and
2100 (LXIII) of 3 August 1977,
m See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Human En•
vironment, Stockholm, 5-16 June 1972 (United Nations publication,
Sales No, E.73.11.A.14 and corrigendum), chap. II.
134
See Report of Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human Settlements, Vancouver. 31 May-I I June 1976 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.7 and corrigendum) chap, I.
1-'' Ibid., chap. 11.
13
• Ibid., chap. Ill.

135

Recalling further its resolutions 31/110 of 16 December 1976, 32/171 of 19 December 1977, 33/1 IO of
18 December 1978 and 34/113 of 14 December 1979,
I. Takes note with satfafaction of the report of the
Secretary-General on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Arab territories; 137
2. Deplores the refusal of the Government of Israel
to allow the Group of Experts on the Social and
Economic Impact of the Israeli Occupation on the Living Conditions of the Palestinian People in the Occupied Arab Territories 138 to visit the Palestinian and other
Arab territories occupied by Israel;
3. Condemns Israeli policy resulting in the deterioration of the living conditions of the Palestinian people in
the occupled territories;
4. Calls upon all States to co-operate with United
Nations agencies, organizations and organs and local
Palestinian authorities to alleviate the tragic living conditions of tile Palestinian people caused by the Israeli occupation;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a corn•
prehensive and analytical report to the General Assernb ly at its thirty-sixth session, through the Economic and
Social Council, on tile progress made in the implementation of the present resolution.
83 rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/76.

Strengthening of human settlements activities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/116 of 14 December 1979
on the strengthening of human settlements activities,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions 1224 (XLII) of 6 June 1967 and l 670 (LII) of
I June 1972 concerning the improvement and upgrading
of living and environmental conditions in the squatter
settlements and slums of urban and rural areas,
Recognizing· tllat one of the most urgent needs in
developing countries is to upgrade the living and working conditions of low-income and disadvantaged groups
in both rural and urban areas,
Reaffirming that adequate shelter and services are a
basic human right, as proclaimed in the Vancouver Declaration on Human Settlements, 1976, 139 and that, in
striving to uphold this right, priority must be given to
the needs of the poor, the homeless and the most vulnerable groups of society,
Noting with concern that, in the years that have
elapsed since the convening of Habitat: United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements, the conditions of
human settlements in developing countries have, by and
large, worsened, particularly in the urban areas, where
the growth of slums and squatter settlements has continued unabated, in the midst of poverty, squalor, overcrowding and human degradation,
Noting also that an increasing number of Governments are committed to upgrading low-income urban
settlements and to improving the quality of life in rural
A/35/533 and Corr. i.
For the report of the Group of Experts, see A/35/533 and
Corr. I, annex. I.
'''' See Report of Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human Set•
tlerne/1/s, Vancouver, 31 May-I I June 1976 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.7 and corrigendum), chap. l.
1i 1

1'"
