S/PV.9238

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9238

th meeting
Tuesday, 10 January 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ishikane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Ms. Shaheen
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (S/2022/1019)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-01075 (E)
*2301075*

S/PV.9238

Peace consolidation in West Africa

violent extremists and criminal networks. Those
non-State armed groups are fighting among themselves
for supremacy and control of resources, pushing States
to the margin and causing untold misery to millions
of people who have had to leave their communities to
seek safety.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (S/2022/1019)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Giovanie Biha, Deputy Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Officer-in-Charge of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel;
and His Excellency Mr. Omar Alieu Touray, President
of the Commission of the Economic Community of
West African States.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/1019, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
I now give the floor to Ms. Biha.
Ms. Biha: I would like to express my best wishes to
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January. I
take this opportunity to wish a happy, prosperous and
peaceful new year to all members of the Council.
I am honoured to present today the most recent
report (S/2022/1019) of the Secretary-General on the
situation in West Africa and the Sahel and the activities
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS).
Despite efforts by national security forces and
international partners, security has again deteriorated
in large parts of the region. As a consequence, more
than 10,000 schools across the Sahel have had to close,
leaving millions of children unable to acquire the
necessary skills to build their lives and their countries.
That is in flagrant disregard of resolution 2601 (2021),
which condemns attacks against schools and demands
parties to conflict to safeguard the right to education.
Moreover, nearly 7,000 health centres have been forced
to shut down owing to the activities of armed groups,
2/17

10/01/2023

Indeed, the central Sahel continues to face
multidimensional
challenges,
unprecedented
levels of security and humanitarian challenges and
sociopolitical instability, further compounded by the
impact of climate change, and food insecurity, which
has been exacerbated by the conflict in Ukraine.
Against that backdrop, UNOWAS supports the efforts
of the Independent High-Level Panel on Security and
Development in the Sahel, led by the former President
of the Niger, Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, to find more
innovative solutions and generate national, regional
and international commitment for change in the Sahel.
During the reporting period, countries along the
coast of the Gulf of Guinea saw an increase in the
number of attacks against their territories, threatening
transport arteries to the landlocked countries further
north. In that regard, I commend the commitment by
leaders in the region to step up collective efforts to
address insecurity under the Accra Initiative. A holistic
approach is necessary, and the establishment of the
Initiative’s Joint Force is an important development in
that regard. As UNOWAS is engaging closely with the
Initiative’s leadership and secretariat, I wish to call on
all partners to support it decisively and in a coherent
manner, learning from past experiences.
UNOWAS is working with national stakeholders
and partners to promote political consensus and ensure
a level playing field ahead of the elections scheduled
for this year in the subregion. In Nigeria, UNOWAS
has liaised with the presidential candidates and other
stakeholders and witnessed the signing of a landmark
peace accord among political parties. In Kaduna state,
in December 2022, the Mission supported the first of
six State-level stakeholder forums to promote peaceful
elections. In Benin, peaceful parliamentary elections
were held just two days ago.
UNOWAS has also been working with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
United Nations system in the region and the Office of
the Special Coordinator for Development in the Sahel,
as well as Government institutions and communities, to
contribute to conflict resolution at both the regional and
local levels. In that context, a joint UNOWAS-United
23-01075

10/01/2023

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Nations Office for Central Africa initiative brought
together farmers and herders and local Governments
from northern Benin with counterparts from West
and Central Africa, national authorities, ECOWAS,
donors, the Office of the Special Coordinator and other
United Nations entities to take an in-depth look at the
pitfalls and opportunities of settlement initiatives for
herders. We discussed solutions that could benefit all
communities while strengthening collaboration, trust
and resilience against violent extremists trying to
establish a foothold in the borderlands.
On another transversal issue, with the support of
partners UNOWAS worked with young people and
women’s groups from the region to promote conflictsensitive best practices on climate-change adaptation
and brought the findings to a broader audience at the
twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in
Sharm el-Sheikh. Our intervention energized a new
commitment from ECOWAS and the African Union
to accelerating the implementation of the Great Green
Wall initiative. In Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire, peace
caravans supported by the United Nations concluded
their journey through those countries, providing spaces
for effective intercommunal dialogue along the way.
(spoke in French)
We are pleased to note that thanks to the joint
efforts of national actors, regional and international
institutions, agreements have been reached on the
length of the transitions in Burkina Faso and Guinea.
UNOWAS will remain actively engaged in the
monitoring and evaluation mechanism agreed between
Burkina Faso and ECOWAS and in implementing the
transition timeline in Guinea. The United Nations
system should continue to support the countries
concerned by focusing on addressing the grievances
that led to their coups d’état. Among those urgent
challenges, combating insecurity and scaling up the
provision of humanitarian assistance to adequately
meet the urgent, basic needs of communities are vital
in a context where millions of innocent civilians are
still under constant attack, in particular in Mali and
Burkina Faso.
We commend the determination of the Gambian
authorities, civil society and citizens to pursue the
implementation of the recommendations made by
the Gambia’s Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations
Commission, and we call on partners to support the
process, including through the international conference

S/PV.9238

to be held in Banjul in a few months. We are also pleased
that several countries in the region have adopted new
national legislation on gender parity with regard to
women’s participation in political decision-making,
after years of sustained advocacy. In that regard, we
hope legislators and other stakeholders in Nigeria and
the Gambia will find consensus through dialogue and
relaunch the legislative process on this important issue.
For its part, UNOWAS will continue to work with the
Working Group on Women, Youth, Peace and Security
in West Africa and the Sahel to assess the effectiveness
of the current approaches and find new ways to ensure
that half of the region’s population has a voice in the
forums where decisions are made and budgets approved.
I welcome the ongoing process to establish a forum for
the Ministers of Justice of the ECOWAS countries,
which could be a key tool for addressing the recurring
allegations of the exploitation of the justice system
in the region. Furthermore, as recommended by the
regional colloquium on the reinforcement of democracy
and good governance in West Africa organized by
UNOWAS in September 2022, we will continue to
work actively with relevant stakeholders on the process
of revising the 2001 ECOWAS Supplementary Protocol
on Democracy and Good Governance with a view to
strengthening democratic governance.
(spoke in English)
Despite the many challenges facing the countries
of the region, especially in the Sahel, the region
remains a land of immense opportunities. The
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel has
leveraged those opportunities through its three pillars
on building resilience, promoting good governance
and strengthening peace and security. I urge Council
members to continue supporting the Strategy. I would
like to take this opportunity to salute the enormous
resilience of the population of the region, particularly
the Sahelian people, who, faced with many challenges
of unprecedented magnitude, continue to fight every
day for a better future.
On behalf of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel and ahead of the renewal of our
current mandate, I would like to thank the Council
for its continued support and guidance. In accordance
with our mandate, we will continue to work together
with our regional and international partners for the
consolidation of peace, security and democracy in West
Africa and the Sahel.

23-010753/17

S/PV.9238

Peace consolidation in West Africa

The President: I thank Ms. Biha for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Touray.
Mr. Touray: The opportunity to address the
Security Council is both a pleasure and an honour, as
it comes at a time when the leadership of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
seeks to invigorate and strengthen efforts to address
the burgeoning challenges to human security in
West Africa.
I would like to preface my statement with a
word or two about the strategic direction we have
taken since our assumption of office in July 2022. In
essence, we have identified four strategic objectives
for our four-year mandate. Generally referred to as the
Commission’s four-by-four, they are enhanced peace
and security, deeper integration, good governance,
and inclusive and sustainable development. In addition
to those four strategic objectives, we have identified
two key enablers — capable institutions and equitable
partnerships. Our briefing to the Security Council this
afternoon is therefore not out of context for us. It aligns
with our first strategic objective, which is enhanced
peace and security.
The sociopolitical and security situation in the
West African region is seeing worsening violence,
particularly in the Sahelo-Saharan region, with spillover
into littoral States. Since 2009, and particularly
2012, the Lake Chad basin and the central Sahel have
emerged as epicentres and incubators of terrorism and
violent extremism — initially homegrown, in the case
of Boko Haram in Nigeria, but steadily incorporated
into the two global terrorist franchises, Al-Qaida and
the Islamic State. Data emanating from our regional
monitoring mechanism — ECOWAS Early Warning
and Response Network, or ECOWARN — indicates
that terrorist attacks, which by contagion are now
affecting coastal countries, have gradually increased
over the years. The incident count of these terrorist
attacks rose from approximately 1,271 in 2019 to
3,519 in 2022. The number of deaths from the attacks
follows the same pattern, from 3,827 in 2019 to 6,492
in 2022. Abductions and forced disappearances have
also increased significantly, from 312 in 2019 to 1,068
in 2022.
These violent incidents have contributed
significantly
towards
the
dire
humanitarian
consequences in some of our communities. According
to the available data, over 1.8 million internally
4/17

10/01/2023

displaced persons were registered in Burkina Faso alone
as of 30 November 2022, and 60 per cent of these were
children. And for the same period, nearly one million
children were affected by the closure of 5,500 schools.
Additionally, the number of food-insecure people in the
ECOWAS region is close to 30 million.
We cannot make mention of the sociopolitical and
security situation in our region without an emphasis
on the recent spate of coups d’état in the region.
Since August 2020, West Africa has experienced
three successful military coups — in Mali, Guinea
and Burkina Faso — and two repeat “coups within
coups” — again in Mali and Burkina Faso — and at least
three documented foiled coup attempts — in the Niger,
Guinea-Bissau, and the Gambia. This phenomenon
constitutes a major setback to the gains made in the
democratic consolidation since the 1990s. But it has also
ignited deep deliberations and galvanized leaders into
action, For example, during its sixty-second ordinary
session, held in December 2022, the Authority of the
ECOWAS Heads of State and Government restated
its commitment to ensuring that all the three member
States in transition must restore full constitutional order
by 2024. The Authority instructed the Commission
to urgently complete the review of the Protocol on
Democracy and Good Governance to further strengthen
the Community’s zero tolerance for power obtained or
maintained by unconstitutional means. The Authority
also decided to establish a regional force that will
support member States in addressing challenges to
constitutional order.
With regard to terrorism, the authority further
instructed the full operationalization of the December
2019 ECOWAS 2020–2024 priority action plan to
eradicate terrorism, including the resort to kinetic
interventions by the ECOWAS Standby Force. It is in
that context that the Chiefs of Defence staff met in
Bissau on 18 December 2022 to assess the modalities
for the operationalization of the decision taken by the
ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government
by 2024.
I am pleased to report that transition processes in
three countries — Burkina Faso, Mali and Guinea — are
on course, and ECOWAS remains fully committed to
accompanying the processes to the desired outcome of
inclusive, transparent, free and fair elections. Beyond
the three countries in transition, ECOWAS continues
to support member States in the conduct of elections.
Currently, preparations for upcoming elections this
23-01075

10/01/2023

Peace consolidation in West Africa

year have seen the engagement of ECOWAS with key
institutions and stakeholders in the various member
States. These engagements cut across the strategic and
technical levels.
I mentioned the importance that our management
attaches to partnerships, especially equitable
partnerships. It is important for us that our partners
stay engaged in the region as a whole and in the Sahel
in particular. No number of current difficulties should
lead to our disengagement, particularly with regard
to humanitarian support and efforts to strengthen the
capacity of the State to play its rightful role across
national territories.
It is in this period that I would like to salute the
excellent working relationship ECOWAS enjoys
with the United Nations, especially through the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS). Allow me to register our appreciation
to His Excellency Mr. Annadif Mahamat Saleh, the
immediate past Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for West Africa and the Sahel, and the Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ms. Giovanie Biha, for the tremendous collaboration.
Since 2021, ECOWAS and UNOWAS have undertaken
many joint initiatives, including joint assessment
missions to Guinea-Bissau, Cape Verde, Sierra Leone
and the Gambia to promote capacity-building and
dialogue towards the peaceful holding of elections.
The two institutions are currently working with
critical stakeholders in Nigeria, including the electoral
management body, political parties, candidates,
security agents, the National Peace Committee, the
media and traditional and religious leaders to ensure
the transparency, inclusiveness and peacefulness of the
pivotal general elections next month.
In addition, ECOWAS and UNOWAS have
undertaken joint assessment and facilitation missions
to countries-in-transition Guinea and Burkina Faso.
Indeed, ECOWAS and UNOWAS have a unique
opportunity to bring the collaboration to a higher level
through innovative and creative joint interventions.
First, based on our comparative advantages, we
can initiate or strengthen support mechanisms to
ensure that the electoral cycle that has just begun in
the region — and which will see critical elections
held in the next two years — produce credible and
peaceful outcomes.
Secondly, the United Nations should enhance
the frameworks for its support to counter terrorism

S/PV.9238

and violent extremism in the region through an
incremental engagement to empower youth, countering
misinformation and disinformation, promoting
intercommunal dialogue and local infrastructures for
peace, engaging more actively in counter-improvisedexplosive-device and mine-clearance efforts, and
rolling out projects for deradicalization, reconciliation
and reintegration in the region.
Permit me to conclude by congratulating Japan on
its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January and to thank it for the kind
invitation to participate in today’s meeting. I wish all
of us a more peaceful and prosperous 2023.
The President: I thank Mr. Touray for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I deliver this statement on
behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council, namely, Gabon, Mozambique, and Ghana (A3).
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on the activities of the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) (S/2022/1019)
and take this opportunity to thank the former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Annadif Mahamat Saleh, for his sterling
performance and significant contribution in addressing
the challenges of the region. While looking forward to
the appointment of a substantive head of UNOWAS, we
thank Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Giovanie Biha, the Officer in Charge, for her
briefing and insightful perspectives as well as for her
continued engagement with regional stakeholders. We
also welcome the briefings made by Mr Omar Alieu
Touray, President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). We
further commend the Peacebuilding Commission for
its forward-looking advisory note, which underscores
the importance of an integrated and coherent United
Nations system.
More than 20 years after its establishment,
UNOWAS continues to make significant contributions
to the peace and stability of West Africa and the Sahel
region. Since the most recent briefing on UNOWAS
to the Council in July (see S/PV.9086), we have seen
useful progress in the consolidation of democracy in
some countries of the region, observed the continuing
effectiveness of the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed

23-010755/17

S/PV.9238

Peace consolidation in West Africa

10/01/2023

Commission and witnessed the reduction of maritime
piracy incidents in the Gulf of Guinea.

condolences and sympathy to all the families of the
victims of terrorism in the region.

However, we note persisting concerns about
insecurity in some parts of the region, the stagnation
of democratic practices in some countries and the
challenging humanitarian situation in several societies.
Those prevailing challenges, coupled with regional
aspirations, require a concerted United Nations effort
to pursue balanced actions for a resilient region. We
therefore believe that the Office’s mandate, which is up
for renewal, remains relevant.

We support the efforts of regional initiatives
such as the Accra Initiative, the Group of Five for the
Sahel Joint Force and the Multinational Joint Task
Force and welcome the Secretary-General’s call on
partners to increase their contributions to enhance
the implementation of such regional arrangements,
including the ECOWAS plan of action to combat
terrorism for the period 2020–2024. We look forward
to the upcoming report of the Independent High-Level
Panel on Security and Development in the Sahel, led
by former President Mahamadou Issoufou of the Niger,
and hope that it will provide realistic recommendations
that leverage the best elements of the existing regional
initiatives and an enhanced unified regional force in a
robust response to the growing incidence of terrorism
in the region.

In addition, the A3 wishes to highlight some points
on the political, security and humanitarian situations.
On the political situation, we welcome the
diplomatic efforts that have enabled the release of the
46 Ivorian soldiers who were detained in Mali, thus
putting an end to a diplomatic crisis between the two
brotherly countries.
We note that the elections will be held in 10
countries of the region and are encouraged by the
consolidation of democracy in countries such as Côte
d’Ivoire, Cabo Verde and Benin, which two days ago
concluded successful legislative elections. We look
forward to successful general elections next month
in Nigeria, the region’s largest democracy. In that
regard, we welcome the signing of a peace pledge by
the presidential contenders and encourage a good-faith
commitment by all stakeholders to peaceful elections.
We condemn all attempted coups in the region
and continue to be concerned about the countries in
transition. We encourage the restoration of constitutional
order in the countries concerned, in accordance with
the ECOWAS Supplementary Protocol on Democracy
and Good Governance. We recall the communiqués of
the sixty-first and sixty-second ordinary sessions of the
ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government,
urge adherence to the agreed electoral timetables for a
definitive return to constitutional rule and note the need
for sustained engagement for inclusivity and tolerance
of political pluralism.
With regard to the security situation, the A3 remains
deeply concerned about widespread insecurity in the
Sahel and its potential spread to littoral countries. We
note the adverse impact of terrorist incidents on civilian
populations and the increasing use of improvised
explosive devices, which also target peacekeepers and
national security personnel. We express our deepest
6/17

We reiterate our long-standing position that the
question of adequate, predictable and sustainable
funding for regional security initiatives that respond to
threats to international peace and security is a pressing
matter on which the Council must have a unified
position. We urge continuing engagement on the
spillover effect of the lingering crisis in Libya on the
Sahel and the threat that the return of foreign terrorist
fighters and the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons pose to the region’s stability. We similarly
affirm the need for continuing attention on maritime
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, even though coordinated
actions are beginning to yield a downward trend in
piracy incidents.
The humanitarian situation in the Sahel is
worrisome. Approximately 6.3 million persons are
displaced, and 11,000 schools are closed. The situation
of insecurity and other aggravating factors, such as
climate change and food insecurity, are worsened by
violations of human rights in many contexts.
The frequency and severity of climate-related
crises seem to be rising exponentially. Last year, we
saw catastrophic droughts and floods, all of which
are believed to have been exacerbated by climate
change. We note the link between climate change and
insecurity, resulting in increasingly stressed tensions
and intercommunal clashes.
We urge support for humanitarian assistance
and towards livelihood empowerment pipelines that
leverage homegrown and regional initiatives such as
23-01075

10/01/2023

Peace consolidation in West Africa

the Climate Responses to Sustaining Peace initiative
launched at the just-ended twenty-seventh Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, held in Egypt, as well
as the Dakar Call to Action on Climate Change, Peace
and Security in West Africa and the Sahel.
Lastly, we re-emphasize the need to prioritize
investment in addressing the root causes of instability
in the region, including governance and development
deficits. That would require adopting deliberate
measures aimed at empowering young people and
women to meaningfully participate in governance
processes. We welcome the integration of the human
security concerns of women and youth into the recently
adopted 2022–2026 ECOWAS early warning and early
response strategic plan and encourage further support
for the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel.
Before concluding, let me convey our support for
the efforts of the penholders to work on a presidential
statement on UNOWAS with members of the Council.
Such a statement, we believe, could boost the efforts of
UNOWAS in dealing with the crises in the region.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank the briefers for their valuable presentations. I
would like to express our appreciation to the former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for guiding the work
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS). We look forward to working
with his successor upon appointment. We also thank
Ms. Giovanie Biha for her work as interim head of
the Office.
Switzerland has a long-standing commitment to
peace and development alongside the countries of the
Sahel. Our priorities — the protection of civilians,
sustainable peace and climate security — are at the
heart of the Office’s activities.
The people of West Africa and the Sahel face
multiple challenges. They bear the cumulative burden
of climate change, armed conflict, food insecurity
and energy prices. While that is a heavy burden for
everyone, it is particularly so for the vulnerable:
40 million children in the Sahel do not attend school,
an alarming figure in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/1019). The future of those children, especially
that of girls, is at stake.

S/PV.9238

We cannot delay in helping those populations,
especially the youth, in order to develop their potential
and that of their region. Let me mention three concrete
ways to do that.
First, it is essential to address the root causes of
violent extremism and conflict in a holistic manner, as
UNOWAS is doing and the Peacebuilding Commission
recommends. That is essential in order to address
the persistent insecurity in the region, including the
terrorist threat in central Sahel and the risk of spillover
to coastal countries. Counter-terrorism measures
must comply with international law, including human
rights and international humanitarian law. We also
wish to emphasize the importance of the inclusion
of, and respect for, human rights in the prevention of
violent extremism. Their key role has been repeatedly
emphasized during the regional conversations that
UNOWAS and Switzerland have been organizing since
2016, the next edition of which is scheduled for the end
of February in Dakar.
Secondly, on the political front, support for States
in transition — in particular Mali, Burkina Faso
and Guinea — in collaboration with the Economic
Community of West African States must remain a
priority. Switzerland underscores the importance of
inclusive dialogue in those contexts and calls on all
stakeholders to respect the constitutional order and
the rule of law. We are encouraged by the peaceful
elections in Senegal, the progress towards social
cohesion and reconciliation in Côte d’Ivoire and the
advancement of transitional justice in the Gambia. At
the same time, we regret the limited progress achieved
in terms of women’s representation and participation in
political and decision-making processes. We encourage
UNOWAS to continue to advocate for the full, equal and
meaningful representation of women in the electoral
processes scheduled for this year.
Finally,
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2022/1019) illustrates the multiple effects of climate
change on living conditions, food security and conflict
in West Africa and the Sahel. Helping communities
adapt to and mitigate the effects of climate change
must be an integral part of the response to the
region’s challenges. In order to create local economic
opportunities, Switzerland is making investments
aimed at strengthening the resilience of the countries
concerned and preserving their natural resources.
The Secretary-General’s report is further evidence
of the importance of UNOWAS in addressing the

23-010757/17

S/PV.9238

Peace consolidation in West Africa

challenges in the region. As part of our role as
co-penholder with Ghana, we will work with all the
members of the Council to provide continued support to
the work of the Office and the United Nations presence
in the region.
In conclusion, I echo my Ghanaian colleague in
announcing negotiations for a presidential statement
that we hope to submit for the Council’s consideration
very soon.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Deputy Special Representative Biha and Mr. Touray for
their briefings. Their work and insights are particularly
valuable and important to us during this perilous time
for the region.
Let me begin, as others have, by noting that we
are approaching the expiration of the mandate of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS). We strongly support its renewal before the
end of this month and look forward to working with the
co-penholders.
Like our briefers, the United States is deeply
concerned about the security, humanitarian and
political crises in the Sahel, which are causing a
dramatic increase in the strength and influence of the
violent extremism that is spreading into parts of coastal
West Africa, as we have heard. Violent extremism
thrives when State authorities are absent, the delivery
of services is weak, democracy is fragile or fleeting,
justice is inaccessible and economic and political
exclusion prevail. For the United States, instability in the
Sahel is clearly a security problem with a democraticgovernance solution. We also cannot ignore the fact
that the Kremlin-backed Wagner Group is interfering
in African countries’ internal affairs, robbing them of
their resources, committing human rights abuses and
endangering the safety and security of peacekeepers
and United Nations personnel. Its presence and
operations are not only failing to address the immediate
violent extremist threat but are actually increasing the
likelihood that violent extremism will grow.
We are also gravely concerned about democratic
backsliding across the region and urge the return of
democratically elected, civilian-led Governments.
We applaud the continued efforts of UNOWAS to
support democratic processes and advise transitional
Governments on how to return to full civilian-led
democracy. We strongly condemn the killing of 28
people in northern Burkina Faso in late December.
8/17

10/01/2023

We will continue to engage with the transitional
Government to strengthen protection for human rights
and civil liberties, and we will support accountability
for human rights violations and abuses. We share
the concerns expressed by the United Nations on the
departure of the United Nations Resident Coordinator
in Burkina Faso and are concerned about reports that
the French Ambassador to Burkina Faso has been asked
to leave the country.
In Mali, the Government must eliminate all the
restrictions on the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali so that it can
effectively carry out the mandate authorized by the
Council, which includes protecting civilians, promoting
human rights and advancing peace and stability in Mali.
We must reinvigorate our collective action and
support our African partners in addressing the problems
that cross borders. We applaud the efforts of the United
Nations, the African Union, the Group of Five for the
Sahel and the Economic Community of West African
States to support the region and hope to soon see a joint
strategic assessment in accordance with their timeline.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank Deputy Special
Representative Biha and Mr. Touray, the President
of the Commission of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), for their informative
briefings. Albania commends the good offices of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) in promoting inclusive dialogue, stability
and peace in the region and welcomes the cooperation
with ECOWAS.
I would first like to draw attention to the growing
political instability in West Africa and the Sahel. In the
past two years, unconstitutional changes of Government
have become an alarming trend. We urge Governments
in the region to focus on resolving the governance
crisis and strengthening their democratic institutions.
We commend the efforts and leadership of ECOWAS
in responding to the political crises and supporting
countries towards the restoration of constitutional rule.
Secondly, this year is crucial for West Africa and
the Sahel as the region prepares for several important
elections. We encourage political actors to pursue
inclusive dialogue and build consensus on outstanding
disagreements in order to ensure the peaceful conduct
of elections. We welcomed the elections held in Benin
on Sunday with the increased participation of parties,
as well as the holding of peaceful legislative elections
23-01075

10/01/2023

Peace consolidation in West Africa

in Senegal in July. We also welcome developments
such as the peace accord in Nigeria. We stress the
importance of the representation of women and young
people in political and decision-making processes, and
we urge Governments, with the support of UNOWAS,
to promote their full and meaningful participation.
Thirdly, we are concerned about the continued
deterioration of the security situation in large parts of the
Sahel, including the terrorist threat, which is expanding
from the Sahel towards coastal West African countries.
In that context, we welcome regional anti-terrorism
mechanisms, including the Accra Initiative. The
presence of the Wagner Group also poses a significant
threat to human rights and international humanitarian
law, and we urge Governments in the region to consider
the long-term risks in that regard.
Fourthly, the dire humanitarian situation demands
our attention, especially given that instability,
violence, forced displacement, climate shocks and food
insecurity have reached alarming levels. Moreover, the
closure of more than 11,000 schools is a very disturbing
trend that has deprived at least 40 million children of
their fundamental right to an education. We also stress
the important role that Resident Coordinators play in
facilitating much-required humanitarian assistance in
the region. We deplore the events in Burkina Faso and
join the call of the Secretary-General in that regard.
It is clear that United Nations support remains
critical to addressing the complex crisis facing the
region. The United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel and the United Nations Support Plan for the
Sahel are key frameworks for addressing the current
challenges, and we encourage actors to coordinate their
implementation efforts.
In conclusion, we welcome the joint strategic
assessment of security and governance in the Sahel
and anticipate the related recommendations. We also
look forward to providing UNOWAS with a fit-forpurpose mandate by the end of the month and hope that
we can agree on a presidential statement in order to
demonstrate the Council’s unity on the matter.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in
French): I thank the Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Giovanie Biha, and
the President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
Mr. Omar Alieu Touray, for their briefings.

S/PV.9238

France welcomed the democratic progress that
characterized 2022 in West Africa, with the holding
of legislative elections in the Gambia and Senegal,
the advances through political dialogue made in Côte
d’Ivoire and the preparations under way for upcoming
2023 elections, particularly in Nigeria and GuineaBissau. Unfortunately, three countries of the region have
yet to restore constitutional order. France welcomes the
efforts of ECOWAS to secure a clear commitment from
the authorities of Burkina Faso, Guinea and Mali on the
duration of their transitions and the holding of credible
and transparent elections.
In that context, the United Nations has a crucial
role to play. I would like to commend the excellent work
done by Special Representative Mahamat Saleh Annadif
and his Deputy. We hope that the appointment of a new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS) will take place without delay. In
that regard, I would also like to recall the importance
of the role of the United Nations Resident Coordinators
in the region. The role being played by UNOWAS and
all the United Nations teams is more important than
ever in supporting political transitions in partnership
with ECOWAS, while at the same time addressing the
factors essential to achieving peace, such as respect for
human rights, the fight against impunity, the ability to
meet humanitarian needs, development, the opening up
of civic space, freedom of the press, the participation
of women and efforts to address climate change. For all
those reasons, France supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that UNOWAS’s mandate be renewed
for three years.
My final comments are about the security situation.
In that regard, France would like to emphatically
underscore the tragic results of the Wagner Group
mercenary model, which has shown itself to be
ineffective in combating terrorism and whose actions
have also left a trail of destruction. It is already
responsible for many human rights violations, which
we have seen in Moura, in Mali, with more than 300
civilian victims. Nor can we be allowed to forget the
plundering of natural resources in the countries where
the Group is deployed.
It is clear that security is a major issue for the
region, but we cannot react to it with brutal, ruthless
or partial measures. France reiterates its full support
for the collective initiatives led by the United Nations,
the African Union, ECOWAS, the Group of Five

23-010759/17

S/PV.9238

Peace consolidation in West Africa

for the Sahel, the Accra Initiative and the Yaoundé
Architecture for maritime security. France and the
European Union will continue to be major partners
in those initiatives. I also reaffirm our support for
the Independent High-Level Panel on Security and
Development in the Sahel, led by President Issoufou.
We hope that it will come up with innovative proposals.
France will continue to provide assistance to countries
in the region that request it within a framework that
conforms to international law.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate our long-standing
support for the African Union’s request for predictable
and sustainable funding for its peacekeeping operations,
including through mandatory United Nations
contributions. The issue will be raised by our Minister
for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Catherine Colonna,
during her visit to Addis Ababa this week together with
her German counterpart.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Ms. Giovanie Biha, Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Omar Alieu Touray, President of the Commission
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), for their informative briefings. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2022/1019) on the latest developments in the region.
Ecuador acknowledges the importance of the work of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS). The work it is doing in partnership with
the countries of the region to address the underlying
causes of violence is vital to building sustainable peace.
We believe that creating opportunities for the
populations in the region and improving their living
conditions are key tasks for which we must establish
and maintain the conditions necessary for political
stability and security. Ecuador supports initiatives and
actions aimed at consolidating democracy and State
institutions. In that regard, we welcomed the holding
of elections in Senegal in July 2022 and in Benin
last Sunday. We also welcome the progress made to
improve civic coexistence in Cabo Verde, Côte d’Ivoire,
Mauritania and the Niger. We are concerned about the
destabilizing effects of unconstitutional changes of
Government and coups d’état. We hope that Burkina
Faso, Guinea and Mali will return to constitutional
rule as soon as possible, and we appreciate the work
of ECOWAS to that end. We are closely following
the preparations for elections in Mauritania, Liberia,
Nigeria, Togo, the Gambia and Sierra Leone, and we
10/17

10/01/2023

hope that the elections scheduled for this year will be
conducted peacefully. We also hope that the issues that
led to the postponement of elections in Guinea-Bissau
will be resolved and that they will be successfully held
in June.
Ecuador is very concerned about the deterioration of
the security situation in the central Sahel, particularly in
Mali and Burkina Faso, as well as the danger of terrorist
violence spreading to the countries along the Atlantic
coast. We condemn the violence in recent months that
has mainly affected Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger,
Benin and Nigeria and express our solidarity with the
families of the victims. We learned from this morning’s
briefings that many of the victims are children and
young people, who are crucial to the development of
all our peoples. We call on the countries of the area to
step up their cooperation to fight terrorism in all its
forms, while recalling their obligation to respect human
rights and international humanitarian law and ensure
accountability at all times.
Ecuador supports regional initiatives that
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security and the peaceful resolution of conflicts,
as — to paraphrase the late former Secretary-General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali — they lighten the burden of
the Security Council and contribute to a deeper sense
of participation, consensus and democratization. We
therefore welcome the decrease in acts of piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea and the strengthening of the Yaoundé
Architecture for maritime security. The progress
made in the work of the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed
Commission is encouraging. Ecuador agrees that
greater participation of women in political processes
fosters social cohesion, development, the prevention of
violence and consequently peacebuilding. Accordingly,
we commend Liberia’s adoption of quotas for women’s
participation in legislative elections and UNOWAS’s
support for the Working Group on Women, Youth,
Peace and Security in West Africa and the Sahel.
In conclusion, it is clear to us that the Council’s
work related to achieving sustainable peace in Africa
must take account of the interrelated nature of such
diverse factors as terrorism, organized crime and food
insecurity, among others. For that reason, I reiterate
Ecuador’s support for the work of UNOWAS and the
renewal of its mandate, which are vital to overcoming
the challenges facing the region.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I would like to begin by
thanking Deputy Special Representative Biha for her
23-01075

10/01/2023

Peace consolidation in West Africa

report and comprehensive briefing and His Excellency
Mr. Omar Alieu Touray, President of the Commission
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), for his valuable insights.
Malta welcomes the peaceful democratic efforts
in the region, which offer hope to other countries
pursuing their own political and democratic paths.
The legislative elections in Senegal in July 2022 and
in Benin on Sunday, and the continued efforts aimed at
national reconciliation in Côte d’Ivoire, are examples of
that. In looking ahead, we call for similar democratic
approaches to ensuring inclusive and peaceful elections
in the run-up to the 2023 electoral cycle in the region.
We are encouraged by the relatively calm environment
in which preparations for the February and March
general elections in Nigeria are taking place.
Despite that progress, we remain concerned about
the successive coups d’état in the region, which are
hindering progress towards democratic consolidation,
and we call on the authorities concerned to respect
democratic processes. Malta fully supports joint efforts
by the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS) and ECOWAS to that end, such as
the joint UNOWAS-ECOWAS high-level mission to
Burkina Faso following the coup there in September. We
also commend ECOWAS for immediately condemning
the attempted coup in the Gambia last December and
for standing firmly by the democratic results.
On the security front, Malta deplores the increasing
threats of terrorism and violence from armed groups,
particularly in Burkina Faso and Mali, as well as the
presence of mercenary groups. We strongly condemn
the terrorist attacks, which are resulting in civilian
casualties and exacerbating the already dire situation
for local communities. The continued fighting between
armed groups and the spread of terrorist activity are
jeopardizing the prospects for long-term stability in the
region. We urge for local, regional and international
efforts to reverse these increasingly violent trends
and address the underlying conditions that lead to the
spread of terrorist activity.
Climate change is also exacerbating instability in a
region already contending with the serious displacement
of populations and food and water insecurity. Malta is
strongly committed to solutions designed to bridge the
climate-security nexus, and acknowledges the work of
UNOWAS in integrating those interlinkages through
risk analysis and road maps, including the Dakar Call
to Action. As things stand, more than 24.4 million

S/PV.9238

people in the Sahel needed life-saving assistance in
2022. That situation cannot be allowed to continue.
Beyond this, women and girls in the region continue
to face high risks of sexual and gender-based violence,
abductions, displacement and trafficking. As a
founding member of the Group of Friends of Women of
the Sahel, Malta is committed to actions that can ensure
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women,
including in leadership roles, in political processes
in the region. They include increasing the protection
of women’s human rights defenders and facilitating
exchanges among women leaders and women’s civilsociety organizations within and outside the Sahel.
We commend UNOWAS for promoting the women
and peace and security agenda and ECOWAS for
establishing its Women, Peace and Security Steering
Group. We also echo the remarks of the Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the
importance of protecting children’s right to education,
in line with resolution 2601 (2021). The links between
education and peace and security are clear, and we need
to safeguard the right to education.
Despite those challenges, we are pleased to see
that solutions continue to be forged through UNOWAS
and regional partners, including the African Union, the
Group of Five for the Sahel and ECOWAS. Supporting
authorities in improving local governance, addressing
social grievances, ensuring education and promoting
gender equality within the scope of all peacebuilding
efforts must remain an integral part of our approach.
Malta underlines the importance of continuing
to enhance and strengthen resilience through various
UNOWAS projects. Additionally, we reiterate our
support for any United Nations, regional or local
efforts striving to advance sustainable development
in the region. To that end, we welcome the greater
cooperation in combating terrorism and transnational
organized crime under the Accra Initiative. We also
fully support the timely set-up of the Independent
High-Level Panel on Security and Development in the
Sahel, and we look forward to its findings later this
year. Malta underlines the central role of UNOWAS in
holistically addressing the challenges in the region, and
we strongly support the renewal of its mandate. Despite
the many challenges, the commitment demonstrated by
UNOWAS to consistently upholding the values of its
good offices is greatly valued.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank Ms. Giovanie Biha,

23-0107511/17

S/PV.9238

Peace consolidation in West Africa

10/01/2023

representative of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), and Mr. Omar
Touray, President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), for the
information they provided.

concerned about various Western countries’ attempts
to drive a wedge through African unity by pitting some
countries against others, including on the basis of their
cooperation with Russia. As we see it, such actions can
only worsen the situation.

We share the concerns voiced today regarding
the situation in many countries in West Africa and
the Sahel. The region is facing increased terrorist
threats and ongoing inter-ethnic and intercommunal
conflicts, while organized crime and drug trafficking
are flourishing. During the second half of 2022, a large
number of civilians died at the hands of militants. We
express our support to all who are waging the difficult
war on terrorism in the region, and it is alarming to see
that subversive elements are seeking ways to escape to
Gulf of Guinea countries.

We believe firmly that it is the States of the region
that should play the main role in maintaining peace
and security there, with the international community
providing them with effective assistance in that regard.
We support Africans in conducting fully independent
policies aimed in resolving relevant issues based on
the principle of African solutions to African problems.
We support the decision taken at the ECOWAS summit
in Abuja on 4 December 2022 to generate $1 billion
as soon as possible to implement the 2020–2024
ECOWAS Action Plan in order to combat terrorism. In
that regard, we wish the countries of the region every
success in implementing the joint assessment strategy
on governance and security, as well as in realizing the
Accra Initiative.

We have to admit that the withdrawal from Mali
of the counter-terrorist Operation Barkhane and the
European Union’s Takuba Task Force without Bamako’s
agreement is having a negative effect on the security
situation, at least in the short term. In the circumstances,
the Malian army has had to assume the full responsibility
for counter-terrorism efforts. Nevertheless, we have
already seen some positive results. Russia is providing
the country with appropriate assistance on the basis of
bilateral agreements. In that connection, we reject any
unfounded allegations that attempt to smear Russia’s
assistance in Mali and other countries on the continent.
Some countries have again claimed today that Russia is
allegedly plundering Africa’s resources or contributing
to the growing terrorist threat there. But it is the
very countries making those claims that are in fact
themselves involved in such actions all over the world
and in Africa in particular. In their desire to plunder
Libya’s resources, those countries have not ceased their
destruction of that country and their destabilization
of the whole of the Sahel. The accusations aimed at
Russia are simply a mockery of common sense and the
ability of the leaders of African nations to assess the
causes behind their problems themselves, as well as
their sovereign right to choose with whom they wish
to cooperate.
We welcome the political mediation efforts of
ECOWAS in the region. We are convinced that equal and
respectful dialogue between that African organization
and the authorities of Mali, Burkina Faso and Guinea
will help to resolve the current disagreements and
contribute to the restoration of constitutional order in
those countries. At the same time, we are extremely
12/17

Returning to the topic of UNOWAS, it is clear that
the Office is facing difficult, large-scale challenges in
its efforts to help settle regional crises, participate in
political mediation, provide assistance to strengthen
State institutions and implement the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, as well as perform
coordinating functions for other United Nations
presences on the ground.
The effectiveness of the work of UNOWAS
completely hinges on how well it cooperates with such
regional organizations as the African Union (AU),
ECOWAS and the Lake Chad Basin Commission.
We support the numerous decisions of the AU Peace
and Security Commission on the need to strengthen
cooperation and coordination between all structures in
the region in order to tackle problems facing the Sahel.
In conclusion, we would also like to remind
colleagues that after the closure of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau in
2020, monitoring events in the country became the
responsibility of UNOWAS. In these circumstances,
we believe that maintaining Security Council sanctions
against Guinea-Bissau under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter, which provides for sanctions only in
the case of a threat to international peace and security,
is absurd. We call for them to be gradually dismantled.
Russia will continue to constructively participate
in collective efforts aimed at ensuring stability in West
23-01075

10/01/2023

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Africa and the Sahel, including as a permanent member
of the Security Council. Russia will continue to support
the countries of the region bilaterally, including by
improving the military preparedness of the armed
forces, training servicemen and law-enforcement
personnel and providing humanitarian assistance.
We are prepared to have a fruitful and constructive
discussion on renewing the mandate of UNOWAS for a
further three years.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Giovanie Biha, Deputy Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Officer in Charge of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), and Mr. Omar Touray, President of the
Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), for their briefings
Recently, in the face of the complex and daunting
international and regional situation, West African
and Sahel States have made a series of important
achievements in maintaining shared security, restoring
economic and social development and strengthening
solidarity and cooperation. The region is strategically
located and rich in energy resources, and it has great
development potential. The international community
and the Security Council should gain a deeper
understanding of the difficulties, challenges and
real needs of the countries in the region, make great
efforts to tackle their root causes and provide more
targeted support and assistance for regional peace and
sustainable development.
First, to give more vigorous support to regional
cooperation so as to build a collective security shield,
West African countries recently convened a summit
and a conference on the Accra Initiative during which
major consensus was reached on combating terrorism
and creating a joint regional counter-terrorism force.
Nigeria’s efforts to wipe out its domestic terrorist
forces and deepen cooperation with such neighbouring
countries as Benin and Burkina Faso deserve our
recognition. Meanwhile, the expansion of terrorist
forces in the region is picking up speed, and the problems
of trafficking in drugs and arms and piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea are far from being tackled. None of this can
hardly be effectively dealt with by one country alone.
China supports countries in the region in
strengthening the concept of a security community,
deepening communication and coordination on
security affairs, advancing the development of regional
joint counter-terrorism forces and other security

S/PV.9238

mechanisms, and striving to enhance their capacity to
maintain stability and fight terrorism. The international
community and traditional partners in particular
should stay engaged in regional security and increase
financial, equipment, intelligence and logistical support
for countries on the front lines, such as the Group
of Five for the Sahel, so as to build a strong defence
against terrorism. The Independent High-Level Panel
on Security and Development in the Sahel is actively
working under the leadership of His Excellency
President Issoufou, and China looks forward to the
Panel’s pragmatic and feasible recommendations, which
will inject new momentum into regional cooperation.
Secondly, to give more vigorous support to political
consultations and dialogue so as to maintain the overall
situation of peace and stability, Nigeria and Sierra
Leone made steady advances on their election agendas
during the reporting period, while Côte d’Ivoire, Benin
and the Gambia actively engaged in political dialogue.
This year, a number of countries will move their
election agendas forward. We hope the political forces
in the countries concerned will step up dialogue, forge
consensus and steadily advance their political agendas
so as to make positive contributions to the stability and
development of their countries. Meanwhile, protests
and demonstrations around issues such those that have
arisen in relation to the general elections in Liberia,
inter alia, have added to the political-security risks
in some countries. This warrants high vigilance. The
international community should provide timely and
constructive support. China supports the ongoing active
role of ECOWAS and its member States in regional
affairs. The consensus on political transition reached
between ECOWAS and Mali, Guinea and Burkina Faso
and other countries is a hard-won achievement that
should be jointly safeguarded.
Thirdly, calling for more vigorous support for
development and governance so as to lay a solid
foundation for long-term peace and security, the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/1019) states
that growth in West Africa and the Sahel region has
slowed down, the food crisis has deteriorated, energy
and inflation problems have become more severe
and the international community — major developed
countries in particular — have cut back development
assistance to the region. Recently, some countries of
the region have been plagued by political instability
and terrorism, which has triggered the vicious cycle of
poverty begetting chaos and chaos begetting poverty,

23-0107513/17

S/PV.9238

Peace consolidation in West Africa

which fully demonstrates that security and development
are inseparable.
UNOWAS and the relevant United Nations
peacekeeping operations should focus on sustainable
development at all stages of peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding and balance security
and development in order to create synergy. Developed
countries should fulfil their official development
assistance commitments and increase financial and
technical support in poverty reduction, infrastructure,
food security and climate change.
It is worth noting that some developed countries
have adopted irresponsible monetary and trade policies,
and their negative spillover effects have aggravated the
fragility of the economies of countries of the region.
During the reporting period, UNOWAS conducted
dialogues with countries of the region and supported
the cooperation initiatives of regional organizations. Its
achievements are commendable.
China supports the efforts that were made by former
Special Representative Annadif Mahamat Saleh. It
also supports in principle the renewal of the mandate
for UNOWAS and hopes that it will fully listen to and
respect the concerns of countries of the region and play
a greater role in regional stability and development
based on its mandate from the Security Council.
As a good brother and partner of African countries,
China has always stood firmly with West Africa and
the Sahel countries. Chinese Foreign Minister Qin
Gang recently kicked off a visit to Africa, including to
that region, which was his very first trip abroad since
becoming Foreign Minister. That continued the fine 33year tradition of Chinese Foreign Ministers devoting
their first foreign visit of any given year to Africa.
China will uphold the philosophy of sincerity, real
results, affinity and good faith, as well as the righteous
concept of upholding justice while pursuing shared
interests, and carry forward the spirit of friendship
and cooperation between China and Africa so as
to contribute to the maintenance of regional peace,
stability, unity and self-improvement.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Biha and President Omar Touray for their
informative briefings.
The region of West Africa and the Sahel presents
problems and challenges as varied as the countries
of which the region is composed. However, there is a
14/17

10/01/2023

common thread that pervades many of the conflicts in
the region, namely, the link between the humanitarian,
political and security crises there. We often see that
difficult humanitarian situations are fertile ground
for political instability, which is often expressed
through violent means. Violence and security, in
turn, increase economic hardship and aggravate the
humanitarian situation.
The proper functioning of democratic institutions
is essential to breaking this cycle and preventing it from
taking place. In that context, I would like to highlight the
peaceful legislative elections that took place in Senegal
last July. I also recall the preparations for the general
elections that will take place in Nigeria in February and
March. The National Peace Accord, signed by party
leaders on 29 September, bodes well for the successful
and orderly conclusion of the electoral process. In
Guinea-Bissau, a country to which Brazil is linked by
close linguistic and historical ties, President Úmaro
Sissoco Embaló set the date for the elections as 4 June
2023. We hope that the postponement of the original
proposed date will allow for the completion of the
process in an orderly and peaceful manner.
It is in the Sahel that the link between political
instability and security and humanitarian crisis is most
clear. The Council already noted with concern the
overthrow of the transitional Government in Burkina
Faso on 30 September 2022, in what amounts to the
second coup d’état in that country in 2022. We urge the
new President of the transition to abide by the transition
timeline approved by the national conference held in
October 2022.
In Mali, the decision of the authorities to withdraw
from the Group of Five for the Sahel created additional
difficulties for the Joint Force in fulfilling its duties
in the fight against terrorism. We are encouraged by
the agreement with the Economic Community of West
African States, which made it possible to lift sanctions
on the country.
It is with great concern that we note the expansion
of terrorist activities from the central Sahel to coastal
countries, such as Benin and Togo. We are encouraged,
however, by the increased regional efforts to fight
this scourge, be it in bilateral agreements or in the
framework of the Accra Initiative. We take note of the
setting up of the Multinational Joint Task Force of the
Accra Initiative.
23-01075

10/01/2023

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Brazil is also encouraged by the improvement of
maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea. That is an
achievement, above all, of the countries of the region,
which have joined their efforts in the framework of the
Yaoundé Architecture. Brazil has proudly contributed
to those efforts. As a member of the Group of Friends
of the Gulf of Guinea, we have provided cooperation
and taken part in naval operations such as Operation
Guinex, Obangame Express and Grand African NEMO.
The humanitarian situation in West Africa and
the Sahel, particularly in the latter, shows no signs
of improving. The number of displaced people,
closed schools and empty hospitals has increased.
Successfully tackling that situation requires the
combined efforts of the countries of the region and of
the international community.
In that context, Brazil praises the efforts of the
leadership and of all the personnel of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), who
have provided an invaluable service — be it providing
good offices or facilitating delicate dialogues or
providing much-needed technical assistance and
expertise to regional initiatives. In particular, I would
like to express gratitude towards His Excellency
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif for his work at the head of
UNOWAS, and I wish him success in his new functions
as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I am grateful to
our briefers — Ms. Biha, Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Touray, President of
the Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) — for their presentations.
I also thank former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mahamat Saleh Annadif for his
dedicated service.
Today I will make three points focusing on
democracy, security and humanitarian issues.
First, the United Kingdom is concerned about the
democratic backsliding and the shrinking of civic space
that the region experienced in 2022. We urge progress
towards the restoration of constitutional Governments
in Mali, Burkina Faso and Guinea within the agreed
time frames. We commend ECOWAS and African
Union efforts to make that happen.
This will be an important year for democracy in
West Africa, with presidential elections in Nigeria,
Sierra Leone and Liberia. The United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) has an

S/PV.9238

important role to play, including through its good
offices. The United Kingdom supports the focus we
have heard today on boosting women’s participation in
those processes.
Secondly, there has been a clear deterioration in
the security situation in the region, notably in Mali,
Burkina Faso, Nigeria and the Lake Chad basin. We
share concerns raised by others today about the risk of
instability spreading to the coastal States. We cannot
ignore the destabilizing role that the Wagner Group
plays in the region. They are part of the problem, not
the solution. Tackling the region’s security challenges
requires a holistic response. This includes the need to
recognize the security impact of climate change, which
multiplies the threats faced by vulnerable populations,
for example, through changes in rainfall patterns.
We welcome the efforts of UNOWAS to enhance
coherence and coordination, including by supporting
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel
and the Accra Initiative. UNOWAS must use its new
mandate to focus on tackling the root causes of conflict.
For our part, the United Kingdom is building our
bilateral cooperation through security dialogues with
Ghana and Nigeria. And we are enhancing multilateral
cooperation through the United Nations Development
Programme’s Regional Stabilization Facility for
Lake Chad.
Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in the Sahel
remains dire, compounded by rising prices and
floods. The United Kingdom remains committed to
our humanitarian efforts in the region. We call on all
actors to ensure full cooperation, as well as safe and
unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance.
In conclusion, we look forward to the Office’s
mandate renewal and the appointment of a new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General so that
UNOWAS can continue to support regional efforts
towards peace and prosperity.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Ms. Giovanie Biha for her valuable
briefing and efforts in leading the important work
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS). I take this opportunity to express
our sincere appreciation to Mr. Saleh Annadif for his
tireless efforts during his tenure. I also thank Mr. Omar
Touray, President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), for
his briefing.

23-0107515/17

S/PV.9238

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Despite the crises facing West Africa and the
Sahel, we believe that the region has immense potential
to yield peace, security and sustainable development.
That requires doubling the collective efforts to find
innovative and inclusive solutions to respond to the
threats facing the region.
We stress in that context the need to focus on steps
that enhance dialogue and constructive engagement
in the region and prevent it from drifting deeper
into divisions and instability. Such steps include
maintaining and building upon the current diplomatic
efforts among the countries of the region, particularly
their efforts to create an environment conducive to
holding elections and making necessary reforms with
regard to governance while fostering long-term growth
and prosperity.
We stress the important role of regional organizations,
the United Nations and its entities, including UNOWAS
and the Peacebuilding Commission, in supporting the
States of the region and enhancing their capabilities in
building their institutions, maintaining their political
unity and deepening partnerships among them.
Therefore, we believe that progress must be made in
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations Support
Plan for the Sahel. We hope that the recommendations
of the Independent High-Level Panel on Security
and Development in the Sahel, led by His Excellency
Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, will provide a clear
assessment of the region’s needs and help us adopt
effective and innovative solutions to meet them.
Given the continuous deterioration of the security
situation, we support the regional efforts to address
the cross-border security challenges in the region,
especially extremism and terrorism. We are concerned
about the expansion of terrorist activities along the
Gulf of Guinea and the coast of West Africa as well
as its accompanying repercussions on security and
development. We believe that some of the existing
regional initiatives, such as the ECOWAS Conflict
Prevention Framework and the Accra Initiative, are
essential for promoting regional peace and security.
We reiterate that regional stakeholders with strong
international support play a pivotal role in identifying
gaps that undermine stability in the region and providing
recommendations on addressing them.
West Africa and the Sahel are among the continent’s
areas most vulnerable to environmental threats that
undermine security and stability in the region. It is
16/17

10/01/2023

therefore essential for the Council to keep that issue at
the top of its priorities, including by strengthening the
role of UNOWAS in helping the States of the region
to confront the issues of climate change and assess
and manage risks. We consider the appointment of a
Climate, Peace and Security Adviser to be an important
step to that end.
As the host of the twenty-eighth session of the
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP28)
this year, we look forward to continuing the important
discussions held during the previous session,
including with UNOWAS and other relevant regional
and international actors. We encourage the Office
to continue its efforts in that regard, including those
aimed at enhancing youth participation in providing
innovative solutions to adapt to climate change.
We cannot ignore the fact that climate change
affects humanitarian situation and stability in the
region. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), 15 per cent of the
region’s population suffer from food insecurity resulting
from the impacts of climate change and droughts that
have caused a shortage of wheat and fertilizers and a
rise in food and energy prices. That highlights once
again the need for measures to address climate change.
Although we realize that such measures alone are
insufficient to improve the humanitarian situation in
the region, they will help mitigate the food crisis and
provide an opportunity for a more sustainable approach
in the future.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates emphasizes
its continued support for the mandate of the UNOWAS,
its local and regional partners, as well as its efforts
to integrate youth and promote the full, equal, and
meaningful participation of women. We hope that all
those endeavours will contribute to establishing peace
and stability in West Africa and the Sahel.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
I would like to thank Ms. Biha, Deputy Special
Representative and Officer-in-Charge of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), for her briefing and His Excellency
Mr. Touray, President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), for his
insights. I also thank the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) for the valuable written comments.
23-01075

10/01/2023

Peace consolidation in West Africa

S/PV.9238

First, Japan appreciates the pivotal role that
UNOWAS is playing in the region. As we witness
the further deterioration of security and political
situations in the region, UNOWAS efforts to build and
sustain peace and stability in close coordination with
regional organizations, notably ECOWAS, are all the
more crucial.

comprehensive institution-building to enhance good
economic governance.

Last month’s attempted coup in the Gambia,
approximately one year after the conclusion of peaceful,
free and fair presidential and legislative elections, is a
reminder that political stability in the region needs to
be reinforced. Unconstitutional changes of government
undermine the security and stability of any country. In
that regard, Japan applauds the leadership of ECOWAS
and the African Union, who have upheld clear principles.

Japan strongly believes that the protection,
empowerment and inclusion of — as well as solidary
with — vulnerable populations, including women,
young people and minorities, must remain at the
centre of efforts to bring peace and stability in the
region. In that regard, Japan welcomes efforts by the
United Nations and regional organizations, particularly
ECOWAS and the African Union, to integrate human
security concerns, such as those of women and young
people, into their activities, including peacebuilding,
security sector reform and climate action.

On that note, Japan calls for the timely preparation
of free and fair elections in Mali, Burkina Faso and
Guinea in order to ensure their return to constitutional
rule. From the perspective of the rule of law, efforts
should be focused on establishing effective, accountable
and democratic institutions, as was reiterated in the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) advisory note and
pointed out by Mr. Touray. As several West African
countries prepare to hold elections in 2023, Japan,
under the New Approach for Peace and Stability in
Africa, will continue to support efforts to strengthen
democratic institutions and governance.
Terrorism and violent extremism continue to be
major threats to peace and security in West Africa and
the Sahel, and their expansion to the coastal States is
of deep concern. Japan welcomes regional initiatives
such as the Accra Initiative and the ECOWAS Conflict
Prevention Framework.
Socioeconomic development is vital for sustaining
peace and stability in the region. Japan echoes the
PBC advisory note in underscoring the importance
of the rule of law in support of socioeconomic
development and in noting the need to undertake

Japan recognizes that the adverse effects of climate
change pose a serious threat to human security. It is
imperative to integrate the effects of climate change
and environmental degradation into early warning
systems, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

The challenges the region faces are diverse yet
interconnected, and we therefore need to take an
integrated and holistic approach. In that regard, Japan
looks forward to the report by the Independent HighLevel Panel on Security and Development in the
Sahel. We hope that the report will provide us with
an assessment of and innovative recommendations
on a future integrated approach to deal with the
region’s challenges.
I would like to conclude by reiterating our support
for the work of UNOWAS and its mandate extension so
that it can continue to engage with and align the work
of various actors, including civil society, in promoting
peace and security in that complex region.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

23-0107517/17
