S/PV.7882

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7882

nd meeting
Monday, 13 February 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Klimkin/Mr. Vitrenko. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ukraine)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Arancibia Fernández
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Amendola
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Abdymomunov
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Klein
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Protection of critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks
Letter dated 1 February 2017 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2017/104)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-03821 (E)
*1703821*

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Protection of critical infrastructure against
terrorist attacks
Letter dated 1 February 2017 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2017/104)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Croatia,
Cuba, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Montenegro, Morocco, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Pakistan, Peru, Poland,
the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, the
Syrian Arab Republic, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the SecretaryGeneral; Mr. Jürgen Stock, Secretary General of the
International Criminal Police Organization; Mr. Hamid
Ali Rao, Deputy Director-General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons; Mr. Chris
Trelawny, Special Adviser to the Secretary-General of
the International Maritime Organization on Maritime
Security and Facilitation; and Mr. Olli Heinonen,
Senior Advisor on Science and Non-proliferation at
the Foundation for Defense of Democracies and former
Deputy Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency.
Mr. Stock is joining today’s meeting via video
teleconference from Lyon.
2/58

13/02/2017

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the following
persons to participate in this meeting: Mr. João Vale de
Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations; and Mr. Krisztian Meszaros,
Civilian Liaison Officer of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/104, which contains the text of
a letter dated 1 February 2017 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/119, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Albania, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Iceland, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Malta, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Poland, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America
and Uruguay.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2341 (2017).
On 21 November 2016, the Security Council held
an Arria Formula meeting on the protection of critical
infrastructure against terrorist attacks. This meeting
demonstrated a growing understanding among States
Members of the United Nations of the importance of
the subject and attested to an urgent need to ensure
a high level of protection of critical infrastructure
and to consolidate international efforts in increasing
resilience against terrorist attacks. In our view, the
resolution just adopted is a timely response by the
international community to emerging and rapidly
evolving threats posed by terrorism. This is a decisive
step towards global preparedness for terrorist attacks
against critical infrastructure and the strengthening of
international cooperation on this matter. I encourage
participants in today’s debate to discuss in detail their
priorities and challenges, to provide information on
their current efforts and to share good practices in the
area of protection of critical infrastructure.
I now give the floor to Ms. Viotti.
Ms. Viotti: It is a pleasure for me to be here today
on behalf of the Secretary-General. I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on convening this meeting.
As terrorist organizations proliferate and seek
innovative ways to plan and execute physical and
cyberattacks across the globe, the threat they pose is
becoming increasingly complex. Critical infrastructure
is especially vulnerable, including energy facilities
and networks; air, land and maritime transportation;
banking and financial services; water supply; food
distribution, public health and other services that are the
backbone of modern societies. Infrastructure networks
and systems that previously functioned independently
have become interlinked through advances in
communication and information technology. An attack
on one sector can affect others, leading to disruptions
and widespread chaos.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate has recognized the gravity of the dangers
of Da’esh and other groups determined to carry out
such attacks. Moreover, since many such facilities and
networks operate across borders, any terrorist attack
against them would almost certainly have regional
and global implications. The transnational nature of

S/PV.7882

terrorism requires the coordinated response on the part
of all States and actors of the international community.
However, we need to admit that international counterterrorism cooperation has been limited, especially in
the area of critical infrastructure. Strategically, this
means that the international community needs to unite
and be more creative, proactive and effective, including
through the development of strong public-private
partnerships. Three key steps need to be taken.
First, vulnerabilities in critical infrastructure need
to be mapped at all levels and in all sectors. Secondly,
international, regional and national actors should
cooperate on prevention and, in case an attack does
take place, on the mitigation of its effects, including
through information-sharing. Thirdly, it is crucial
to build States’ capacities, including to assess risks,
take preparedness measures, strengthen emergency
management capacity and ensure that responses
are fully in keeping with human rights norms and
standards. The United Nations stands ready to assist
Member States in these and other areas.
The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force has set up the Inter-agency Working Group on
the Protection of Critical Infrastructure including
Internet, Vulnerable Targets and Tourism Security.
Various projects to assist Member States are under way,
encompassing many areas, United Nations entities and
partners. But of course, the primary responsibility lies
with Member States.
This debate comes at a crucial time. As our world
becomes increasingly interconnected through travel,
commerce and communications and in cyberspace, we
become more vulnerable to attacks by technologically
savvy terrorists seeking new ways to spread fear. It is
encouraging that the Security Council has heightened
its attention to this critical threat.
The President: I thank Ms. Viotti for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Stock.
Mr. Stock: It is an honour to brief the Security
Council once again, and on an issue of central
importance to our collective security.
I would like to thank Ukraine for convening this
meeting and for its continued efforts to mobilize
international cooperation on this crucial subject.
Critical infrastructure acts as the life-support
system of our everyday existence. Our societies are

17-038213/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

sustained by a highly complex and sophisticated
network of infrastructure systems. Our citizens expect
and rely upon functioning institutions and services
for their health, safety, security and economic wellbeing. This life-support system has become more
efficient and productive due to technological advances,
the interchanges of globalization and the demands
of an increasingly urban population. The advent of
life 3.0 — the overlapping of the digital and physical
worlds — allowed us to monitor and even control
infrastructure from anywhere in the world.
However, with heavy reliance and real-time
connectivity comes vulnerability to threats. The
interdependence of our infrastructure through sectors
and industries, between the cyber and physical
areas, and across national boundaries means that the
consequences of an attack could be far-reaching.
One attack on a single point of failure could lead
to the disruption or destruction of multiple vital
systems in the country directly affected, and a ripple
effect worldwide. This creates an appealing target
to those intending to harm us, and as our cities and
infrastructure evolve, so do their weapons. Conflict
zone tactics — such as simultaneous active shooter
events, armoured vehicle-borne improvised explosive
devices, homemade explosive vests, hacking attacks
or portable unmanned aerial systems with explosive
payloads — could be honed for use in our city streets
and against key facilities.
So how can we protect the vital organs of our
life-support system against this ever-adapting threat?
The short answer is that we can do so by getting all
relevant actors able to prepare, prevent and respond to
such attacks. These imperatives are at the core of the
efforts of INTERPOL and our partners in the Working
Group on the Protection of Critical Infrastructure
including Internet, Vulnerable Targets and Tourism
Security of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force to promote intelligence-sharing, capacitybuilding and resilience in some crucial areas.
First, we focus on strengthening critical site
security with emergency-preparedness standards and
procedures. For instance, INTERPOL’s Vulnerable
Targets Team has been working with our member
countries in West Africa to enhance the physical
security of laboratories hosting dangerous pathogens
and to protect them from terrorist attacks. Generously
funded by the Canadian Government, this project
4/58

13/02/2017

seeks to build biosecurity action plans through joint
inter-agency action.
Secondly, we continue to urge countries to protect
their borders and counter terrorist mobility. As
mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report on the
threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(S/2017/97), discussed here last week (see S/PV.7877),
between October 2016 and January 2017 INTERPOL
observed a 63 per cent increase in the number of
profiles of foreign terrorist fighters accessible in real
time through its criminal information system, and a
750 per cent increase in the sharing of information by
member countries through its channels. This is simply
unprecedented in such a sensitive area; the call issued
by the Security Council created a watershed.
Thirdly, it is essential to remain vigilant and
increase efforts to interdict materials and tools
before they become the next weapon. In this context,
INTERPOL works closely with the International Atomic
Energy Agency on mitigating the illicit trafficking of
radiological and nuclear materials through training in
monitoring and detection, and cross-border operations.
Lastly and above all, INTERPOL encourages
inter-agency and international collaboration as a
force multiplier. The exchange of information, urgent
threats detected and best practices in identifying
vulnerabilities, methodologies and lessons learned
is crucial.
In law enforcement, we are keenly aware of the
tragic paradox that a terrorist incident is often an
opportunity for learning and improving. Sharing these
lessons across borders means reaping the benefits
without paying that cost. It is a win-win scenario.
Together we can build a global infrastructure security
toolkit and incident-response mechanisms that are
based on real-life operational experience. In parallel,
we can test ourselves with plausible scenarios we may
have to face in future.
To that end, INTERPOL organizes events for
experts from all involved stakeholders. Our joint
symposium, hosted by the United States Federal
Bureau of Investigation, is a case in point. Our recent
digital security challenge, together with private-sector
specialists, is another example of how we are working
with member countries and donors to prepare, prevent
and respond to threats, be they physical, digital or both.
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

In an interconnected world, we will not succeed in
protecting national infrastructures in isolation. That is
why initiatives such as this meeting and the steps that
will be taken as a result by the international community
are essential.
The President: I thank Mr. Stock for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Rao.
Mr. Rao: Allow me to begin, Sir, by offering
you my congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. On behalf of
the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), I wish to
thank you for having invited the OPCW to brief on this
important issue.
This year the OPCW is celebrating 20 years of
working together for a world free of chemical weapons.
As we remain on track to eliminate and verify all
chemical weapons declared by possessor States by the
early part of the next decade, we are redoubling our
efforts to prevent their re-emergence.
The OPCW is not a counter-terrorism organization,
but it is a credit to the commitment of our States parties
that they have recognized the organization as a forum
that can make a meaningful contribution to global
counter-terrorism efforts, especially with regard to the
threat of chemical terrorism.
Since 2009, the OPCW has been implementing and
expanding international cooperation programmes aimed
at enhancing global chemical security. At the request of
States parties, the OPCW conducts a comprehensive risk
assessment to help them determine chemical-security
threats. The aim of capacity-building in such countries
is to assist in assessing risks, increasing vigilance,
instituting protective measures and responding to
threats. Capacity-building programmes involve a wide
range of stakeholders, including facility managers,
police, academics, laboratory staff and chemical,
biological, radiological or nuclear experts in order to
strengthen the security framework at the country level.
Experts from neighbouring countries are included, as
appropriate, to increase the footprint of the security
framework regionally.
As we strengthen our role as a platform for
information-sharing and coordination, we have
reinvigorated the work of the Open-Ended Working
Group on Terrorism through the creation of a
sub-working group on non-State actors. The group

S/PV.7882

addresses the legal, prevention and response aspects of
countering chemical terrorism. The OPCW secretariat
has also developed its capacity to assist States parties
in responding to possible acts of chemical terrorism.
A rapid-response and assistance mission has been
established at OPCW headquarters to deploy at short
notice to any State party affected by a chemical
incident involving the alleged use of toxic chemicals
by a non-State actor. The mission will deploy only at
the request of the State party affected. The team will
be equipped to secure the affected area, detect toxic
chemicals and provide advice on decontamination and
immediate assistance to victims. Essentially, the team
will be equipped to cooperate and coordinate with
the United Nations and other relevant international
organizations. In January, the mission was tested at a
tabletop exercise held in parallel with a United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force meeting
at OPCW headquarters.
Secondly, we are working with the chemical
industry. Hundreds of thousands of tons of scheduled
chemicals are traded internationally every year. As the
global chemical industry continues to grow in size and
complexity, ensuring that chemicals are never traded,
whether knowingly or not, for purposes banned by
the Chemical Weapons Convention is a high priority.
Security along the chemical-supply chain will play a
critical role in protecting people and the environment
from the hostile use of toxic chemicals.
We have seen the enormous human and environmental
costs that chemical accidents can have. The potential
damage is only multiplied if such events are purposely
caused by those wishing to do harm. The recent attack
on a chemical plant near Mosul, Iraq, illustrates all
too vividly the risks we face if those who wish to
harm and terrorize focus their sights on the chemical
infrastructure. Equal responsibility must be shared
between industry and government if we are to raise
the chemical-security bar against terrorist attacks.
The chemical industry worldwide fully understands
the importance of preventing any misuse of chemicals
as well as the physical protection of chemical plants,
and our close collaboration with the global chemical
industry continues to gain in strength.
Thirdly, we are working with our international
partners. Combating chemical terrorism requires a
broad-ranging approach to security that includes a
network of stakeholders and international partners. We
engage with major international organizations through

17-038215/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
a body that forms part of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The Task Force aims to
enhance preparedness and response capacities through
a common and coherent framework. As co-Chair of
the working group on preventing and responding to
weapons of mass destruction attacks, the OPCW has
called for enhanced inter-agency coordination in
response to a chemical terrorist attack. Last month,
the OPCW hosted a tabletop exercise with the working
group to clearly outline response capabilities and gaps.
The goal of the exercise is to create a comprehensive
global response system and to ensure that any country
that requests assistance will receive it in a coordinated
and effective way.
Also in January, the OPCW signed a memorandum
of understanding with the World Customs Organization.
Enhanced cooperation with the World Customs
Organization is envisaged in order to strengthen
national and international controls on the trade of
toxic chemicals.
The members of the Council are fully aware
of the work that the OPCW carried out jointly
with United Nations to eliminate the Syrian Arab
Republic’s chemical-weapons programme. More
than 30 countries committed financial and technical
resources to this effort. The private sector played a
pivotal role, as chemical funds in multiple countries
were also involved in the elimination of some of these
agents. Although progress has been made, our work in
Syria is not yet complete. It is deeply regrettable that
chemical weapons have continued to be used in that
country. In Libya, the threat from non-State actors led
to a request from the Libyan authorities for assistance
in removing and destroying the last remnants of its
former chemical-weapons programme. This operation
is currently being successfully carried out with the
cooperation and support of our States parties.
A world free of chemical weapons can be
realized only through a high degree of awareness,
a shared vision and the continuing commitment to
international cooperation. The Chemical Weapons
Convention affirms a common resolve never to allow
the science of chemistry to turn against humankind.
Through it we will continue to work together with
all stakeholders to strengthen the global capacity to
prevent and, when needed, to detect and respond to acts
of chemical terrorism.
6/58

13/02/2017

The President: I thank Mr. Rao for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Trelawny.
Mr. Trelawny: The Secretary-General of the
International Maritime Organization (IMO), Mr. Kitack
Lim, thanks the President of the Security Council and the
Government of Ukraine for the invitation to participate
in this high-level open debate on the protection of
critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks. He very
much regrets that he is unable to be here in person, but
has asked me to deliver his statement.
IMO is a specialized agency of the United Nations
responsible for the safety, security and efficiency of
international maritime transport and the protection of
the marine environment. Within the legal framework
for the protection of critical infrastructure, IMO is
the responsible organization for the Convention on
Facilitation of International Maritime Traffic; the
International Convention for the Safety of Life at
Sea, including the associated International Ship and
Port Facility Security Code; and the 1988 and 2005
Conventions for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Maritime Navigation, and their
associated Protocols for the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms located on
the Continental Shelf. Together, these international
instruments provide a firm legal basis, both for
allowing Parties to bring perpetrators of incidents to
justice and for IMO activities in the field of maritime
security, including active collaboration with the work
of the Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the General Assembly’s
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.
In the context of security, IMO focuses on what
the civil maritime industry — that is, both the shipping
and port sectors — and the offshore sector can do
to protect themselves and others against possible
maritime security threats, including acts of terrorism,
and to assist Governments through the implementation
of appropriate security measures to protect global
maritime trade. The main focus is on preventive security
through a continuous risk-management process, which
includes procedures for deterrence and threat transfer,
rather than countering terrorism per se.
The special measures to enhance maritime security,
detailed in chapter XI-2 of the International Convention
for the Safety of Life at Sea and the International Ship
and Port Facility Security Code, provide a practical,
risk-based framework not only for maritime security,
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

but also for wider application. Although the Convention
addresses the safety of life at sea and thereby provides
jurisdictional challenges ashore, where most of the
preventative security measures are applied, IMO
addressed this by leaving it to Member States to define
the geographical limits of their port facilities, including
their application to offshore installations. IMO also
cooperated with the International Labour Organization
(ILO) to develop a Code of Practice on Security in Ports,
which effectively extended the International Ship and
Port Facility Security Code into the wider port area;
and with the World Customs Organization on container
security, which led to the development and adoption
in June 2005 of the SAFE Framework of Standards to
Secure and Facilitate Global Trade.
In terms of the practical implementation of
chapter X1-2 of the International Convention and the
International Ship and Port Facility SecurityCode, it
would be fair to say that the main challenges are in the
port facilities. Unlike on ships, where an existing safety
culture was relatively easy to evolve into a security
culture, the security structure in ports is generally far
more complex, involving many players from different
governmental, law enforcement and private entities.
Many countries view ports as critical infrastructure
and their security as a facet of national security.
However, without clear national and local legislation,
policies and direction coordinating the activities of all
key stakeholders, security responses in ports are, at
best, fragmented.
Critical to the success of port and port facility
security regimes, be they for protecting port
infrastructure against terrorist attack, countering theft
and other criminal activity, or preventing access to ships
by terrorists, drug smugglers or stowaways, is a wellcoordinated, risk-based preventive strategy. Although
IMO has no mandate to assess the compliance of port
facilities with chapter X1-2 of the Convention and the
International Ship and Port Facility Security Code per
se, it is readily apparent that the absence of port and
port facility security committees is an indicator of a
lack of inter-agency cooperation and thus of poor port
facility security. The promotion of such coordination
mechanisms, consistent with the ILO/IMO Code of
Practice and other guidance issued by IMO, forms the
cornerstone of the organization’s work on promoting
better compliance with chapter X1-2 and the Code.
of

In fact, since 2001 IMO has developed a range
guidance, self-assessment tools and training

S/PV.7882

materials for the protection of ports, ships and offshore
installations. These include model courses for port
facility security officers; guidelines on training
and certification for port facility security officers;
guidance on voluntary self-assessment by Convention
Contracting Governments and by port facilities; and
consolidated guidance in the form of the Guide to
Maritime Security and the Code, published in 2012.
IMO has also developed a number of training packages
on ship and port security, including the conduct of
drills and exercises and the development of maritime
security legislation, which are delivered upon request
from member Governments. We also have a vibrant
programme of technical cooperation activities to assist
Member States to develop capacity and capability to
deter, prevent, detect and respond to security threats,
which complements our 2017 World Maritime Day
theme, “IMO: Connecting ships, ports and people”.
The world has changed since the introduction of the
special measures to enhance maritime security. Ongoing
threats to the port, shipping and offshore sectors and
related infrastructure continue to evolve. The responses
to these challenges have also changed. The Millennium
Development Goals for developing countries have
been replaced by the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) for global application. In this context, IMO
actively assists States to address SDG 9 with respect
to improving the resilience of infrastructure and other
key SDGs. The focus on reactive efforts to counter
terrorism have been replaced by a focus on proactive
measures to prevent terrorism in the first place.
There is also a need to focus on the opportunities
offered by the shipping sector. That involves looking at
ports and shipping as wealth-creators within the context
of economic development. In this regard, efficient
and effective port safety and security is becoming
increasingly important and marketable.
One of the biggest challenges to effective
implementation of maritime security and maritime
law enforcement measures is that they are seen as
departmental issues — issues for the navy, coast guard,
police, port authority, maritime authority, or customs
and border control — with those agencies competing
for scarce resources, rather than being part of a
national, multi-agency response to developing the port
and maritime sector.
Through our programme of capacity-building
initiatives to enhance maritime security, IMO’s aim is

17-038217/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

to work with developed and developing countries, the
shipping industry and public and private ports with a
view to promoting best practices and building bridges
between the diverse actors. At the national level,
these include enhancing the efficiency of the whole
maritime sector by improving cooperation between
ports and ships and developing a closer partnership
between the two sectors; raising global standards and
setting norms for the safety, security and efficiency
of ports and port and coastal State authorities; and
improving standardization of port procedures through
identifying and developing best practice guidance and
training materials.
For the longer- term development of the whole
maritime sector, IMO programmes — such as our
support to the Yaoundé process in West and Central
Africa, pursuant to resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039
(2012), and the Jeddah Amendment to the Djibouti
Code of Conduct 2017, adopted in January — focus on
challenging sea-blindness and encouraging investment
in the whole of the maritime sector. This includes
encouraging national authorities to break down silos
and switch from a departmental focus to a national
focus and to engage with the private sector. We need
not only to encourage the port sector input to national
maritime business plans and national and regional
maritime and maritime security strategies, but to
promote the concept of the port as a service-provider to
ships, addressing the us-and-them attitude.
In order to do that, it is vital that national
Governments assure their national oversight capability
for safety and security and promote the application of
the Code and the ILO/IMO Code of Practice in Ports
and Offshore Installations. That includes promoting
the establishment of port security and facilitation
advisory committees as a vehicle for inter-agency
cooperation for wider security that addresses all
security-related threats, including theft, drugs, illegal
wildlife, stowaways, migrant smuggling and terrorism,
with Government oversight ensuring effectiveness,
an approach that lends itself to the protection of other
sectors’ critical infrastructure.
Effective security systems require effective
procedures, appropriate equipment and, above all,
adequately trained and motivated people. At the
lowest level, that includes implementing frameworks
and developing tools for raising security awareness
among all employees. However, in order to ensure the
establishment better and more sustainable security
8/58

13/02/2017

systems, Governments and the port sector should
develop port security as a career, not just a job, with a
focus on developing graduated training packages and
programmes aimed at enabling personnel to progress
from patrolling and guarding to security supervisory
and management roles. There is also significant benefit
to be had from developing port-facility security-officer
networks designed to help officers exchange best
practices and learn from one another.
Although the two modes of transport differ,
there are many key similarities between aviation
and maritime security, not the least of which
are the importance of member States adopting a
multi-agency, whole-of-Government approach to the
organization of security, including the protection of
vital infrastructure; the importance of addressing the
whole security system, that is, through threat, risk and
vulnerability assessments; the selection, training and
certification of personnel; and equipment, procedures
and holistic oversight. To those can be added the need
for contingency and resilience planning, and for the
protection of transport systems and infrastructure to
be seen as an enabler of economic development, thus
helping to meet sustainable development goals and
prevent violent extremism.
As outlined, IMO’s maritime security initiatives,
conducted in cooperation with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL and others,
promote such approaches and, in particular, encourage
the establishment of national maritime security and
facilitation committees, national security plans and
contingency plans endorsed at the highest level, as
well as regional communication between national
focal points and more comprehensive training and
certification programmes for security personnel
working at key national points.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Trelawny

for

I now give the floor to Mr. Heinonen.
Mr. Heinonen: I appreciate the opportunity to share
some of my personal reflections on nuclear terrorism
with the Security Council today. I would specifically
like to address the issue as it relates to the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Council. To that
end, I have given the full version of my statement to the
Secretariat, as it includes complementary information
supporting some of the points I will make today.
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

We all understand that a nuclear accident anywhere
is a nuclear accident everywhere, as are the ramifications
of nuclear terrorism. We are fortunate that so far we
have been spared from acts of nuclear terrorism, but we
should bear in mind that terrorists have already openly
expressed a desire to acquire nuclear weapons. Thefts
and other attempts to obtain nuclear and radioactive
materials have shown that there are circumstances in
which that could happen. Nuclear security can also be
compromised in other ways. For instance, the energy
industry has been the victim of cyber attacks, including
by sabotage at nuclear installations, for which my
written statement includes some documentary evidence.
There are two ways in which the risk of nuclear
terrorism is heightened today. The first is the increased
use and spread of nuclear technology for the production
of electricity, radiation technologies in medicine and
industry, and the shipment of radioactive and nuclear
materials across borders and seas. That brings with it
an increase in the number of physical installations and
shipments that could be potential targets for terrorist
attacks or theft. The second way is a new phenomenon.
Terrorist
organizations
are
becoming
more
sophisticated. A recent report from Conflict Armament
Research describing the production by Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) of ammunition reflects a
professional approach that included quality controls for
the manufacture of its devices. In other words, ISIS is
able to attract skilled engineers and other specialists to
its production activities, and to internalize sophisticated
ways of functioning and means of production. We
should therefore not ignore the possibility that such
organizations are able to recruit or are at least seeking
to co-opt individuals with nuclear skills that could bring
insider threats to nuclear installations or increase the
probability of the release of dirty bombs, for example.
At the same time, when we are considering the
possibility of acts of nuclear terrorism, we should not
confine ourselves to traditional ways of thinking about
how such acts can occur or be delivered. For instance,
just as nuclear material could be used to build dirty
bombs, the possession of such toxic materials could also
very well be used as for blackmail purposes, or in novel
scenarios involving the dissemination of the materials
in urban environments. In that regard, we might recall
the issue of the possible contamination of water supplies
in Damascus in recent weeks. Radioactive materials
could be used for similar purposes.

S/PV.7882

Threats of nuclear terrorism can come from many
sources, ranging from sophisticated, well-financed
terrorist organizations to nuclear smugglers, hackers
capable of launching devastating cyber attacks and
individuals with malicious intentions and access to
inside information on nuclear installations. We must be
prepared to deal with wide-ranging threats from various
angles and scenarios. When it comes to operating
nuclear installations, all those challenges have an effect
on their management by facility operators, regulators
and those in charge of emergency planning and
response. While every State is responsible for nuclear
safety and security on its own territory, we have to
be prepared for accidents, emergencies and incidents
that have cross-border impact, including handling
emergencies arising from the transportation of nuclear
and radioactive materials through or near a State’s
territories. Preparedness and response capabilities
should also cover incidents and emergencies arising
from possible terrorist acts using materials that do not
originate in the target State.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to
another sensitive aspect. We should recognize that any
assessment of nuclear security relating to the use of
nuclear or radioactive materials in military applications
in States possessing nuclear weapons remains outside
the control of the international community in the
situation that exists today.
There are a number of ways that States can
approach the issue of better addressing ways to combat
nuclear terrorism. They include closer collaboration
between nuclear safety and security regimes, as well as
changing the roles of the IAEA and the United Nations.
While the following list is by no means exhaustive, it
should represent good directions to pursue. Safeguards,
security and safety are commonly seen as separate
areas of nuclear governance. While there are technical
and legal reasons justifying that, the three can also
coexist and be mutually reinforcing in many ways.
They have synergistic effects on one another, and
avenues for collaboration should be identified in order
to contribute to the efficiency and effectiveness of the
overall nuclear order.
The relevant IAEA treaties, conventions,
non-legally binding codes of conduct and United Nations
resolutions, as well as the sharing of best practices and
resources, are all considered part of today’s global
nuclear norms.However, what is adopted on paper can
be at variance with what is implemented in practice.

17-038219/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

An option to consider is the establishment of a review
process for such legal instruments or mechanisms in
order to achieve a more transparent assessment of
States’ implementation of their obligations. Before
such measures can be achieved, there are other steps
to take, such as more active engagement by the IAEA.
For example, the IAEA Director General could inform
the State in question in writing about the potential
risks associated with inadequate implementation of its
legal commitments in relation to the legal instruments
adopted, which could open a channel for corrective
action that could be undertaken.
The proposed changes could be initiated in a
number of ways. The IAEA Board of Governors could
mandate the secretariat to initiate action. States parties
to the nuclear safety and security conventions could
also prompt such action during the review meetings
on such instruments. The forthcoming International
Conference on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material
and Nuclear Facilities, scheduled for November, is
yet another venue in which we can explore hardening
nuclear infrastructure against acts of terrorism.
In addressing risks relating to nuclear security
threats, including acts of terrorism, the Nuclear
Security Summits have made important contributions.
That work continues now, to a great extent, within
the IAEA and in cooperation with other international
organizations and industries, as guided by the IAEA
Ministerial Conference held in Vienna in December
2016, which reaffirmed the importance of protecting
nuclear and radioactive material. The Conference
adopted a declaration that puts that responsibility in
the hands of the international community, international
organizations and Member States. In order to fulfil
that requirement, the IAEA and other international
organizations need adequate funding. To that end, the
support of the Security Council is indispensable. The
efforts of the Security Council to analyse and assess
terrorist threats, highlight existing vulnerabilities,
identify capacity gaps with the aim of understanding the
challenges posed by terrorism to critical infrastructure,
and recommend how best to support Member States in
those efforts are essential in combating terrorism.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Heinonen

for

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.
10/58

13/02/2017

I would like to thank today’s briefers for their inputs
into our discussion. Once again, they reconfirmed the
complexity and importance of the problem in question.
The protection of critical infrastructure is vital
to national security, public safety and the economic
development of all States. Terrorist attacks on such
facilities and services can significantly disrupt the
functioning of societies and bring about massive
human suffering.
I would also like to express my appreciation to all
Security Council members for their support during the
process of preparing the text of resolution 2341 (2017),
which was adopted today. The resolution sends a strong
message from the Security Council to the international
community to give serious consideration to the issue.
It also outlines a specific framework of objectives
and actions aimed at raising awareness of possible
terrorist threats to critical infrastructure. It does so by
identifying the threats and preventing them, as well as
by seeking to alleviate their possible consequences.
As part of their essential counter-terrorism
efforts, it is crucial for States to develop and put in
place a strategy that assigns the relevant tasks and
responsibilities regarding the protection of critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks. The primary
goals should be to counter such attacks and prevent
their repetition by identifying the perpetrators and their
supporters, as well as to provide support to victims
of terrorism.
In view of the existing challenges to international
peace and security, especially the evolution of terrorist
threats, Ukraine has been working to develop a
national legal framework for the protection of critical
infrastructure against such threats. Taking into
account a series of terrorist attacks in recent years
against facilities in Ukraine, that work has become
particularly important.
Since 2015, several Ukrainian governmental
agencies, as well as critical national infrastructure, such
as regional power grids and financial institutions, have
become the targets of attacks by malicious software.
Hacker groups have also attacked the Kyiv airport and
the Ministry of Defence’s electronic resources. On
6 December 2016, on the eve of the end of the financial
year, the websites of the State Treasury, the Ministry of
Finance and the State Pension Fund were temporarily
paralysed . Of course, we know that the objective of
such attacks is to damage Ukraine’s financial system,
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

weaken our defence capabilities and eventually
destabilize Ukrainian society. It is quite obvious that
Ukraine has been deliberately selected as a target by
organized external cyberterrorists. Their attacks can be
as devastating as more conventional warfare. We have
been hurt, but we have grown more resilient as a result
of the attacks.
In today’s dynamic and globalized world, we are
of the view that the following elements should be
incorporated into national policies in order to maintain
an adequate level of safety and resilience for critical
infrastructure. The first element is cooperation
among all stakeholders, both public and private,
involved in the process of operating and protecting
critical infrastructure. The second element is the open
exchange of information about threats and risks to
critical infrastructure among public authorities, the
private sector, communities and individual citizens.
The third element is to increase the level of selfprotection, mutual assistance and self-empowerment
of individuals and organizations that can be adversely
impacted by the termination or impairment of critical
infrastructure services.
Apart from the factors I just listed, a coherent
system aimed at averting the terrorist threat to critical
infrastructure should prioritize active international
cooperation, which would include, inter alia, an
exchange of best practices and the holding of joint
training sessions and investigations. Such international
cooperation has gained paramount importance given
the development of global cross-border infrastructure
projects. Terrorist attacks against those projects may
affect the interests of several States and cause significant
damage, both economic and environmental. In that
context, our goal must be to intensify cooperation at
the national, regional and international levels, and to
establish early-warning and rapid-response mechanisms
in order to react better to possible terrorist attacks.
However, while seeking to safeguard the most
vulnerable parts of our critical infrastructure from
terrorist attacks, we should never forget that it is the
lives of our citizens that are at stake, which we, as
States, are obliged to protect. Therefore, it is our duty
to do everything possible to prevent terrorist attacks on
critical infrastructure. The well-being of our peoples
depends on it. That is the main objective of resolution
2341 (2017), adopted today. Forearmed is forewarned. I
count on members’ further cooperation on this matter.

S/PV.7882

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to other members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Amendola (Italy): It is a pleasure for me to
be here today to engage in this discussion on such a
crucial topic. Let me thank the Ukrainian Minister,
Mr. Klimkin, for convening today’s debate and bringing
today’s resolution 2341 (2017) to the Security Council
for adoption.
The threat posed by terrorism and the need to
protect critical infrastructure perfectly serve to
describe the complexity of the security challenges that
affect us all today. The Security Council called for a
comprehensive and pre-emptive approach to address
their potential impact on global security. Security
involves the resilience of States and the cohesion of
public opinion. Indeed, resolution 2341 (2017) allows
the international community to fill a critical void. Italy
therefore welcomes and supports this initiative.
As previous speakers have underlined based on
their experience, terrorists target critical infrastructure
in many ways, and at times they succeed in disrupting
our way of life. It is a matter of the resilience of the
State, of public involvement and the fear that terrorists
cause in our societies. Last year, for excample,
terrorist attacks at airports in Brussels and Istanbul
showed how ruthless and effective terrorist groups
can be. The targeting and exploitation of facilities by
Da’esh in Iraq is another clear, although qualitatively
different, example of very damaging attacks on
critical infrastructure. In the framework of Iraq Italy
remains committed — and we are proud this — to the
protection of the Mosul Dam, which has been targeted
by Da’esh since 2014, threatening the lives of hundreds
of thousands of people living nearby.
Those are just a few examples, but their impact
shows how vital it is for the international community
to swiftly act upon this threat. It is a transnational
threat that requires a transnational response.
Clearly, the United Nations has a prominent role in
recognizing — just as we are doing today — the need
for international cooperation in coordinating a coherent
response, including through regional organizations.
First of all, we must identify which targets are critical.
Secondly, we must announce cross-border synergies
to prevent terrorist attacks and mitigate their impacts.
Thirdly, we must respond to the threats with cooperation
along borders and among States. Since every chain

17-0382111/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

is as strong only as its weakest link, international
dialogue and partnership involving public opinion and
capacity-building are key elements in the protection of
critical infrastructure.
As many speakers have already mentioned, at this
stage of global affairs the importance of connections
means that the infrastructure connecting the people
very often has transborder effects on society. Sometimes
those connections are stronger than borders, and in
respecting and defending borders we must be aware
that the fact that the nationalities should cooperate
to defend the connections. We are therefore ready to
support the role of the United Nations, as the resolution
suggests, in identifying and spreading best practices
for protecting that infrastructure.
A key element of partnership is information
exchange. We know this in Europe, as we are doing
with the European Union, and the membership should
be made aware of the nature of the threats to a single
country when they affect our collective security.
Let me say a few words about the role and relevance
of cyberspace, and more generally about information
and communication technology. We know that today
they have decisive relavance to infrastructure and
that they are both a means and a target of terrorism.
We believe that we must have a broad understanding
about what constitutes an attack on information and
communication technology. We are already under
attack when we are unable to detect and stop the online
planning of attacks and the propaganda of terrorist
groups on the Internet. We also recognize that an attack
is taking place when a plane or a truck is hijacked, so
we must acknowledge that a different kind of attack
is taking place when network spaces are hijacked by
terrorist organizations. We must be able to balance
the free access of our public opinion and civil society,
as an extraordinary source for communication and
democratic participation with our collective security. It
is not easy, but plans for our freedom and security are
enhanced with today’s resolution.
That brings me to a new alliance that we must
emphasize and boost. In this framework, defending
critical infrastructure also requires an alliance between
the public and private sectors, because the connections
driving trade, business and communication also drive
our civil society dialogue and, at the same time, our
need to protect and defend our security. That is why
today’s debate and resolution are important. They
12/58

13/02/2017

provide an indispensable international legal framework
for such a partnership to be announced and to flourish
in our free, open and creative society.
Mr. Abdymomunov (Kazakhstan): Let me express
my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for highlighting the
need to protect critical infrastructure in the light of the
recent change of the tactics, forms and strategies of
terrorist organizations witnessed today. The challenge
becomes more acute considering the immensely vast
scope and categories of critical infrastructure that
are vulnerable, from nuclear and energy facilities,
commerce, finance and banking to all forms of
transportation, to mention just a few. The problem is
aggravated because digital and modern information and
communication technologies are central to all operations
of more than 20 major systems of critical infrastructure
having national, regional and global implications.
My delegation would like to present how Kazakhstan
is taking precautions on two very important fronts:
first, information and communication technologies of
public resources, and, secondly, nuclear facilities.
Kazakhstan realizes that modern critical
infrastructure is drawing the attention of, and attacks
from, international terrorist organizations. Although
infrastructure protection is a direct responsibility
of our State authorities, we see the need for joint
public- and private-sector efforts, together with
close cooperation with international and regional
organizations, including the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the International Atomic Energy
Agency, INTERPOL, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and NATO, as well as the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Collective
Security Treaty Organization.
We are also taking care regarding potential energy,
business, cross-border and transnational disasters,
because of the interlinkages of these areas through
information and communication technologies. In such
circumstances, we are developing our national system
to counter terrorism on the Internet, entitled “CyberShield of Kazakhstan”.
Currently, the laws of individual Member States
have no common approaches for the understanding of
critical infrastructure, and therefore it is necessary to
harmonize national legislation so as to adhere to United
Nations global norms of critical infrastructure security.
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

I
turn
now
to
another
key,
critical
infrastructure — nuclear infrastructure. Nuclear
safety is a key collective responsibility today at the
national, regional and global level. Kazakhstan is
therefore taking all the necessary measures to ensure
the security of such facilities located in its territory
and in the region. As a party to almost all international
conventions in this field, we call on others to comply
with them in good faith.
We are also actively striving to promote an
international legal framework to ensure the safe
handling of nuclear materials. We are vigilant
in protecting critical infrastructure, including
infrastructure located on the former Semipalatinsk
test site — now the National Nuclear Centre of the
Republic of Kazakhstan — and on the BN-350 nuclear
facility, with the active assistance of our partners. We
are ready to prepare highly qualified specialists, and
for that purpose we are establishing a training centre
on nuclear safety in Almaty with the support of the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the United
States Government.
Stringent measures are taken to ensure safety in the
construction of the IAEA Low Enriched Uranium Bank
on our territory, and in the transportation of nuclear
materials. In that connection, I would like to emphasize
that Kazakhstan has complied with the requirements of
the four nuclear security summits, especially as they
relate to the safe use of nuclear energy. We are also
adequately securing radioactive sources that terrorists
could use to manufacture dirty bombs.
Every effort was made to ensure security at the
28th World University Winter Games, recently held
in Almaty, by focusing on the early identification
and elimination of threats, and the same is true of the
forthcoming Astana EXPO-2017.
I am pleased to report that we are developing close
cooperation with the European Programme for Critical
Infrastructure Protection, along with the fight against
transnational crimes. The country is also active in the
Critical Infrastructure Warning Information Network
of the European Commission, sharing information on
research regarding infrastructure protection.
Kazakhstan stands ready to develop common
security schemes acceptable to all States, regardless of
their national characteristics and traditions, in order to
keep our world and planet safe from the ever-growing
threats we face.

S/PV.7882

Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Let me begin by thanking
the Ukrainian presidency of the Security Council for
convening today’s open debate and for conducting the
consultations on resolution 2341 (2017), which we have
just adopted. The consensus behind it underlines the
open and inclusive process that led to its agreement, as
well as the importance that we all attach to that vital
issue. Out of respect for all Member States that want to
participate in this debate, I will make an abbreviated
statement now and make the full version available
through other means.
Objects of critical infrastructure have long been
attractive targets for terrorist attacks. Through turning
off the lights, contaminating or shutting off water
supplies, or undermining individuals’ willingness
to travel, such attacks achieve the core objective
of terrorism to cause as much fear and disruption
as possible. It is hard to imagine the devastating
consequences that a terrorist attack on a nuclear power
plant could have on human lives and the environment,
both in terms of immediate impact and the long-term
effects. Mr. Heinonen has reminded us that that is not a
wholly unrealistic scenario.
We live in an increasingly interconnected world.
That is particularly true when it comes to our critical
infrastructure. Interconnectivity — whether physical
or in terms of communications technology — means
that the ripple effects of a large attack in one country
have the potential to be felt not only in neighbouring
countries, but globally. For that reason, today’s
discussion is all the more timely and relevant. Efforts
to protect critical infrastructure from terrorist
attacks require cooperation — across borders, across
sectors and across public and private stakeholders.
Regional and global approaches help build resilience
and preparedness. All public agencies in Sweden are
required to undertake a security analysis to identify
vital critical infrastructure within their remit, and to
identify and assess potential risks.
The purpose of our policy is twofold. The first goal
is to improve awareness, build resilience and prevent
attacks, and to respond and recover from incidents
and crises where they do occur. The second aim is to
increase cooperation for prevention among all relevant
stakeholders, including public and private actors, at the
regional and international levels.
Sweden’s Counter-Terrorism Cooperation Council
brings together relevant actors to jointly increase

17-0382113/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

national capacity. Our approach involves law
enforcement, intelligence and security authorities, the
Civil Contingencies Agency, sector-specific agencies,
regional and local authorities, and the private-sector
actors that own and operate critical infrastructure. In
2016 we launched a national system for the mandatory
reporting of information technology incidents for
all Government agencies. Next year, as part of the
European Union (EU) directive on security in network
information systems, such reporting will become
mandatory for both public and private actors.
Moreover, at the level of the European Union, the
EU and its member States are committed to acting in
solidarity within any member State that is the object of
a terrorist attack, the so-called solidarity clause. The
EU has put in place a range of initiatives to address
the protection of critical infrastructure. The approach
is not only focused on threats from terrorist attacks,
but also on those resulting from criminal activities,
natural disasters and accidents. We supports several EU
programmes aimed at protecting critical infrastructure
within the broader region, which includes the Balkans
and Turkey.
There are a number of regional organizations
created to improve the capacities of member States in
matters related to civil protection and preparedness,
such as the Council of the Baltic Sea States, the Arctic
Council and the Barents Euro-Arctic Council, which is
a forum aimed at supporting and promoting regional
cooperation in the northernmost parts of Sweden,
Norway, Finland and the north-western parts of Russia.
Iceland and Denmark are also members.
There must be accountability for all acts of
terrorism. Perpetrators, organizers, and sponsors of
terrorist attacks must be held responsible. As reflected
in resolution 2341 (2017), adopted today, measures to
counter terrorism must be taken in accordance with
international law, including human rights law and
international humanitarian law.
We welcome the fact that the resolution encourages
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
to continue to examine these important issues. The
country visits by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate have resulted in valuable
knowledge and expertise, and the potential for States
to draw on best practices. More, not less, international
cooperation is key to countering these threats. We
14/58

13/02/2017

appreciate Ukraine’s leadership on these issues in the
Security Council.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to thank Ukraine for having taken
the initiative of convening this important debate. I
should also like to thank the speakers thus far for their
insightful statements.
France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
The examples of terrorist attacks that have targeted
critical infrastructure, particularly transportation, are
regrettably numerous, as we were reminded with the
tragic attacks on the Brussels airport and Metro in
March 2016 and on the Istanbul airports in December
2015 and June 2016.
This debate gives the Council another opportunity
to send a strong and united message on the important
of international cooperation in the fight against
terrorism, as we have already done in other meetings
on the financing of terrorism, on the fight against
propaganda and on international legal cooperation.
The fight against terrorist threats must be waged on all
fronts, with respect for international law and for States’
national authorities. It is especially necessary for each
State to have robust preventive and protective measures
in place in order to deter terrorists from carrying out
attacks against potentially vulnerable targets or, failing
that, in order to be able to react rapidly and effectively
when they do occur.
France considers protecting the people and ensuring
the continuity of the essential national functions to
be a strategic priority. In 2006, we set up a security
mechanism for vital activities in order to protect them
from malicious acts, such as terrorism. Today there are
more than 200 public and private entities classified as
organs of vital importance that are subject to special
rules and vigilance. The list of ths infrastructure is
kept confidential and includes administrations, media,
transportation entities and industrial actors in different
sectors. They ensure activities that are crucial to the
functioning and the survival of the nation.
In that context, France welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2341 (2017), the first to be so
closely concerned with this key topic. I draw the
Council’s attention to two messages contained therein.
The first involves the prevention of and preparation
for potential threats. Early identification of the major
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

challenges and vulnerabilities in terms of protecting
critical infrastructure, and the elaboration of a targeted
strategy to be implemented in the event of an attack
are essential. Such approaches help not only to reduce
risks, but also to improve responsiveness.
The second message concerns the observation that
strengthening critical infrastructure protection cannot
be done in isolation. Cooperation, whether intra- or
inter-agency or among States, is essential in order to
ensure an adequate level of protection. That includes
exchanging information, knowledge and experience.
Owing to the very nature of the activities carried out by
critical infrastructure, close cooperation between the
public and private sectors is absolutely essential.
There are many challenges. But the scale and
particularly high level of the terrorist threat today
must prompt us to strengthen our efforts to protect
populations and to ensure the continuity of crucial
State services.
Allow me to conclude by thanking once again the
Ukrainian presidency of the Security Council for this
very useful debate on a question that is both specialized
and technical, but also touches on the daily lives of
all our fellow citizens. Rest assured that France will
continue to play its full part in such efforts.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to convey the sincere gratitude of
the Senegalese delegation to the Ukrainian presidency
for having taken the initiative to organize this important
debate on a topic of proven relevance. The briefings of
this morning made by Ms. Viotti, Mr. Stock, Mr. Rao
and Mr. Trelawny have given us a clear idea of the
issues under consideration, and I would like, on behalf
of the delegation of Senegal, to warmly thank and
congratulate them.
I recall that in September 2016 we held an open
debate concerning aviation security in the face of
terrorist attacks (see S/PV.7775). We also held two
Arria Formula meetings in November, one of which
was organized by Ukraine on the topic of critical
infrastructure. The other, on the issue of cybersecurity,
was co-organized by Senegal and Spain. Our discussion
this morning affords us an opportunity to continue our
strategic analysis of the ways and means to properly
identify and better prevent the risks linked to such
threats and, at the same time, to measure the reliability,
resilience and vulnerability of critical infrastructure

S/PV.7882

in the face of terrorist attacks that could lead to
incalculable catastrophe.
Because extremist groups have increasingly
targeted civilian infrastructure in their efforts to
maximize civilian casualties, such infrastructure
should be given priority in terms of surveillance and
protection in order to preserve the continued operation
of human communities and enterprises, while also
guaranteeing national security and public safety in
countries that are targeted or attacked. On that point
my delegation welcomes the unanimous adoption this
morning of resolution 2341 (2017), which constitutes,
without a doubt, an important step forward in the
international community’s efforts in the face of such
emerging threats to international peace and security.
Given the interconnected nature of civilian
infrastructure, which only serves to heighten
its
vulnerability,
constant
vigilance
and
awareness — bearing in mind the specificities of the
geopolitical environment and context of each country
and region — is crucial. The delegation of Senegal
thinks that it is very important to establish and
strengthen public-private partnerships at the national,
regional and international levels with all stakeholders,
in terms of sharing information, experience and even
intelligence, as well as operational coordination, the
securing of supply lines and border control. I would
like to recall that Senegal has established a framework
for the exchange of sensitive information with other
States with a view to coping more effectively with the
emergence of new threats and attempts at illicit actions
using aircraft or targeting airports or port infrastructure.
In the area of aviation, in accordance with the
provisions the relevant texts adopted by the International
Civil Aviation Organization, which stipulate that each
State is responsible for the effective implementation of
all safety measures aimed at protecting civil aviation
against illegal attacks, Senegal has for several years
implemented a broad programme aimed at enhancing
civil-aviation security in the country and in its airspace.
That policy has led the national assembly to adopt a new
civil aviation code through an act of 4 May 2015 and to
establish aircraft regulations aimed at ensuring the full
implementation of security procedures and measures.
In the maritime and ports sphere, I wish to point out
that Senegal is a signatory to most of the international
instruments mentioned by the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General, including the Yaounde process, the

17-0382115/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Djibouti Code of Conduct and the African Charter on
Maritime Security, Safety and Development, adopted
in October 2016 in Lomé.
At the subregional level, a cooperation agreement
was signed on 24 March 2016 by the relevant Ministers
of Senegal, Mali, Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso in
order to pool the efforts of those countries; strengthen
cooperative relations among their security services and
establish unity of action through the harmonization
of national counter-terrorism legislation and border
surveillance; and ensure the authenticity of travel
documents in accordance with regional agreements
concerning the movement of persons.
Over the past few years, West Africa has seen an
increase in terrorist attacks and criminal cyberattacks.
In that regard, I would mention the report of the United
Nations assessment mission on the impact of the Libyan
crisis on the Sahel region, carried out in December
2011 (see S/2012/42), in which the circulation of a
large number of weapons and ammunition in the
region was noted, in particular rocket launchers.
Such smuggled weapons constitute a real threat to the
security and stability of the Sahelo-Saharan region. It
is therefore essential to avoid having Africa become the
weak link in preventive efforts to protect and secure
critical infrastructure. On that point, the delegation of
Senegal welcomes and strongly supports the effective
implementation of paragraph 9 of the resolution that we
have just adopted.
Moreover, the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
which is already doing outstanding work through its
Executive Directorate in cooperation with the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, should continue
to provide technical assistance to affected States in
order to help them strengthen their capacity to protect
critical infrastructure and vulnerable public spaces.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to point
out that, for the implementation of the resolution we
have just adopted to be effective, it must be consistent
with previously adopted Council resolutions in the
framework of the fight against terrorism, in particular
resolutions 2178 (2014), 2253 (2015) and 2322 (2016).
Hence, it should be part of a more comprehensive United
Nations global anti-terrorism strategy. My delegation
is also waiting with great interest for the presentation
in the coming 12 months by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee of a progress report on the implementation
of the important resolution just adopted.
16/58

13/02/2017

Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would first like to express my
sincere appreciation to you for taking up this timely and
important topic. My appreciation also goes to Ms. Viotti
and all other speakers for their insightful briefings.
Over the past few months, we have adopted two
Security Council resolutions on counter-terrorism:
2309 (2016) on aviation security and 2322 (2016)
on international judicial cooperation. We welcome
the adoption today of resolution 2341 (2017), on the
protection of critical infrastructure. We thank Ukraine
for taking the lead. Through these resolutions, the
Security Council has shown unity in addressing
terrorism through a multifaceted approach. Our task
now is to translate these resolutions into action.
Once a terrorist attack occurs, it is already too
late, especially given the devastating impact that
the destruction of critical infrastructure could have
on societies and individuals. We must collectively
strengthen our security with a focus on prevention.
Japan is giving particular priority to the protection of
critical infrastructure. We owe it to our citizens and
visitors alike. This is especially so for Japan, as the host
of the Tokyo Olympic and Paralympic Games in 2020
and the Rugby World Cup in 2019.
Learning from international best practices, Japan
has enhanced its infrastructure security, including
for public transportation, large-event facilities,
international seaports, nuclear plants and embassies.
The protection of nuclear plants from terrorist attacks
is particularly important owing to the possibility of a
particularly devastating effect. For nuclear plants in
Japan, anti-firearm squads are deployed by the police
around the clock and special assault teams can be
dispatched in emergencies. Information is key. Japan
is exchanging information with foreign counterparts
and police are conducting joint exercises with selfdefence forces while also working closely with nuclear
plant operators through on-site visits and guidance on
self-vigilance.
Responding to recent technological developments
is critical. As there has been an increase in incidents
involving the malicious use of information and
communications technologies, Japan has been
enhancing its cybersecurity in cooperation with the
private sector and foreign counterparts. Last April, we
enacted a law prohibiting unmanned aerial vehicles, or
drones, from flying over critical facilities, embassies
and nuclear plants to prevent possible attacks.
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7882

Our experiences attest to the importance of
multiple streams of efforts, including international and
public-private cooperation, accelerating information
exchange, sharing good practices, developing advanced
technologies and supporting capacity-building for
those in need. We believe the resolution just adopted
provides a useful framework for all other members
to undertake their own proactive efforts. As part of
this effort, two weeks ago the Government of Japan
decided on a new assistance package for international
cooperation in the fields of counter-terrorism and
preventing violent extremism. This will be used to
facilitate the implementation of relevant Security
Council resolutions through concrete projects, such as
a project on cyberattacks on information technology
systems of financial infrastructure. We also support
the initiative of Secretary-General Guterres to ensure
coordination and coherence in United Nations counterterrorism efforts, under the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy review process.

We all know that terrorists and other criminals
have developed the capacity to launch coordinated and
sophisticated attacks on other critical infrastructures.
Public institutions, private businesses, factories
and industries, roads and bridges, shopping malls
and sport centres, among others, have increasingly
become targets of attacks aimed at disrupting normal
economic activities. Cyberterrorism carried out with
the aim of causing damage to computer systems and
telecommunication infrastructure has also become a
real danger.

To conclude, I would like to emphasize Japan’s
consistent and constant preparedness to promptly
address terrorism in all its aspects. Japan will continue
to be an active partner in this important endeavour with
the entire international community.

The protection of critical infrastructure can be
said to have been partly addressed by international
treaties and conventions related to civil aviation,
maritime security and nuclear weapons. However,
there has not been a resolution dedicated to this issue,
and the resolution we adopted today will, we hope,
fully contribute to promoting greater international
cooperation to effectively counter terrorist attacks
against critical infrastructure.

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We would like to express
appreciation to the Ukrainian presidency for
organizing and to you, Mr. President, for presiding
over this important debate on the protection of critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks. We welcome the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2341 (2017) and our
thanks also go to all the briefers for their presentations.
With the growing threats of terrorism and violent
extremism, the vulnerability of critical infrastructure
to attacks by terrorists has been a source of great
concern. The devastating economic and security impact
of such attacks to some of the infrastructure that we
normally take for granted in our daily lives, such as
water, electricity, telecommunication and the Internet,
transportation, banking and finance is too ghastly to
contemplate. Of course, the airline industry has often
been the primary target of terrorists and a series of
measures have already been put in place to enhance
aviation security. However, the airline industry still
remains vulnerable to terrorist attacks; hence the need
for greater international cooperation in closing any
loopholes that could be exploited by terrorists.

All countries big and small are indeed vulnerable
to these kinds of threats. As we are living in a volatile
neighbourhood, which is facing threats of terrorism and
violent extremism, attacks against critical infrastructure
by terrorists are not remote possibilities for us. They
are real threats and they have already happened in our
region. We believe it is through effective international
cooperation that the protection, security and resilience
of critical infrastructure can be enhanced.

As the concept note (S/2017/104, annex) rightly
points out, there is a need to build national capacity to
prevent and react to potential risks and threats in this
regard. The roles of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
along with its Executive Directorate and the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force (CTITF), will be critical in closely following up
on this issue and helping Member States build their
capacities. The designing of tailor-made programmes
on the protection of critical infrastructure by CTITF,
in line with the potential threats and risks they face,
could certainly be very helpful. Reactivating the
CTITF Working Group on the Protection of Critical
Infrastructure Including Internet, Vulnerable Targets
and Tourism Security will be instrumental in achieving
this objective; no doubt, so would be the very timely
initiative that the Secretary-General is contemplating
to enhance the capacity of the Secretariat to better
coordinate the United Nations counter-terrorism effort,
which indeed has so far lacked coherence.

17-0382117/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Finally, we believe that the sharing of experiences
and best practices among countries and regions
could also go a long way in enhancing capacity
and responsiveness to such threats. The United
Nations in cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations could possibly facilitate such platforms
to enhance their awareness and enable the exchange of
valuable experiences in connection with the protection
of critical infrastructure.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Mr. Minister, for presiding over our work
today. I would like to commend your country for having
organized this open debate and for conducted with
great balance and transparency the negotiations on the
important resolution 2341 (2017), which we adopted
today and which, together with resolution 2309 (2016)
on the terrorist threat to civil aviation, reflects the
importance that the Security Council attaches to the
issue. I would also like to thank the Chef de Cabinet
of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, for her participation and all the other
briefers at today’s debate for their informative briefings.
There is growing concern on the part of the
international community with regard to the threat of
terrorist attacks against critical infrastructure. That
concern is highly justified when we consider the serious
consequences that such acts may entail in terms of the
loss of life and the elimination of or the decreased
ability of States to provide essential services to their
population and economic losses. The actions carried
out by those terrorist groups through the use of new
technologies and increased capabilities extend beyond
borders and regions, which forces us to adopt measures
to confront those new challenges. It is therefore no
surprise that at the State, regional and international
levels, initiatives aimed at protecting infrastructure,
taking into account both physical and cybernetic
aspects, are gaining ground.
It is also necessary to generate greater public
awareness concerning cyberthreats and their potential
consequences through involving all public and
private stakeholders and promoting cooperation and
coordination among them. Furthermore, we undeniably
find ourselves in an are that requires greater legislative
development both at the domestic and international
levels. As we have already seen in other areas in the
fight against terrorism, inter-State, regional and
international cooperation is essential for the success
of preventive policies on attacks of that nature as well
18/58

13/02/2017

as for the containment of their potential consequences.
That is becoming increasingly necessary as many
States face difficulties and constraints with regard to
applying and implementing effective policies owing to
insufficient material resources and the lack of trained
personnel and practical experience in assessing threats,
risks, vulnerabilities and consequences. Accordingly,
a greater exchange of information and experiences,
knowledge of best practices, technical assistance and,
in some cases, financial support are also necessary.
It is important to create areas of discussion and
seek effective prevention measures, thereby supporting
the work already being done by the United Nations
through its competent bodies. We also believe it is
relevant to underscore that critical infrastructure
must be protected wherever it may be. Uruguay was
a sponsor resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection of
hospitals and humanitarian personnel in situations of
armed conflict, and attaches particular importance to
that issue.
In Latin America, several countries already have
a strategy and legal framework for cybersecurity and
cyberdefence, and others have begun to develop national
and comprehensive policies and strategies concerning
cybersecurity. In 2004, the members of the Organization
of American States (OAS) unanimously adopted the
Comprehensive Inter-American Cybersecurity Strategy,
and in 2012 they signed the Declaration Strengthening
Cybersecurity in the Americas. Similarly, in 2015
the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism of
the OAS adopted the declaration on the Protection of
Critical Infrastructure from Emerging Threats.
Uruguay has its own response centre to respond
to cybersecurity threats that coordinates and
implements the response to that type of incident and
develops and disseminates policy standards and
best practices in order to increase security levels. In
tandem with the Government’s electronic agency for
the country, it collaborates with other countries and
has joined international bodies with a view to bolster
communication and cooperation among response
centres. That is the case of the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism and the specialized
United Nations Regional Inter-agency Working Group
on Information and Communications Technologies.
At the level of the Ministry of the Interior, there is
a department of technological crimes, and in April
2015 we established a response defence centre for
cybersecurity incidents in the Ministry of Defence. In
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the first quarter of 2016 in Uruguay, there was total
of 419 incidents of cybersecurity incidents, which
accounted for an 11 per cent increase compared to the
same period for the previous year. Among other factors,
that increase is attributed to the global trends relating
to cyberattacks and cyberfraud.
It is undeniable that the capacity of Member
States to respond to terrorist attacks against critical
infrastructure remains uneven owing in large part to
its varying degrees of development and the availability
of resources. We must therefore must be aware of the
collective duty to provide protection as well as the
respect for the sovereignty of States while ensuring
the right balance between security measures and the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Mr. Klein (United States of America): I want to
thank all the briefers for their very informative and
comprehensive briefings today and for highlighting
the work that their organizations are doing on this
important topic.
The United States recognizes Ukraine for drawing
attention to the importance of protecting critical
infrastructure. The challenges for most people is that
critical infrastructure is both everywhere and nowhere.
We do not think about the bridges and the tunnels that
allow us to get to work every day. We do not think about
the radars, satellites and radios that allow aeroplanes
to move safely across the sky. We do not think about
the network of power plants, substations and highvoltage lines that keep the lights on. We do not think
about the server rooms and fibre-optic cables that get
our e-mails to where they need to be. Therefore, when
we talk about protecting critical infrastructure at the
Security Council, we are really talking about nothing
less than protecting what underpins our daily lives in
the modern era.
It is not an issue that each of us can combat in
isolation, and that is why the United States supported
resolution 2341 (2017), adopted by the Council just
moments ago. Part of the reason, of course, is that the
consequences of an attack on critical infrastructure
could go far beyond one country’s borders. Pipelines
carrying vital supplies of oil and gas span thousands
of miles. A catastrophe at a chemical or nuclear plant
could sicken people across continents. One could
go on and on, but the point is that protecting critical
infrastructure can help keep us all safe. Another
reason, however, to cooperate is that the threat to

S/PV.7882

critical infrastructure can be transnational. That is
especially true of cyberthreats whereby malicious
actors can reach across borders to cause havoc. We can
therefore surely agree on the importance of this issue
and its international dimensions. The question then
becomes how Member States can act to reduce the risk
of a devastating terrorist attack.
In the United States, private companies own most
of the country’s critical infrastructure, and that is why
protecting it is a shared responsibility among various
levels of Government, companies and individual
citizens. It has to be a collaborative effort. In fact,
anyone in the Chamber who has ridden a New York
City subway has certainly seen all the signs reminding
passengers: “If you see something, say something”.
That is part of the strategy. Every bit of extra vigilance
can help. The United States Government, especially
the Department of Homeland Security, is constantly
working on public-private partnerships that strengthen
the resilience of our communities. The United States
believes that the United Nations counter-terrorism
bodies and its agencies can be helpful. They can collect
information on how Member States can address critical
infrastructure and disseminate best practices for
keeping these institutions safe.
Today’s resolution also recalls that the States
Members of the United Nations must ensure that
terrorist attacks are criminal offences, including those
intended to destroy or disable critical infrastructure.
That is important partly for deterrence, but also to
make sure that perpetrators of such attacks cannot
escape prosecution. Member States must strengthen
partnerships to share information about potential
threats and ensure that their law enforcement and other
relevant agencies can work together to prevent attacks
before they happen. As the Minister said, forewarned
is forearmed.
This is a new area of cooperation for the Security
Council to discuss, and so there is still much that we
still need to define, including the role of the United
Nations in helping Member States cooperate. But
the resolution today should be an impetus to develop
concrete ways for Governments to share the lessons
they have learned and to collaborate in keeping critical
infrastructure running safely in the background of our
daily lives, where it should be.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to express my sincere thanks and

17-0382119/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

congratulations on the adoption of the significant
resolution 2341 (2017), on the protection of critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks. I would also like
to thank the Ukrainian presidency of the Security
Council for convening this important debate. And I also
thank the briefers for their valuable presentations.
The terrorist incidents witnessed by the world
today attest to the importance of protecting critical
infrastructure, which ought to be a priority as part of
our efforts to counter terrorism, especially with the
increasing numbers of victims of terrorist incidents
that target infrastructure. Such attacks also have a
negative impact on large segments of the peoples
subjected to such attacks — one that goes beyond
national boundaries.

13/02/2017

over the resolutions adopted by the Council to defeat
terrorism. It is high time to hold them accountable for
sponsoring terrorism.
In conclusion, allow me once again to thank the
Ukrainian presidency and to assure the Council that
Egypt will remain committed to its obligations and will
be at the forefront of the efforts of the international
community to defeat terrorism, while respecting
international law, the rule of law and human rights.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I am most grateful
for the analysis shared by the briefers this morning. I
join others in paying tribute to you, Mr. Minister, for
your leadership in bringing this important issue to
our attention.

Today’s resolution is the first of its kind to address
the protection of critical infrastructure against terrorist
attacks. It covers a number of important points that
must be taken into consideration, including the fact
that every State must determine what constitutes its
critical infrastructure, especially given the absence of
an international definition in this area, as well as how
to effectively provide protection from terrorist attacks.
The resolution also reiterates the need for inter-State
cooperation, promoting international cooperation and
information exchange and increasing awareness so as
to improve preparedness to counter attacks against
critical infrastructure.

The terrorist threat has evolved over the past
decade. We face increasingly complex threats as
terrorists acquire new knowledge and new technology.
Not content with simply killing innocents, terrorists
seek to destabilize, demoralize and disrupt our way of
life. Critical infrastructure, be it a transport system,
a communications hub or a power grid, represents
an attractive target for these sinister actors. The fact
that those responsible for the attack on the Brussels
metro and airport last March had also invested time
and surveillance on a Belgian nuclear scientist should
concern us all. We must redouble or vigilance to ensure
that we are ready to defend the systems that allow our
societies to function.

The resolution also underscores the importance of
every country identifying and developing strategies to
eliminate terrorist risks to critical infrastructure. The
resolution urges States with capacity to provide relevant
assistance to build the capacity of other States and
empower them to protect their critical infrastructure
against terrorist attacks, including through training and
providing the necessary resources, as well as technical
assistance and the transfer of technology.

We therefore wholeheartedly welcome the action
taken by the Security Council today to adopt resolution
2341 (2017). The resolution raises the profile of this
important issue, calls on States to improve preparedness
and strengthens our cooperation in protecting the
security of our people and our critical infrastructure. If
we are to truly tackle this threat, I believe we need to
focus on three things, namely, preparation, protection
and partnerships.

The adoption of this resolution on protecting
critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks is of vital
importance. However, more crucial is implementing
this and other Security Council resolutions on counterterrorism. That requires thorough follow-up by the
Council and the holding to account of countries and
regimes in the event of non-compliance when it comes
to implementing such resolutions, or in the case of
those who finance or sponsor terrorism or who harbour
or supply them with weapons. Such countries and
regimes are sapping our efforts and riding roughshod

First, on preparation, it is vital that plans for
protecting our critical infrastructure be comprehensively
developed, maintained and tested. We echo the call of
the resolution for States to develop their own strategies
to prepare and respond to any attack. Threats to our
infrastructure can come from many sources: terrorism,
criminality or natural hazards. In reducing the risk to
our infrastructure, the United Kingdom takes an allrisks approach. That means developing plans that can be
used to respond to many types of disruption or threats
to life. Measures taken by States to prevent unlawful or

20/58

17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

criminal interference in our infrastructure can also serve
to help prevent terrorist attacks. It is in part because of
the strong measures we have taken that terrorist threats
to our infrastructure are being mitigated.
Secondly, on protection, the threat to some elements
of our national infrastructure may be aspirational,
but there is one area where the threat is very real and
very high, that is, transport. As recent reports by the
Secretary-General show, there continues to be a serious
and enduring threat from international terrorism to
our transport networks, specifically to civil aviation.
Three billion passengers reach their destinations
by air every year. The past year offered us too many
reminders of the risks they face: attacks on airports in
Brussels and Istanbul, the destruction of the Russian
Metrojet aircraft over Sinai and the explosion on board
a Daallo Airlines flight from Mogadishu. It was to
combat such threats that the United Kingdom authored
resolution 2309 (2016), and why today we echo our call
on States to work with the International Civil Aviation
Organization. Working together we can ensure not only
that international security standards keep pace with the
terrorist threat, but also — crucially — that they are
implemented effectively on the ground.
Finally, on partnerships, the critical infrastructure
that we need to protect is largely owned by the private
sector, and can also form part of complex international
networks and supply chains. Preparation and protection
of infrastructure are simply good intentions if we fail
to work across sectors to achieve them. Each side has
its part to play. Private companies are responsible for
ensuring that their infrastructure is protected and that
essential services are maintained, just as Governments
have an obligation to ensure that industry is managing
these risks fully and responsibly. As today’s resolution
identifies, stronger international partnerships are
vital at a time when the functioning of infrastructure
relies on cross-border networks and supply chains. The
sharing of information, early-warning networks and
expertise will strengthen our common approach.
The Security Council needs to stay abreast of
the evolution of the terrorist threat and respond to it.
Just as we act to prevent conflict, we should also act
pre-emptively to prevent terrorism. Today we have
put another building block in place to strengthen our
common effort. Because of our efforts, terrorists intent
on stirring chaos have another hurdle to cross. Because
of our efforts, our societies are little safer than they
were yesterday.

S/PV.7882

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Ukraine‘s initiative to convene today’s
open debate of the Security Council on the protection
of critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks. We
welcome Foreign Minister Klimkin’s presiding over the
meeting. We listened attentively to the briefings made
by the Secretary-General’s Chef de Cabinet, Ms. Viotti,
and the other briefers.
With the deepening of economic globalization and
the interconnection of countries becoming increasingly
close, infrastructure is of great significance for countries
as they develop their economies and strengthen
interconnectivity and economic integration. On the
other hand, the global counter-terrorism situation is
increasingly serious, and infrastructure is increasingly
becoming an easy target for terror attacks. Recently,
a series of terrorist attacks on infrastructure, such as
airports and mass-transport stations, has caused panic
and resulted in serious losses of life and property. The
international community should pay close attention
to such developments and work together to fight
this phenomenon.
First, countries need to focus on ensuring the
security of regional interconnection projects and other
critical infrastructure. Regional collaboration has
significant bearing on global economic development
and prosperity. China’s Belt and Road Initiative makes
infrastructure interconnection a cooperation priority
with a view to supporting the countries along the
Road, improving their infrastructure development and
achieving mutually beneficial win-win cooperation and
synchronized development for the benefit of everyone.
To date, more than 100 countries and international
organizations have joined the Belt and Road Initiative.
China hopes to strengthen cooperation in areas such
as intelligence-sharing, risk assessment and joint law
enforcement through bilateral and multilateral channels,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Security Council and the General Assembly, so
as to effectively protect interconnection projects and
transboundary infrastructure from terrorist attacks
and to ensure the safety and security of the Belt and
Road construction.
Secondly, countries need to effectively assume
primary responsibility for the protection of their
infrastructure. China hopes that, in accordance with
the requirements of resolution 2341 (2017), countries
will strengthen their coordination and develop relevant
national-security policies, factoring in the risk of terror

17-0382121/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

13/02/2017

attacks so as to strengthen their capacity to protect
infrastructure from such attacks through monitoring,
early-warning systems and emergency response,
with a view to ensuring the safety and security of
their infrastructure.

introducing new forms of financing and expertly
using modern information technologies to develop
their material base and attract recruits. The Security
Council should do everything it can to counter those
new threats.

Thirdly, countries need to strengthen international
cooperation in the area of infrastructure security.
Countries need to comprehensively strengthen relevant
international cooperation from the vantage point
of building a human community of shared destiny.
Developed countries should help developing countries
strengthen capacity-building in that regard. Parties
need to strengthen cooperation in information-sharing,
law enforcement and judicial assistance in order to
crack down on terror attacks against infrastructure.
Relevant international and regional organizations
should help Member States to share best practices and
enhance national prevention capabilities. The United
Nations and the Security Council should play a leading
role in the relevant international cooperation.

Guided by those principles, our delegation has put
forward a whole range of initiatives in the Security
Council. In implementing many of those initiatives,
we have relied upon the counter-terrorism structures
of the United Nations and Member States, including,
in particular, a number of measures to combat the
financial resourcing of terrorism, which are set forth
in resolution 2199 (2015). Further, important steps
for combating ISIS and its financing were envisioned
in resolution 2253 (2015), which was put forward by
Russia and the United States.

Terrorism is the common enemy of all humankind.
Whenever, wherever and in whatever forms it occurs, it
must be countered resolutely. Countries need to adhere
to uniform standards and staunchly crack down on all
terrorist organizations listed by the Security Council.
International counter-terror actions should maximize
the leading role of the United Nations and its Security
Council and abide by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations so as to enhance effective
coordination. China, as an important member of the
international counter-terrorism camp, will continue
to pursue bilateral and multilateral cooperation in
accordance with its national law on counter-terrorism
and the relevant international conventions in order
to ensure the effective protection and security of
infrastructure and work with the international
community to combat terrorism and safeguard
international peace and security and stability.

A number of terrorist threats today remain without
an appropriate response. The coordination of the
efforts of the members of the international community
in that area would contribute to setting up the broad
international anti-terrorism coalition that has been
proposed by the Russian Federation. We have introduced
a draft resolution in the Security Council on combating
terrorist ideology with a focus on the spreading of that
ideology through the Internet. Those approaches have
the support of many members of the Security Council.
Our delegation has also always supported proposals
aimed at finding the most effective measures to combat
the modern challenge of terrorism.

Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I too should like to thank the briefers for their
participation in today’s meeting.

At the same time, we believe that in preparing
new decisions of the Security Council, especially in
as important an area as combating terrorism, the focus
should be on truly important topics, with attention to
added value and the achievement of concrete results. It
is not worthwhile to start negotiations that seek merely
to outline obvious points or reproduce statements
that have already been submitted many times in other
international or national documents. Of course, there is
no harm in that approach, but no real results have ever
come from such efforts.

Combating terrorism in today’s world must be an
absolute priority in the work of the Security Council.
Today, the international community is encountering
increasingly sophisticated forms of terrorist activity
and support. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), Jabhat al-Nusra, Al-Qaida and their allies
are adapting themselves to the changing situation,

We call once again on members of the Council to
work resolutely and in a coordinated manner in order to
develop effective and joint responses to the pernicious
challenges of terrorism that come, first and foremost,
from ISIL, Jabhat al-Nusra and Al-Qaida, and the
groups connected with them. The acuteness of those
threats has not diminished.

22/58

17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Mr. Arancibia Fernández (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like
to welcome Foreign Minister Klimkin today and thank
the delegation of Ukraine for having put this item on
the Security Council’s agenda. I would like to express
my thanks and appreciation to all of the speakers who
have taken the floor before me.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia reiterates its
firm commitment to the fight against terrorism and its
categorical rejection of terrorist acts, regardless of why,
where or by whom committed, if they are deliberately
carried out against international peace and security and
in flagrant violations international law. At the same
time, Bolivia reiterates that this scourge should not
be linked to any religion, nationality, civilization or
ethnic group.
The objective of this debate is to encourage
Member States to assess their vulnerabilities and
interdependence, the impact of terrorist attacks on
critical infrastructure and their ripple effects. We are
also invited to consider possible preventive measures in
the development of national policies and strategies. My
delegation participated in negotiations on resolution
2341 (2017), on the protection of critical infrastructure
against terrorist attacks, which was adopted today, and
wishes to highlight several aspects of the resolution.
We recall the Security Council’s resolutions in
response to the serious global threat of terrorism,
beginning with resolution 1373 (2001), reaffirming the
Council’s respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of all States pursuant to the
Charter of the United Nations. We stress the importance
of implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, established by General Assembly
resolution 60/288 of 8 September 2006, wherein we
reiterated the need to adopt measures to prevent and
combat terrorism, and in particular pillar II of the
Strategy, which includes the need to strengthen efforts
to improve the security and protection of vulnerable
targets such as public infrastructure and spaces.
We also recognize that every State identifies that
which constitutes its own critical infrastructure and
how to protect it effectively against terrorist attacks. We
further believe that it is principally the responsibility of
Member States to respond to terrorist attacks on what
they consider to be their critical infrastructure, be it
private or public, and always under national legislation.
We support the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism

S/PV.7882

Committee (CTC), with the support of its Executive
Directorate, in pursuit of their relevant work in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), including
support for Member States and the protection of critical
infrastructure against terrorist attacks with a view to
identifying good practices, gaps and vulnerabilities
in that area. In that regard, we encourage the CTC
to continue to work, with the support of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, to facilitate the
provision of technical assistance and capacity-building
and to raise awareness of the need to protect critical
infrastructure against terrorist attacks, in particular by
strengthening dialogue with competent regional and
subregional organizations that work closely with one
another, especially through the exchange of information.
The legal architecture relating to terrorism has
grown with the proliferation of terrorist incidents
throughout the world. It is important to acknowledge
the efforts of Government and peoples to counter
this scourge.
Lastly, we believe that it is important for States
to assume their responsibilities in the fight against
terrorism, including the protection of critical
infrastructure, through full compliance with the
provisions of international instruments and the relevant
resolutions of this multilateral forum, as well as the
effective implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Estonia.
Mr. Mikser (Estonia): I would like to start by
thanking Ukraine for organizing this very timely
discussion today.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
We are also a sponsor of resolution 2341 (2017),
on the protection of critical infrastructure from
terrorist attacks.
Our common goal is to make sure that security
is not a luxury item; it must rather be a commodity

17-0382123/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

available to everyone. Even though the terrorist threat
in Estonia has remained low, we have been and will be
deeply affected by acts of terrorism both in our region
and further afield. Estonia therefore remains committed
to our common efforts in the fight against terrorism.
Terrorism is an alarmingly increasing phenomenon,
both in scope and in geography. Over the past year,
we have seen a series of horrific acts of terror all over
the world, including in our region, Europe. Several
of these attacks have been committed against critical
infrastructure. We all remember the heinous attacks
on the Brussels and Istanbul airports, where many
innocent lives were lost. Indeed, objects of critical
infrastructure — such as banks, telecommunications,
water and energy supply, transport and emergency
services — are attractive targets for terrorists. The
vulnerability of critical infrastructure is exacerbated
by its increasing dependence on information and
communication technologies in an increasingly
interlinked world. Attacks against those objects,
including cyberattacks, could therefore result in serious
damage and loss of life.
Estonia knows what it means to be the target of
a large-scale cyberattack. In 2007, our preparedness
and swift action prevented major damage to our
infrastructure. However, the cyberattacks against
Estonia that year clearly highlighted the importance
of tackling cybersecurity as part of our national
security architecture.
One key word in addressing this threat is resilience.
In terms of critical infrastructure, resilience requires
the close involvement of the private sector, which often
owns and operates these vital services. In some areas,
such as banking, cybersecurity has become an integral
part of operations, but a similar degree of attention to
cybersecurity should be given to other sectors. It should
also be understood that, as Governments, we cannot
expect information-sharing to be a one-way street from
companies to Governments. To build trust, enhance
security and share best practices as well as information
about possible threat vectors, Governments must also
share information with the private sector.
In addition to public-private cooperation, civil
society plays an extremely important role in building
resilience. In order to effectively strengthen our
societies, Governments have to communicate potential
threats to critical infrastructure to their citizens and to
ensure their readiness to cope with the consequences
24/58

13/02/2017

of possible attacks. One major contributor to our
successful handling of the 2007 cyberattacks was
horizontal cooperation between information security
experts. This led to the establishment of the Cyber
Defense Unit of the Estonian Defence League — an
innovative model for the involvement of volunteers in
national cyberdefence.
It is crucial for countries to map out their critical
infrastructure and cross-border dependencies in
order to strengthen their national cybersecurity and
resilience. No country can face the full spectrum of
cyberthreats alone, and international cooperation is
crucial to preventing worst-case scenarios. We therefore
encourage countries further to share knowledge
and contribute to capacity-building across borders,
supporting wider acknowledgement of cybersecurity
threats and their mitigation.
Estonia has extensive experience in leading and
contributing to various cybersecurity and digital
development capacity-building efforts globally. We
will continue to share our best practices and lessons
learned. Here at the United Nations, we are proud to
contribute to cybersecurity through the United Nations
Group of Governmental Experts on Developments in
the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the
Context of International Security.
Cooperation that is all-inclusive is the foundation
of resilience. This ensures that the critical players in
cybersecurity — Governments, militaries, intelligence,
critical infrastructure operators and key private-sector
players — are fully informed, prepared and sufficiently
capable of handling large-scale cyberattacks.
I would like to reiterate the importance of the
Budapest Convention on Cybercrime. The Budapest
Convention is the only binding international instrument
dealing with cybercrime, and it also covers the use
of the Internet for terrorist purposes. The effective
implementation of the Cybercrime Convention would
ensure that national legislations provide appropriate
sanctions for cases involving serious attacks, including
terrorist ones, on information-technology-based or
general information-technology infrastructure.
Estonia calls on every country to adopt policies,
strategies and regulations that help to achieve and
maintain an open, resilient, secure and peaceful
cyberspace. We must meet the highest standards of due
diligence in the development and use of information
and communications technology.
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Prevention is the only means of preventing
radicalization
and
recruitment
into
terrorist
organizations altogether, as well as of eliminating the
terrorist threat to critical infrastructure. We support the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism. The prevention of future threats should be
given the highest priority in every country.
In line with this, I would like to commend the
Secretary-General’s initiative to consolidate and
streamline United Nations counter-terrorism structures
while improving their transparency. We hope that the
new structure will also focus on the prevention of
violent extremism as its main objective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this debate on the protection
of critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks and on
promoting discussion on preventive measures against
such attacks. In this context, I would like to recall the
outcome of the Arria Formula meeting on cybersecurity
and international peace and security organized by
Spain and Senegal in November 2016.

S/PV.7882

low risk to States. But despite the fact that cyberattacks
are occurring with greater frequency and intensity
around the world, many either go unreported or are
underreported, leaving the public with a false sense of
security about the threat itself.
While Governments, businesses and individuals are
all being targeted on an exponential basis, infrastructure
is becoming a target of choice among both individual
and State-sponsored cyberattackers, which recognize
the value of disrupting what were previously thought
of as impenetrable security systems. Many countries
around this table have already dealt with these kinds
of actions in the recent past. According to Dell’s 2015
annual security report, cyberattacks against supervisory
control and data-acquisition systems doubled in 2014,
to more than 160,000.
Today, according to INTERPOL, malicious code
can potentially be used to manipulate the controls of
power grids, financial services, energy providers,
defence systems, health-care databases and other critical
infrastructure, resulting in real-world catastrophic
physical damage, such as blackouts or the disruption of
an entire city’s water supply.

As the threat landscape changes and becomes more
complex, so too must our approach to security problems
change in the face of asymmetric and cross-border
threats. As such, they must be confronted at both the
national and international levels. No country is immune
to cyberterrorism threats, including mine. Slovakia
adopted its national strategy to combat terrorism, based
on four key pillars, in line with the objectives of the
European Union action plan on combating terrorism:
prevention, protection, prosecution and response.

Our joint action is necessary. Some studies suggest
that the following measures should be taken to improve
critical infrastructure protection: first, assess critical
infrastructure vulnerabilities; secondly, develop plans
to eliminate significant vulnerabilities; thirdly, propose
systems for identifying and preventing attempted major
attacks; fourthly, develop plans for alerting, containing
and rebuffing attacks in progress; and fifthly, rapidly
reconstitute minimum essential capabilities in the
aftermath of an attack.

The threats posed by major disruptions of critical
infrastructure to a country’s economy, infrastructure
and national security are real. These threats can be
classified into three categories: natural, human-caused
and accidental or technical threats.

It cannot be excluded that in future the use of
cyberspace by State or non-State actors may amount
to a threat to international peace and security and will
require the Security Council to take more decisive steps
to respond.

Although reducing the vulnerabilities of critical
infrastructure and increasing its resilience is the
responsibility of individual States, the need for
international cooperation is growing rapidly. As has
been mentioned, cyberthreats and attacks are becoming
more common, sophisticated and harmful to States
as we come to depend more and more on computer
communications systems. At present, cyberterrorist
attacks are generally considered to pose a relatively

As stated by the Secretary-General in the
foreword to the 2015 report (A/70/174) of the Group of
Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field of
Information and Telecommunications in the Context of
International Security in 2015:
“Making cyberspace stable and secure can be
achieved only through international cooperation,
and the foundation of this cooperation must be

17-0382125/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

international law and the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.”
Unfortunately, however, international treaties
intended to address the problem have so far had a limited
impact because of, first, the inability to hold signatories
accountable and, secondly, the difficulty of accurately
determining the identity of responsible actors.
Enhanced information-sharing, combined with a
mandate to swiftly and accurately release information
regarding attacks on impacted citizens, provide
a sensible foundation for designing a protocol to
effectively address future attacks and may help, yet
very few Governments routinely engage in this practice.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy calls on Member States to improve efforts
related to ensuring the security and protection of
particularly vulnerable targets and to share best
practices, and stresses the importance of developing
public-private partnerships in this area. But again
so little has been done in practice, as shown by the
experience of many countries.
In this respect, I would like to underline the following
five points on which we should be concentrating.
There is a need, first, to support States with practical
assistance in the implementation of the provisions of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy;
secondly, to establish appropriate mechanisms to
facilitate the enhanced sharing of best practices;
thirdly, to strengthen the capacity of both the public
and private sectors and to increase the development of
public and private partnerships, including by promoting
awareness and understanding of the necessary balance
between economic and security interests, in order to
ensure an adequate level of protection and limit the
detrimental effects of disruption on society and citizens;
fourthly, to be more decisive in efforts to combat
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism, as it
is through this channel that a great deal of know-how
falls into the wrong hands; and, fifthly, for the Security
Council to consider making better use of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force Working Group
on the Protection of Critical Infrastructure, Including
Vulnerable Targets, Internet and Tourism Security.
All of this should be aimed at avoiding, addressing
and preventing attacks on critical infrastructure such
as those that have taken place in recent decades to
many countries represented this Chamber and to other
Members of the United Nations.
26/58

13/02/2017

Terrorism poses a threat not only to our security
but also to the values, rights and freedoms of our
societies and their citizens. My country is committed
to playing its part in regional and global efforts to fight
terrorism and violent extremism on all fronts, including
the protection of critical infrastructure and the sharing
of best practices and technologies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like at the outset to thank the Ukrainian
presidency for having convened this open debate of the
Security Council on the issue of the protection of critical
infrastructure against terrorist attacks. I should like in
particular to welcome Mr. Pavlo Klimkin, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, who honours us with his
presence today. We wish also to thank previous speakers
and to welcome the adoption of resolution 2341 (2017).
The protection of critical infrastructure,
particularly from attacks by terrorist groups, should be
a priority for all States in the framework of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, with the
goal of preserving the health, security and economic
well-being of citizens as well as the proper functioning
of the State and its administration.
As has been stated, critical infrastructure includes
the various facilities, networks and services of the
economic and social structure of States, including
communication routes, basic services, and tourist
and recreational facilities. These should be taken
into consideration in the process of designing
protection strategies.
Peru having been the target of terrorist attacks
in the past, we know that critical infrastructure is
a preferred target for terrorist organizations due its
vulnerabilities — and all the more so when such attacks
lead to serious consequences, such large loss of life and
the destruction of property, and, in the medium- and
long-term, to economic losses and insecurity among
the population.
With the development of information and
communication technologies, the Internet and virtual
infrastructure have also become a target of attacks for
terrorist organizations. The increasing interconnectivity
and greater technological dependency increase our
vulnerability: the services of an airport control tower,
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7882

a nuclear power plant or the valves of a dam can be
simultaneously attacked remotely.

challenges that challenge our capacity for prevention
and effective responses.

In Peru, we are aware of the importance of
protecting ourselves against those threats. In 2009, we
set up a cybersecurity incident response team, which
works closely with the national police and is developing
a national cybersecurity network. Faced with global
threats there should be global solutions. In that regard,
Peru strongly believes in the importance of international
cooperation and the exchange of experience and good
practices in order to find effective and innovative
responses. States must work together while using
regional and international coordination mechanisms.

For Colombia, the protection of critical
infrastructure against terrorist attacks has been at the
centre of our Government policy. As a result of the
internal conflict that affected us for more than 50 years,
my country has suffered terrorist acts that have sought
to destabilize the functioning of the Government and
society. Those attacks or attempted attacks targeted
oil infrastructure, telecommunications centres, power
grids, transportation, networks for the warehousing
of gas and fuel, banking and financial systems, water
supply systems and emergency services.

The United Nations plays a key role based
on the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
its comprehensive, coordinated and balanced
implementation across all of its different pillars. We
welcome the work of the Working Group on Protecting
Critical Infrastructure of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force. We urge it to coordinate
efforts to establish the necessary mechanisms to
provide the necessary technical assistance to Member
States at their request.

Those attacks forced us to develop within our
armed forces the Centres for Special Operations for
the Protection of Critical and Economic Infrastructure
of the State, which make cooperation possible
among communities, the public service and the
private sector — the businesses who provide those
services — by launching initiatives such as those
involving the development of standardized documents
and security protocols, which are developed jointly
between security agencies and sectors that seek to
optimize security in their activities. Fortunately, the
peace process will make it possible for those lessons
learned to be shared with others and, hopefully, that
will be of use to the international community.

Similarly, my delegation recalls the importance of
completing the process of drafting a general convention
on international terrorism and of convening a highlevel conference on this topic under the auspices of the
United Nations. We call on everyone to step up their
efforts to conclude such a convention.
I would like to reiterate the commitment of Peru in
combating the threats posed by terrorism and violent
extremism. To that end, Mr. President, you can count
on the constant support of my delegation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I congratulate Ukraine on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I would also like
to thank the Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General
and the representatives of the various entities who
shared their points of views this morning on a matter
of global concern.
The convening of this debate comes at a time
when the frequency and threat of terrorist attacks
witnessed around the world is latent in all countries
without any distinction. We are confronting new

As you, Mr. President, emphasized in your concept
note (S/2017/104, annex), in my country we have been
working with various communities based on trust and
dialogue, and, as the Chef de Cabinet and the SecretaryGeneral of INTERPOL mentioned this morning, States
must identify vulnerabilities in all possible sectors,
strengthen cooperation on prevention and mitigation
and ensure greater technical cooperation to enhance the
capacities of States, including through the exchange of
intelligence, good practices and lessons learned.
For Colombia, acts of terrorism are criminal and
unjustifiable, whatever their motivation, wherever
they occur and whoever commits them. Terrorism
cannot and should not be associated with any religion,
civilization, ethnicity or nationality.We reaffirm
our commitment to prevent, combat and eliminate
terrorism and its financing, in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, with
full respect for the sovereignty of States, the rule of law
and international law.

17-0382127/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, let me express my gratitude to the delegation of
Ukraine for organizing this open debate, as well as to
thank the briefers for their inputs.
I align myself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
Today we are facing a proliferation of terrorist
acts on an unprecedented scale. No country is immune
from the possibility of falling victim to terrorist acts.
The most recent terrorist attacks, particularly those
committed by Da’esh and other extremists and terrorist
groups, serve to show that critical infrastructure is
increasingly becoming an attractive target for terrorist
operations. The real dimensions of this global menace
is revealed when we note the fact that there are still
tens of thousands of terrorists, including women and
youth from over 100 countries from all the regions
of the world, who have joined the rank and file of
terrorist organizations. Terrorist acts against critical
infrastructure create a state of terror among the
general public and inflict adverse consequences on the
economic and social development of States, including
the possible disruption of the delivery of basic services.
Therefore, there is a dire need to protect infrastructure
against a growing number of diverse terrorist attacks,
both physical and cyber.
Terrorist attacks against infrastructure, such as
energy and water supplies, financial institutions,
telecommunications, transportation or governmental
structures, may well result in civilian fatalities, harm
and loss of property on a large scale, disrupt the
proper functioning of public services and bring about
chaos in societies. They may also cause widespread
environmental damage and significantly undermine
national resources and capabilities to face its challenges
and emergencies.
The protection of critical infrastructure should
therefore be seen in the framework of the fight against
terrorism, and needs to be incorporated into national
plans for countering and preventing terrorism. At the
international level, enhanced resilience on the part of
the international community to face these threats is
also key to curbing the loss of human life and protect
the services that are essential for our societies.
28/58

13/02/2017

The attacks in Turkey, Iraq, Brussels, Afghanistan
and some African countries are the most recent terrorist
attacks targeting critical infrastructure. At the same
time, we should not overlook the fact that the collective
punishment of peoples and the brutalization of peoples
under foreign occupation — such as the blockade
carried out by Israeli regime against Palestinians for
decades — also constitute the gravest form of terrorism,
depriving consecutive Palestinian generations from
their vital infrastructure and natural resources. In
places where war continues to be waged, such as
Yemen, much of what was already an impoverished
civilian infrastructure has been decimated, helping
to strengthen terrorism and destabilize the region. In
the face of terrorism as a global threat, we must build
a stronger collective political will for international
counter-terrorism cooperation. At the same time,
we emphasize that all efforts to fight terrorism must
be conducted in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.
We need robust coherent multilateral mechanisms
if we are to respond to terrorism as a common threat
to our world. Since there are no simple solutions
to complex phenomena such as terrorism, only
mechanisms such as these can ensure that our policies
are more coherent and coordinated and prevent careless,
imprudent or dangerous unilateral action in the name of
combating terrorism.
In conclusion, we believe in the centrality of the role
of the United Nations and other relevant international
and regional organizations to counter-terrorism and
conflict-prevention efforts. Their involvement will
improve capacity-building and further enhance the
effectiveness of the general effort to counter terrorist
attacks, including against critical infrastructure, and at
the national, regional and international level.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s open debate on an
issue of increasing significance in an interconnected
world. We also appreciate the informative and
thoughtful briefings.
Increasingly, the ideas, industries, markets,
resources, services and products we share are
interconnected as never before, from the way we trade
to the way we invest, the way we travel to the way we
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

eat and, indeed, from the way we think to the way
we live. All of these, in one way or another, depend
on the growing proliferation of complex and sensitive
networks. These interconnections, underpinning the
provision of essential societal functions, have created a
new kind of vulnerability, giving terrorists the chance
to threaten targets that otherwise would perhaps have
been unassailable. Such threats serve the purpose of
creating disruption on a scale far beyond the immediate
area of an attack. They affect the population on a much
broader scale. They force the multiple stakeholders
providing basic services to be constantly on guard.
They therefore not only add to the stress on the
stakeholders and their societies, they also raise the cost
of the services provided.
Big urban centres such as Mumbai, New York
and London have become targets, since any impact on
cities that serve as financial hubs can affect a country’s
economy in multiple ways. The investigations into the
heinous terrorist attacks in Mumbai in 2008 revealed
the impact that their perpetrators wanted to have on the
psyche and economy of the whole of India. The attacks,
whose targets included a hospital, a railway station and
hotels, were carefully planned and crafted from beyond
our borders in order to produce crippling effects not
just on daily life in a bustling metropolis but on an
entire country of a billion people.
The protection of critical infrastructure is
primarily a national responsibility. However, given
that many of our technologies and base templates for
systems around the world are similar, threats of attacks
on an international stock exchange, a major dam, a
nuclear power plant, of the possible sabotaging of oil
or gas pipelines or airport air-safety systems, or of the
potential blocking of an international canal or strait can
have much wider implications and complications that
extend far beyond national frontiers.
Many recent terrorist attacks have shown that
access to information and communications technologies
(ICT), and in some cases their manipulation, has
been an important enabler. The global nature of such
technologies raises the necessity for international
vision and coordination on aspects of policy, with the
aim of enhancing our capabilities. Despite years of
concern about the problem, States have adopted few
international instruments addressing issues resulting
from threats from cyberspace.

S/PV.7882

Current international law is not well positioned to
support responses to cyber attacks. Security Council
decisions that impose binding counter-terrorism
obligations do not mention them. With regard to new
treaty law, Member States have been negotiating a
proposed comprehensive convention on international
terrorism since the latter half of the 1990s, the period
that corresponds to the rise of worries about terrorist
cyber attacks. The offence defined in the draft text may
be broad enough to be applicable to cyberattacks, and
yet the possibility of terrorist cyberattacks has not been
a catalyst for negotiations even after 20 years.
Today’s debate is therefore an opportunity to
ask ourselves if we can work out our differences in
the face of concerns regarding ICT-related threats to
critical infrastructure, or if it will require a cataclysmic
event to foster greater international collaboration
on protecting critical infrastructure from terrorist
cyberattacks. Since the threat is discernible and there
is understandable global angst about it, can we not
look at options for strengthening international law
against terrorist cyberattacks? Last month, there was a
crescendo of support in this Chamber for a preventive
approach. Are we therefore ready for a collaborative
preventive approach to addressing terrorist cyberattacks
against critical infrastructure? If we are not willing to
negotiate a treaty on such attacks, can we at least start
by clarifying the applicability of various anti-terrorism
treaties to them?
Collaboration is key to moving the perimeter that
we defend from our front doors to the edges of our
neighbourhoods. Protecting critical infrastructure from
terrorist cyberattacks requires a global neighbourhood
watch programme because, as the saying goes, there
is safety in numbers. Any effective collaboration,
however, also requires trust, and right now there is a
trust deficit. The lesson of the past is that international
law on terrorism has largely developed through States
reacting to terrorist violence. We hope that this will
not continue to be the case, and the Security Council’s
adoption today of resolution 2341 (2017) is a first small
step in an area where much more needs to be done.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): I would like to congratulate
Ukraine and its Minister for Foreign Affairs on
its presidency of the Security Council and to wish
Ukraine success in the coming month. We thank you,

17-0382129/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Mr. President, for convening this timely debate on an
important topic, and we were proud to be a sponsor of
resolution 2341 (2017), adopted this morning.
For Israel, today’s debate is unfortunately not a
theoretical one, as we have been coping with terrorist
threats since our founding. Today, as terrorism
threatens all of us, Israel is in one of the world’s most
volatile and violent neighbourhoods, threatened from
all sides. To the north, we face Hizbullah, which has
been designated internationally as a terrorist group, and
which hides its arsenal of more than 150,000 rockets,
all pointing towards Israel, in civilian homes, schools
and hospitals. In threatening civilians from within its
own population, Hizbullah is committing a double war
crime, and yet its actions are rarely if ever condemned
in this Chamber. In 2016, Hassan Nasrallah, Secretary
General of Hizbullah, threatened a catastrophic attack
on Haifa’s ammonia-storage tanks that would, he said,
lead to the death of tens of thousands of residents and
affect 800,000 Israelis. He went on to declare that this
would be exactly like a nuclear bomb and that therefore
he could say that today Lebanon had a nuclear bomb.
In the south, we face Hamas, the terrorist group
controlling Gaza that openly calls for the destruction
of the State of Israel. Hamas also intentionally targets
civilians among its own population, while making an
effort to target crucial infrastructure. We witnessed
that in 2014 when Hamas attempted to paralyse Israel
by attacking Ben Gurion Airport, Israel’s primary
international transport hub.
Israel has previously stated here in the Chamber that
wherever there is terror, there Iran is also. Therefore,
hearing the statement made by the representative of
Iran a few minutes ago reminds me of someone who
killed his own parents and then begs the mercy of
the court because he is an orphan. Iran is the leading
State sponsor of terror, backing and supporting the
operations and activities of Hizbullah, Hamas and other
terror groups based in the Middle East and throughout
the world.
Iran continues to test increasingly advanced
ballistic missiles, in a direct threat to Israel. Just last
week, on 4 February, a senior member of the Iranian
Parliament’s National Security and Foreign Policy
Commission stated, “only seven minutes are needed
for the Iranian missile to hit Tel-Aviv”. The test firing
of that ballistic missile proves once again that Iran
is ignoring resolution 2231 (2015). I call upon the
30/58

13/02/2017

Security Council to respond firmly and decisively to
such Iranian violations and provocations.
We have recently witnessed a wave of terror attacks
on critical infrastructure across the globe, including by
Da’esh. The downing of the EgyptAir jetliner aircraft
over the Mediterranean Sea, the attacks in Istanbul’s
Ataturk Airport, and the Brussels metro station and
airport bombings left hundreds dead and wounded,
proving once again that no country is safe and no person
is immune to such despicable attacks.
From global transportation to financial systems,
from energy infrastructure to water supplies, attacks on
critical infrastructure threaten the very foundations on
which our modern society is built. Terrorists recognize
that perpetrating attacks against critical infrastructure
has the potential for devastation that transcends the
target itself. Attacks on major infrastructure networks
have the ability to paralyse the workings of entire
countries and regions.
We must adapt every day to the constant and evolving
terror threats that aim to attack our infrastructure, our
civilians and our citizens. We recognize that the only
way to combat such threats is by staying ahead of the
game, remaining vigilant and anticipating the next
step of the perpetrators. Today’s realities require us to
address not only physical attacks. We are now fighting
on a whole new front, and we must also guard against
cyberthreats and attacks.
Critical infrastructure is closely linked to
technology and the associated danger of cyberattacks.
Cyberattacks have no borders and are not limited to
State actors. Perpetrators meet no physical barriers and
can cause even greater damage than a physical terror
attack on a single location. Through Israel’s high-tech
security culture and joint private-public cyberventures,
Israel has successfully combated threats that impact
both private and State systems.
It is said that necessity is the mother of invention.
Out of necessity, we have become experts in the field
of counter-terrorism and are proudly sharing our
knowledge with Governments throughout the world.
Israeli experts are contributing their expertise on a wide
range of issues — from terrorist financing to forensic
investigation and from aviation security to border
protection. Those activities reflect our fundamental
belief that terrorism can be effectively confronted
only through international cooperation. A serious
international threat requires a serious international
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

response. We are committed to taking all necessary
steps to continue protecting our citizens and sharing
our knowledge with the international community.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: It is my honour speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member States.
The candidate countries of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and
Albania; the country taking part in the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate
Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and the
Republic of Moldova and Armenia, align themselves
with this statement.
Let me first congratulate Ukraine on its current
presidency of the Security Council and to thank
Sweden for its excellent presidency last month. I would
like to commend Ukraine for organizing today’s debate
and for this opportunity to speak about the protection
of critical infrastructure, a topic of major concern for
the European Union and its member States. I would
also like to stress the importance of working together
on this issue at the international level to ensure a high
degree of protection of our critical infrastructure and
to increase their resilience to terrorist attacks and
other disruptions.

S/PV.7882

assessing the need to improve their protection. Those
refer to critical infrastructure located in member States
whose disruption or destruction would have a significant
impact on at least two member States. It has a sectoral
scope and applies to the energy and transport sectors.
The directive furthermore requires owners and
operators of designated European critical infrastructures
to prepare operator security plans — advanced
business continuity plans — and nominate security
liaison officers, linking the owner/operator with the
national authority responsible for critical infrastructure
protection. The application of the directive is monitored
by contact points appointed from each EU member
State. The contact points group also engages with the
European Commission in international cooperation
outside of the EU — so far with United States of
America and Canada — but, this year, will also start to
engage with neighbouring countries in Eastern Europe
and the Balkans.
Reacting to new threat developments, in 2016
the EU adopted a joint framework to counter hybrid
threats, which also covers the matter of the protection of
critical infrastructure against hybrid and asymmetrical
threats, such as in the field of energy and transport. It
is designed to strengthen member States’ resilience in
that area and foresees cooperation with EU partners in
countering such threats.

On the first question, about our tools, in Europe
we have in place the European Programme for Critical
Infrastructure Protection. In place since 2006, it sets
the overall framework for activities aimed at improving
the protection of critical infrastructure in the European
Union across all relevant sectors of economic activity.
The programme aims to respond not only to terrorist
threats, but also include man-made, technological threats
and natural disasters. In short, it seeks to provide an
all-hazards cross-sectoral approach. The programme is
supported by regular exchanges of information between
EU member States in the framework of the meetings of
the critical infrastructure protection contact points.

With regard to the second question, on methods
to promote improved responsiveness to terrorist
attacks and the resilience of critical infrastructure, the
European Commission has funded over 120 different
projects under the Prevention, Preparedness and
Consequence Management of Terrorism and other
Security-related Risks Programme between 2007 and
2013. That programme was designed to protect citizens
and critical infrastructures from terrorist attacks
and other security incidents by fostering prevention
and preparedness, improving the protection of such
infrastructure and addressing crisis management. A
key objective was to provide expert knowledge and the
scientific basis for better understanding criticalities
and interdependencies. The increase in cyberthreats
also led the EU to adopt legislation on the security of
network and information systems in July 2016.

A key pillar of the programme is the 2008 European
critical infrastructures directive, which establishes a
procedure for identifying and designating European
critical infrastructures and a common approach for

As for the third point, on how to strengthen the
capacity of both the public and private sectors to prevent
attacks and react to threats to critical infrastructure,
training sessions and exercises have been very useful

The questions raised in the concept note (S/2017/104,
annex) are very important.I would like to address them
briefly, one by one.

17-0382131/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

tools, which the European Union has encouraged
and engaged in. A good example is the VITEX 2016
exercise, which was designed and coordinated by
the Dutch presidency of the European Union. It was
the first EU-wide exercise focusing on the effects of
large-scale failure of critical infrastructure — in this
case electricity — across Europe. The VITEX 2016
exercise resulted in an exercise guide with an exercise
design, which describes step-by-step how such an
exercise can be organized. This guide is available to
everyone in order to encourage possible follow-up
exercises in the future.
Addressing the fourth point on mechanisms and
platforms for cooperation, I want to point to the vital
importance of regular exchanges of information and
best practices. The European Commission has for such
purposes developed the Critical Infrastructure Warning
Information Network, which is an Internet-based,
multi-level system for exchanging critical infrastructure
protection ideas, studies and good practices among
Member States and key stakeholders. This portal,
which has been operational since mid-January 2013,
also seeks to raise awareness and contribute to the
protection of critical infrastructure in Europe.
As for my last point — the role of the United
Nations and its agencies in this work — there is
certainly a potential for further cooperation as the
security and protection of critical infrastructure are a
concern we all face, as is the fight against terrorism.
The European Union would be interested in cooperating
internationally, with partners beyond its border, in the
area of protection of critical infrastructure against this
common threat. We are already engaged in various
forums, such as the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe, but
would also welcome United Nations initiatives in this
field, and we stand ready to explore possibilities for
such cooperation.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Ukrainian presidency of the Security
Council for its initiative of placing the protection
of critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks on
its agenda for the first time. I also thank the briefers
who, through their interventions, have enriched this
open debate.
32/58

13/02/2017

Romania fully endorses the statement of the
European Union. I should like to add a few remarks
from my national perspective.
Transport, telecommunications, energy or water
distribution networks, financial systems and emergency
services infrastructure — what is called critical
infrastructure — is essential to the sound functioning
of our contemporary society. Consequently, their
protection is a key priority. Terrorist entities have
demonstrated the ability to act with tenacity, speed and
flexibility. Given their goal of producing the greatest
number of casualties and material damage, critical
infrastructure remains a preferred target.
The global dimension of terrorist threats and
attacks requires a comprehensive response, and the
United Nations must play a key role in a coordinated and
effective approach. Given the inter-State connections of
critical infrastructure, regional and global cooperation
is also crucial. In recent years, terrorist attacks on
critical infrastructure have highlighted the vulnerability
of States. We all remember the most recent cases, which
demonstrated the impact of the terrorist attacks on the
Brussels and Istanbul airports. We must not forget the
most deadly attacks in the history of Spain against
passenger trains in Madrid in 2004.
In addition, the international community has
witnessed the horrors committed against civilians in
Syria, where water became a weapon of war when more
than 5 million inhabitants of the capital were deprived
of water for more than a month after an attack against
its main supplier of water. We also recall the destruction
in 2013 of the Deir ez-Zor suspension bridge on the
Euphrates, cutting access to around 50,000 people
in the city, or the Da’esh attacks that targeted oil
wells, refineries and power stations in Syria and Iraq.
Unfortunately, the list is not exhaustive. No State is
completely immune.
In 2011, Romania developed a national strategy
for the protection of critical infrastructure. We believe
that in our efforts to protect critical infrastructure, we
must place greater emphasis on cooperation among
State authorities, economic operators and the public, as
well as on risk analysis and the operationalization of
the public-private partnership. The latter is essential,
since a significant portion of the infrastructure belongs
to private or multinational companies.
Among the means that terrorist entities exploit of
and that offer immense opportunities are computer
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

technologies and online communication, which have
exhibited unprecedented growth. Experience has shown
that the most serious terrorist threats are of a mixed
nature, enabling cyberattacks to have a direct impact
on physical infrastructure. In that context, prevention
has become increasingly significant.
In 2013, Romania adopted a cybersecurity strategy
and a national action plan for the implementation of
its national cybersecurity system. Moreover, in 2011,
Romania set up the National Cybersecurity Incident
Response Centre, tasked with public prevention,
response and advisory services. Currently, the Centre
is implementing a project in conjunction with partners
from 27 organizations, from 14 European countries.
Another effective means of combating terrorism is
the prevention of violent extremism, in which Romania
has also invested heavily, with results that speak for
themselves. My country has not experienced the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters or seen a single
case of a Romanian citizen or foreign national travelling
to the theatre of war to join a terrorist organization.
Furthermore, in Romania, jihadi propaganda is found
only in extremely isolated pockets.
We deeply appreciate United Nations efforts to
develop legal and institutional frameworks for the fight
against terrorist threats to be placed at the disposal of
the Member States. Romania was a sponsor of resolution
2341 (2017), on the protection of critical infrastructure
from terrorist attacks, adopted unanimously today by
the Council. It complements the adoption of resolutions
2322 (2016), on international judicial cooperation; 2309
(2016), on combatting threats to civil aviation; and
resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection of personnel
and medical facilities in armed conflicts. Another
important pillar remains General Assembly resolution
71/19, on cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Police Organization,
INTERPOL.
We welcome the decision of the Secretary-General
to launch a thorough debate on the implementation of the
Organization’s Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The
informal discussion, to be held in the General Assembly,
thus represents a good starting point for strengthening
the United Nations’ counter-terrorism component.
In conclusion, Romania believes that the respect
for international legal frameworks and the adoption
and implementation of national laws are essential

S/PV.7882

to any effort to protect critical infrastructure from
terrorist attacks.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): We thank
the Ukrainian presidency of the Security Council for
having convened this public debate on the important
topic of the protection of critical infrastructure
from terrorist attacks. We also thank the briefers for
their statements.
Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Multiple responses are needed to counter terrorism
and violent extremism. First, we must tackle the root
causes of the phenomenon by collectively protecting our
fundamental values: respect for human rights, the rule
of law, good governance, sustainable development, the
fight against impunity and the promotion of tolerance.
The international community must also join forces to
promote the peaceful and political resolution of the far
too many conflicts ravaging our planet.
In that connection, Syria is the clearest tragic
example, but is unfortunately not the only conflict. Other
regions are embroiled in war and instability that are
conducive to the growing influence of terrorist groups.
In that regard, we highlight the Security Council’s
particular responsibility to unite the international
community in efforts to find peaceful and political
resolutions to those conflicts. Additionally, it is clear
that we must directly confront Da’esh, Al-Qaida and
affiliated groups. In that regard, Belgium is an active
participant in the international coalition against Da’esh.
With particular regard to the protection of critical
infrastructure, I would like to make the following
comments. In this area, as in others, the importance
of prevention is paramount. In that respect, modern
methods of prevention, based on adequate training of
security officers and law enforcement officials, should
be developed. Belgium attaches great importance to
these aspects, in particular through the organization
of drills and the introduction of specific training
programmes for its security forces.
The critical infrastructure security plan must
contain both physical measures, such as the installation
of security barriers or surveillance cameras, as well as
cybermeasures such as firewalls or detection systems.
In addition, authorities should ensure the development

17-0382133/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

13/02/2017

of digital emergency planning, and crisis and alert
management for populations directly affected by an
emergency. In Belgium, for example, the Belgian Centre
for Cyber Security, created in 2014, has developed a
national plan that describes the roles and tasks of the
various authorities in the event of a national incident or
national cyber security crisis.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.

Effective public-private cooperation is another
important area of prevention and response to threats, as
it is not uncommon for parts of critical infrastructure
to belong to the private sector. There is therefore a need
to increase opportunities for the public and private
sectors to meet, in particular through conferences,
drills or trainings. Establishing an information network
among private companies and public authorities against
terrorist threats is an extremely important tool in
that respect.

Argentina condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and considers that terrorist acts not only
constitute a threat to international peace and security,
but are also a threat to human dignity, peaceful and
civilized coexistence, stability, the consolidation of
democracy, and the economic and social development
of nations. Our country, which was the victim of bloody
terrorist attacks in the 1990s, reiterates that terrorist
acts are criminal and unjustifiable, whatever their
motivation and wherever and by whomsoever they
are committed.

Strengthening international cooperation, including
through information exchange, joint drills and the
development of scenarios and contingency plans,
should be encouraged. With this in view, the European
Union (EU) has developed, together with its member
States, a number of tools to deal with the threat, notably
the European Programme for Critical Infrastructure
Protection and the European Directive of 6 July 2016
on network security and information systems within
the EU. Because those tools, as well as others, were
detailed in the statement made by the representative of
the EU, I will not revisit them.
The important role of the United Nations, in
particular through the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
the Executive Directorate — which assists the
Committee — and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, bears mentioning. These bodies can work
usefully to raise Member State awareness on the issue
of protecting critical infrastructure against the terrorist
threat by promoting the exchange of good practices
in the operational framework. Such awarenessraising may include, for example, the organization of
meetings in which States share lessons learned from
their own experience and present best practices that
have proven successful. The United Nations is a vital
forum for developing the exchange of information
and best practices and helping to identify gaps in the
protection of critical infrastructure. For that reason,
Belgium sponsored resolution 2341 (2017) adopted at
the beginning of this meeting.
34/58

Mr. Garcia Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I should like to thank the
Ukrainian presidency for the invitation to participate in
this open debate on an issue of such importance to the
international community.

Terrorism cannot be tackled solely through the
enforcement of defence or security measures. Instead,
a comprehensive approach should be taken — such as
that reflected in the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy — based on the balanced
implementation of the four pillars of the strategy,
within the unrestricted respect for international
law, international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and international refugee law.
Critical infrastructure are those that are
indispensable for the proper functioning of essential
services for society: health, security, defence, the
social and economic well-being of citizens and for
the effective functioning of the State, whose total or
partial destruction or disruption affects or significantly
impacts those services. We therefore welcome the
approach chosen for this debate, due to the urgency
of the threat posed by terrorism to the vital services
and infrastructure of our countries. In that regard,
there is a need for greater cooperation, coordination
and information exchange among agencies and
organizations within each country, as well as among
the various countries. There is also a need to adapt to
the changing nature of the terrorist threat, physical
and cybernetic.
We welcome resolution 2341 (2017), which the
Council adopted this morning and which is the first
to focus specifically on the issue of the protection of
critical infrastructure. We agree on the need to call on
States to develop and improve their strategies for risk
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

assessment and risk reduction and to cooperate in this
regard. Collaboration between the public and private
sectors in this area is also key to mitigating risk and
preventing attacks on this type of infrastructure.
Aware of the importance of addressing this problem
without delay, our authorities have set up a working
group within the Ministry of Modernization to draw
up guidelines for an action plan for the identification
and development of regulations and measures for
the protection of critical infrastructure, including
information infrastructure. The working group should
determine the criteria for identifying infrastructure,
the sectors involved, and the regulatory bodies and
companies or organizations responsible. The group
will also develop a working methodology to carry out
a risk assessment and establish measures to manage
those risks. An inter-institutional approach involving
all relevant sectors will be taken.
With respect to cybersecurity, we are of the
view that achieving adequate levels of security in
the digital universe is essential for information and
communication technologies (ICTs) to reach their full
potential. A strong commitment from the international
community is required to avoid and limit the misuse
of technological tools by various State and non-State
actors. We must take into account, however, that there
is a broad spectrum of non-State actors that carry out
network security attacks using ICTs. Those actors
range from terrorist groups and transnational criminal
organizations to individual offenders. Responses to
these threats require specific and separate international
legal instruments to articulate effective international
cooperation systems in the prevention, prosecution and
criminal repression of such conduct.
Finally, we reaffirm the central role of the United
Nations in the fight against terrorism, as the pillar of
the multilateral system of universal composition,and
having the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. We are convinced
that multilateral action, through the United Nations,
in accordance with the principles of the Organization,
will enable us to address the threat of terrorism in
full respect for international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, and to achieve a more
secure world for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.

S/PV.7882

Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The open-ended
litany of terrorist attacks in cities and villages continues
to remind us of the threat of terrorist attacks to civilian
infrastructure and to civilian populations. This wave of
terror, which considers innocent civilians as legitimate
targets of violence, either directly or indirectly, through
the destruction of the civil infrastructure on which
we depend, must be counteracted by the actions by a
unified international community.
Recent conflicts in the area of ancient Mesopotamia
have had a devastating impact on ancient ethnic,
religious and cultural minorities that for millenniums
have inhabited the region. Parties to those conflicts have
purposefully sought to destroy the cultural fabric and
the historical rootedness of those communities in the
region by destroying their religious and cultural heritage
sites. The intentional destruction of the infrastructure
critical to the survival of those communities, such
as schools, hospitals, water supplies and places of
worship, has become a strategy to annihilate them
collectively, immiserating and eradicating them by
attacking the structures that give them a modicum of
communal existence.
It is the obligation of the international community,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
to protect civilians and their critical infrastructure
from the brutality and barbarity of terrorist groups.
Part of that obligation is to heighten public awareness
of that terrorist tactic and to urge States to maintain
a high level of critical infrastructure protection and
resilience, as well as public preparedness, in the event
of an attack, and to prevent, as much as possible, the
disruption of critical services and the loss of human
life. My delegation therefore believes that this debate is
a response to such a need.
More effective and lasting measures to protect
critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks must
be based on policies that reject the unfettered pursuit
of profit and narrow geopolitical interests, even at the
cost of the destruction of critical civil infrastructure. In
that regard, my delegation wishes to reiterate the Holy
See’s appeal to weapon-producing nations to severely
limit and control the manufacture and sale of weapons,
ammunition and technologies to unstable countries
and regions of the world, where the likelihood of their
illegal use or their falling into the hands of non-State
actors remain a real and present danger.

17-0382135/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The international community must also address the
role of organized crime in the sale or barter of weapons
capable of destroying critical infrastructure. States
should be urged to collaborate in that area, at both
the international and the regional levels, through the
sharing of information and best practices, coordinated
policies and joint border controls.
The world must act to prevent terrorists from
having access to financial support from terror
sponsors. The borderless nature of the terrorist groups
perpetrating the destruction of critical infrastructure
requires the international community to control the
cybertechnologies that violent groups use to recruit
new adherents, finance their activities and coordinate
terrorist attacks.
Pope Francis has spoken on a number of occasions
of our age as a time of war, namely, a third world war
that is being fought piecemeal, one in which we daily
witness savage crimes, brutal massacres and senseless
destruction, like the destruction of infrastructure
critical to the existence of entire populations.
The international community must come together
as one to put an end to this war fought piecemeal. Such
unity is necessary if the international community is going
to achieve the shared objective of protecting critical
infrastructure against terrorist attacks. Our common
goal will be achieved most quickly and effectively
through an unselfish sharing of critical information and
best practices and of resources and technologies among
States, in particular with those States that are the least
capable of protecting their critical infrastructure and
populations from terrorist attacks.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank Ukraine for organizing this open debate, a
follow-up to the very useful Arria Formula meeting
held in November. I also wish to thank the speakers
for their briefings. Turkey welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2341 (2017), which it co-sponsored.
At the forefront of the fight against terrorism, Turkey
is currently fighting several terrorist organizations
simultaneously, We know only too well the deep
suffering, damage and loss of life caused to individuals,
families and society. More than 500 innocent lives were
lost and many more wounded owing to terrorist attacks
36/58

13/02/2017

by Da’esh and the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK) during
the past year and a half.
Terrorist organizations are very aware of
the potential damage that the attacks on critical
infrastructure can cause. Terrorist attacks targeting
critical infrastructure, including sectors such as the
energy, transport, telecommunications, defence and
chemical industries, not only cause human and material
loss, but they also carry the potential to disrupt public
safety and the delivery of key public services, thereby
affecting the functioning and well-being of societies, as
pointed out in the President’s concept note (S/2017/104,
annex).
Turkey is indeed a victim of such attacks. In June
2016, Da’esh targeted the Istanbul Atatürk Airport,
while the PKK has attacked water dams, pipelines,
health services and public and private institutions,
including schools, education facilities and medical
infrastructure. The PKK has also kidnapped civil
servants, including health, education and customs
personnel. Moreover, State institutions, including the
Turkish Parliament, were bombed by the Fethullah
Terrorist Organization during the foiled coup attempt
of 15 July 2016.
Faced with the serious threats posed by multiple
terrorist organizations, Turkey has taken certain
measures to protect the lives of its people, as well as
public and private institutions and investments. Turkey
attaches particular importance to the security of
critical energy infrastructure, owing to the country’s
increasing energy demands as a result of its evergrowing economy as well as its geostrategic position,
which provides a sustainable route between producer
regions and consumers. One measure that we took and
found useful was the establishment of committees for
the security of critical energy infrastructure and for
pipeline security, under the Ministry of Energy and
Natural Resources.
The protection of critical infrastructure from
terrorist attacks is a complex issue, involving both
public and private sectors and requiring the protection
of cross-border infrastructure and international
preparedness. International cooperation and the
sharing of best practices are therefore needed. That is
why many international and regional organizations,
including NATO, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the European Union, have
been focusing on the issue.
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

As a country that attaches importance to the
centrality of the work of the United Nations in global
counter-terrorism efforts, we note that the protection
of critical infrastructure was also one of the goals
included in the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, adopted in 2006. We thank the Chef
de Cabinet of the Secretary-General for an overview of
the work of the United Nations on that issue. We hope
that the United Nations will pursue further its efforts to
that end in close coordination with other international
and regional organizations dealing with the matter.
In that connection, I would also like to mention
the importance of protecting soft targets, which
include religious centres, tourist sites and public
surface transportation facilities, as well as business
and commercial facilities, such as hotels, restaurants,
stadiums and entertainment venues, where people
come together and which are relatively vulnerable to
terrorist attacks owing to their open access and limited
security. Concerns about protecting soft targets are
not new. However, terrorist groups increasingly target
such venues, as we have seen in the terrorist attacks
perpetrated in Istanbul near a football stadium in
December 2016 and in a night club on 1 January
2017, which claimed the lives of many Turkish and
foreign nationals.
In that regard, the inaugural meeting of the
“Protection of Soft Targets in a Counterterrorism Context
Initiative”, co-led by the United States and Turkey
under the auspices of the Global Counterterrorism
Forum, was held in Antalya, Turkey, in December 2016.
We hope that the set of good practices to enhance the
security and resilience of sites that are potential soft
targets, which is to be developed within the framework
of the initiative as a result of region-specific workshops
to be held throughout 2017, can serve as the basis for
international engagement, assistance and training so as
to enhance the security and resilience of sites that are
potential soft targets.
As I emphasized, the protection of critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks is a challenge that
we need to confront together. International cooperation
is vital. We support the work being done in that area
in international and regional organizations. We believe
that the United Nations and its agencies have a special
role to play in that regard. We stand ready to support
any initiatives that could be taken to that end.

S/PV.7882

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Cuba aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Our country reiterates its unwavering willingness
to combat terrorism and expresses its categorical
rejection and condemnation of all terrorist acts, methods
and practices in all their forms and manifestations,
irrespective of motivations, including State-sponsored
terrorism. Cuba, in compliance with the 18 international
conventions pertaining to terrorism to which it is a State
party, has carried out relevant legal measures, such as
law 93 on acts of terrorism. The Cuban people bear the
scars of terrorist acts organized, financed and executed
from abroad which have resulted in a toll of 3,478 dead
and 2,099 disabled.
The Cuban Government has never allowed, nor will
it ever allow, the use of its national territory to carry
out, plan, support, conceal or finance acts of terrorism
targeting any other State, without exception. Our
country supports the adoption of a general convention on
terrorism and favours the convening of an international
conference, under the auspices of the United Nations,
that would allow us to reach a multilaterally agreed
response to terrorism. We reject and condemn the
double standards and selectivity in the treatment of
this issue. Combatting terrorism cannot be used as a
pretext for interference, interventionism, aggression or
violations of international and human rights law.
We call for an end to the financing, equipping,
training of, supplying of arms and support of any kind
to terrorist groups in all their forms. In the light of
the militarization of cyberspace and the proliferation
of cybercrime and cyberterrorism, it is increasingly
urgent for States to ensure that information and
communication technology, the Internet, television,
radio and other parts of their critical infrastructure are
not used by terrorist groups.
As a result of growing interconnectivity, critical
information infrastructure is now exposed to an
increasing and more varied number of threats and
weaknesses, which pose new security challenges. The
use by State and non-State actors of new information
and communication technologies for purposes
incompatible with international peace and security is
a serious problem, which requires efforts by all States.

17-0382137/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The undercover and illegal use by individuals,
organizations and States of the information systems
of other nations in order to attack third countries has
the potential to trigger serious conflicts. The only way
to prevent and address these threats is through joint
cooperation among all States to ensure cybersecurity
and to protect critical infrastructure by supporting
national efforts aimed at strengthening human capacity,
creating more learning and employment opportunities,
and improving public services and the quality of life
of the population. We must achieve a legally binding
international instrument, within the United Nations
system, that regulates the use of information and
communications technology and ensures that it is
only used in accordance with international law and in
particular with the Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to thank Ukraine and its Minister for Foreign
Affairs for convening this important open debate on the
protection of critical infrastructure. Iraq also welcomes
today’s adoption of resolution 2341 (2017) , which Iraq
co-sponsored.
We must not attribute terrorism to any religion,
culture, nationality or geographical region, as affirmed
by numerous Security Council resolutions, the most
recent of which being resolution 2253 (2015). The
challenges represented by terrorist organizations,
such as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
terrorist gangs, emanate from their high organizational
capacity, which allows them to perpetrate terrorist
attacks in cyberspace that have a direct physical
impact on critical infrastructure. The attacks destroy
and impede the functionality of critical infrastructure
and cause serious damage. ISIS gangs are working to
strengthen their organizational capacities and strategies
aimed at recruiting supporters from developed
nations who have received an education in prestigious
Western universities. These highly educated recruits
allow terrorist organizations to carry out transborder
cyberattacks that evade all national restrictions, thereby
creating a reality in which there are in fact no borders.
Strengthening international cooperation in the
area of counter-terrorism is extremely important, in
particular because ISIS perpetrates its crimes through
decentralized networks. These gangs have increased
their technical capacities for the purpose of carrying out
38/58

13/02/2017

cyber attacks and have recruited foreign terrorists who
have advanced skills to carry out such complex attacks.
Among the most important trends that can be
observed in the conduct of terrorist organizations, in
particular of Da’esh terrorist gangs, is the continued
targeting of critical infrastructure in Iraq, including
bridges, power lines, telecommunications towers and
oil pipelines. Terrorism has impacted many projects
that constitute the backbone of Iraq’s infrastructure.
Terrorists have also burned monuments, mosques and
universities. Such terrorist attacks have increased the
cost of development projects because of the growing cost
of security measures necessary to protect construction
sites. The targeting of oil facilities and refineries in
Iraq in areas that witness many terrorist attacks is
one of the most serious attacks on Iraq’s economy and
infrastructure because the country depends primarily
on revenue from oil.
The liberation of Iraqi cities that were previously
controlled by Da’esh gangs usually comes at great
economic cost. In the battle to reclaim Mosul, ISIS
gangs planted mines and explosive devices in citizens’
homes and in public buildings and on bridges to destroy
them and prevent security forces from advancing
towards these cities and towns. These challenges have
grown as oil prices have fallen on the global market,
since petroleum revenues form the core of Iraq’s
national budget.
In conclusion, my Government is deeply grateful
for the active role and efforts of the global coalition,
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and
other international organizations, particularly the
United Nations Development Programme. We call on
the international community to make further efforts to
reconstruct the liberated areas of my country, restore
stability and rehabilitate our infrastructure, including
schools and hospitals.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
Ukrainian presidency for organizing this open debate
and the briefers for their insights.
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Resolution 2341 (2017), adopted today, will help
to create further impetus towards protecting critical
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

infrastructure from terrorist attacks. The resolution
comes at a time when there have been reports of terrorists
making increasing and sophisticated attempts to find
access to and attack critical infrastructure. The need to
conduct security analyses for critical infrastructure has
become all the more important to enhancing resilience
and preparedness in the wake of some recent terrorist
attacks in international airports and the targeting of
other critical infrastructure.
Today’s open debate has been useful in highlighting
a number of ongoing national and regional initiatives,
especially in the context of growing interdependencies
among critical infrastructure sectors. We take note
of the work being carried out in different critical
infrastructure sectors, including industry and supplychain management, civic amenities, cross-border
transportation and the cybersphere. Such work should
form a useful repository of good practices and help to
inform further legislative work that remains to be done
at the international level, particularly on cybersecurity.
The environmental consequences of terrorist attacks on
critical infrastructure, especially in densely populated
city centres, underscore the complexity of the challenges
before us.
In Bangladesh, our authorities concerned shall
continue to further study resolution 2341 (2017) in order
to identify existing gaps, challenges and strengths at
the national level in terms of addressing the possible
vulnerabilities of our critical infrastructure to terrorist
attacks. We remain mindful of the overwhelmingly
transnational nature of most threats to critical
infrastructure, and open to strengthening regional and
subregional cooperation to that effect. In the areas of
our evident capacity constraints, many Member States
in a comparable situation will continue to rely on the
United Nations as both a first responder and a consistent
provider of capacity-building assistance, including for
contingency measures.
In the context of building our national-level
preparedness, we have been working with the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force and various
relevant United Nations entities in the areas of nuclear
security, maritime and aviation security, combating
the financing of terrorism, and cybersecurity. Such
capacity-building work has been critical in terms of
making our concerned agencies and other stakeholders
better aware of the existing international legal and
normative frameworks. They have also helped to
conduct mapping of the various mutually reinforcing

S/PV.7882

strands of work by different entities that may benefit
from further coordination and coherence. We look
forward to drawing upon such work towards developing
a national strategic approach to pre-empting and
preventing terrorist attacks and threats against critical
infrastructure. The work done to protect infrastructure
from criminal acts and natural hazards should also
contribute to these efforts.
The primacy of risk assessment, early warning
and information-sharing in the protection of critical
infrastructure and civilians need not be overemphasized.
Bangladesh remains a reliable partner of the international
community in the area of information-sharing, in
conformity with our Prime Minister’s zero-tolerance
approach to terrorism in all forms and manifestations.
We urge the Counter-Terrorism Committee, including
its Executive Directorate, to undertake consultations
with national and regional actors, while taking stock
of Member States’ efforts, with a view to drawing on
evidence-based, substantiated information.
The critical importance of forging partnerships
between the public and private sectors has been
underlined by almost all delegations. Bangladesh
is keen to participate in and learn from relevant
international and regional forums bringing together
representatives from the public and private sectors to
promote synergistic approaches through their work. We
acknowledge the potential merit of further developing
certain
international
emergency-preparedness
standards that the private sector may be required to
comply with.
Against the backdrop of rapidly evolving
terrorist threats, we underscore the need to facilitate
knowledge-sharing and technology transfers in the
spirit of effective international cooperation and
partnership. While all Member States must continue to
assume their primary responsibility to address terrorist
threats to major infrastructure, much of our collective
success will critically hinge on the need-based support
to be made available to developing and least developed
countries by the concerned development partners,
including the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by thanking the
delegation of Ukraine for convening today’s debate on
such an important issue.

17-0382139/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Among the myriad threats endangering global
security, terrorism has emerged as one of the most
complex and imposing challenges of our times. Our
dependence on critical infrastructure makes this an
attractive target for terrorists of all stripes. Terrorist
attacks on infrastructure aim to disrupt life, cause
widespread fear and chaos, retard socioeconomic
development
and
impede
regional
economic
cooperation. Advances in the world of communications
technologies, making the world interdependent as
well as interconnected, and the increasing use of
encrypted communications by terrorist organizations
like Da’esh have amplified the threat of a terrorist
attack on financial and energy hubs. National resolve
and collective endeavour are necessary to protect
the infrastructure that is essential to the welfare and
progress of our peoples.
My country has confronted and combatted terrorism
over several decades with courage and conviction. Our
resilience has been tested time and time again, from
the barbaric attack on the Marriott Hotel in Islamabad
in 2008 to the destruction of military equipment in the
attack on an air force base in Kamra in 2012 and the
attack on Karachi airport in 2014. These attacks were
aimed at destroying and disrupting the lives of my
people, weakening our defence forces and demoralizing
the nation, but they only strengthened the resolve of our
people to continue their efforts to eliminate this scourge.
Over the past four years, Pakistan has adopted
a multipronged strategy. A military-led operation
called Zarb-e-Azb has successfully destroyed terrorist
infrastructure, and a national action plan — undergirded
by a strong national consensus — has effectively sought
to counter the narrative of terrorist and extremist
organizations. That comprehensive approach has
succeeded in expelling terrorist organizations from our
territory and greatly constrained their ability to carry
out lethal attacks, as evident from the dramatic decline
in the number of such attacks, despite this morning’s
cowardly terrorist attack in Lahore. What Pakistan
continues to face today are increasingly and externally
supported terrorists. One of their principal targets is
the major infrastructure that we are currently building
in Pakistan. Their aim is to undermine our economic
accomplishments and stability.
State control of infrastructure systems and its role
in determining how to effectively protect infrastructure
are critical. The diversity of the threat requires a
coherent response by all national stakeholders based
40/58

13/02/2017

on the specific environment of each individual country.
International and regional organizations and regional
cooperation also remain vital in countering the threat
of terrorism. At the regional level, the sharing of
information and threat assessments, as well as effective
border management and the sharing of best practices,
can significantly enhance national capacities to deter
and defeat terrorism.
It was in that spirit that my country joined the
Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism of
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC). However, unfortunately, SAARC as an
organization has become a victim of the hostile agenda
of some of our neighbours, which has severely hampered
the ability of our region to respond to the multiple
challenges it faces, including the challenge of terrorism.
Although we remain committed to strengthening
regional cooperation to combat terrorism, Pakistan
continues to suffer from regional terrorist attacks
that are supported by forces within the region. We are
determined to repel, and are fully capable of repelling,
such State-sponsored terrorism.
The United Nations can, and should, play a role
in enhancing Member States’ capacities in their
counter-terrorism efforts. The Working Group on the
Protection of Critical Infrastructure of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force is playing a
positive role in that regard. The United Nations also
provides a platform for assisting Member States in
identifying potential facilities-related threats and risks
and in developing sound strategies and partnerships to
implement those plans.
In addressing the terrorist threat, it is essential for
the global community to analyse and understand the
phenomenon of terrorism in all its complexities. The
global campaign against terrorism cannot be reduced
to a slogan slandering Islam or any other religion or
race. It is also important to examine the reasons that,
despite the global campaign to counter terrorism, the
threat continues to evolve and emerge in new and more
virulent and toxic forms and ideologies and across
ever-extending geographic regions, thereby posing a
pervasive threat to international and national peace
and security.
Pakistan remains convinced that in order to defeat
and eliminate terrorism it is essential to address
the underlying causes that create terrorist recruits:
unresolved internal and inter-State conflicts, the illegal
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7882

use of force, external aggression and intervention,
foreign occupation, denial of the right to selfdetermination, political and economic injustice and
the marginalization and alienation of communities and
groups. It is only by addressing those underlying causes
that the international community can erode the appeal
of the narratives of hate and hostility that provide the
oxygen for the existence and the growth of terrorism.

The Warsaw Summit commitment therefore
underlined the need to provide continued support
for partners and improve cooperation with other
international organizations in order to address
vulnerabilities and make the alliance, NATO’s
neighbourhood and the wider international system more
secure. No single entity holds all the tools necessary to
achieve resilience.

The President: I now give the floor to Meszaros.

Accordingly, we are working with the European
Union to bolster resilience to hybrid threats and are
offering capacity-building assistance to partners in
Eastern Europe, South-East Europe, North Africa and
the Middle East, particularly in establishing robust
crisis-management systems and in training. We are
taking this work forward by engaging our partner
nations, the private sector and our counterparts in the
European Union on the resilience-baseline requirements
so as to ensure transparency and compatibility and to
foster a sense of shared responsibility.

Mr. Meszaros: The North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) allies and the international
community as a whole confront a wide range of terrorist
challenges that pose a direct threat to the security of our
populations and to international stability and prosperity
more broadly. We have faced terrible terrorist attacks
on our soils and in our cities. In the changing security
environment, NATO is strengthening its capabilities
for deterrence and defence. That means investing in
and improving military capabilities, but it also means
improving nations’ resilience to the full range of
threats, especially those that are aimed directly at soft
targets, such as our civilian populations, our critical
infrastructure, our cybernetworks and our essential
Government functions. That is why at the Warsaw
Summit NATO Heads of State and Government
committed to enhancing resilience in those and other
critical areas.
More important, from the perspective of
critical-infrastructure protection, NATO nations
agreed to meet resilience requirements in seven
sectors: continuity of Government, energy supplies,
civilian supplies, civilian transportation systems, civilcommunication services, food and water supplies and
the ability to deal with mass casualties and large-scale
refugee movements. Those requirements define the
level of resilience that allies require in order to be able
to counter the full range of threats. NATO member
nations are now doing what is necessary to meet
those requirements.
For NATO, building resilience is in the spirit of
article 3 of the founding Washington Treaty, which
obligates every ally to do what is necessary in order
to be able to resist attack. But in an age of global
interconnectedness, we note that our own resilience is
directly linked to the resilience of our neighbours. That
is why NATO’s work to improve resilience and protect
critical infrastructure also includes our partners. If our
partners are more resilient, NATO will be more secure.

NATO can act as a platform for allies and partners
to share expertise and best practices, but also eventually
to provide training and awareness-raising in the area of
the protection of critical infrastructure and on wider
counter-terrorism issues. We stand ready to share
best practices and lessons learned as appropriate with
the relevant United Nations bodies, in particular the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the
Working Group under its auspices. Taking into account
our interconnectedness with others, we consider
resilience and critical-infrastructure protection to be a
shared responsibility, and we stand ready to contribute
NATO’s experience and expertise to the wider
international efforts to enhance resilience.
The President: I thank Mr. Meznaros for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like to thank you, Sir, and congratulate you on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. We
would also like to congratulate you on the adoption of
resolution 2341 (2017) this morning. Let me also take
this opportunity to thank the Swedish presidency of the
Security Council during January.
Turning to the topic of today’s debate, I would like
to thank you for the concept note that your delegation
has provided (S/2017/104, annex), as well as all previous
speakers for their constructive statements.

17-0382141/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Terrorism
is
a
danger
that
threatens
international peace and security and targets innocent
civilians — women, children and the elderly — as well
as critical civilian infrastructure. In 2015, we suffered
a terrorist attack in Kuwait that targeted religious
institutions and caused many casualties. In 1990, while
our country was occupied by Iraq, oil sites were targeted,
thereby undermining our country’s environment. That
is why we called for the designation of 6 November as
the International Day for Preventing the Exploitation of
the Environment in War and Armed Conflict.
Kuwait has undertaken many measures to protect
its infrastructure. We support the efforts of the
international community to combat the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant. We condemn terrorism in all
of its forms and manifestations. Terrorist acts are
unjustifiable. They cannot be linked to any religion
or nationality. The fight against terrorism requires
bolstering international efforts, while also fully
complying with human rights, the rule of law, good
governance, peaceful coexistence among religions and
respect for all religious symbolism. In that respect, we
stress the need for the implementation of, inter alia,
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1963 (2010), 2129 (2013) and
2322 (2016).
We also stress the need to implement the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and support the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate along
such lines. We emphasize the importance of technical
assistance and capacity-building aimed at protecting
critical infrastructure while strengthening dialogue
between countries and regional and international
organizations with a view to exchanging best practices
and drawing upon each other’s experiences. We also
note the importance of international cooperation with
INTERPOL, inter alia, in the area of information- and
expertise-exchange in order to combat terrorism and
improve the protection of critical infrastructure.
We urge all Member States to draw upon the work of
United Nations programmes and specialized agencies,
as well as regional and international organizations.
Critical infrastructure across the world is a particular
target for terrorists, as its connectivity makes it more
vulnerable to attacks. Information technology entities,
when attacked, can become a multiplying factor for
danger. That is why there must be cooperation among
Governments to devise emergency plans.
42/58

13/02/2017

Here we would take note of resolution 2286 (2016),
on the protection of medical facilities, personnel and
equipment in armed conflict. The resolution is fully in
line with international humanitarian law and human
rights law.
In spite of terrorism continuing unabated and
the fact that ISIL is still continuing with its heinous
acts, in addition to those committed by Boko Haram,
Al-Shabaab and the Al-Nusra Front, in Yemen, Syria,
Iraq, Libya, Somalia, these groups continue to lose
ground in many regions across the world, as noted in
the Secretary-General’s report contained in document
S/2017/97. We stress the importance of collective action
to rebuild critical infrastructure, and we highlight
Kuwait’s assistance to displaced persons and refugees,
as well as the need to rebuild critical infrastructure
destroyed by terrorism, so as to ensure that life goes
back to normal in hospitals and schools that have been
struck as well as other sites.
Finally, we reiterate that our unchanged position
of condemning terrorism and stress the importance of
international law, the four Geneva Conventions and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, as well as
international cooperation within the United Nations to
tackle this threat.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): In order to ensure the
smooth running of this meeting, I will now read a
summarized version of the statement that the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela has the honour to address to the
Council on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. The
complete text of the statement will be published on the
page of the presidency of the Coordinating Bureau of the
Movement. After reading out the summarized version,
I will then make a few remarks in my national capacity.
First and foremost, I should like, on behalf of the
States members of the Non-Aligned Movement, to
convey our respects to Mr. Pavlo Klimkin, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine. We also wish the
Ukrainian delegation and Ambassador Volodymyr
Yelchenko a very successful month in guiding the
work of the Security Council. I wish also to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the very diligent way in
which the Swedish delegation, under the leadership of
Ambassador Skoog, led the work of the Council during
the month of January.
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

During the seventeenth summit of the Non-Aligned
Movement, held in September 2016 on Margarita
Island, Venezuela, the Heads of State and Government
reaffirmed that terrorism constitutes one of the major
threats to international peace and security and reiterated
that any act of terrorism is criminal and unjustifiable,
irrespective of its motives and of wherever, whenever
and by whomsoever committed, as it also constitutes a
flagrant violation of international law.
By the same token, the Heads of State and
Government reaffirmed that terrorism cannot and
should not be associated with any religion, nationality,
civilization or ethnic group, nor should such
associations be used to justify terrorism or measures to
fight it, including, inter alia, profiling or intrusions into
individual privacy.
The most recent terrorist attacks, particularly those
committed by Da’esh, demonstrate that vulnerability
to this scourge and to the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters is now global. In this regard, it
should be noted that the destruction of the physical and
economic infrastructure of States, including critical
infrastructure, has always been a major goal of terrorist
groups. This sows terror among the general public and
also generates massive publicity at the global level.
The protection of critical infrastructure plays
a significant role in the fight against terrorism
and its prevention and could be incorporated in a
comprehensive way into national plans to combat this
scourge and prevent it. We therefore need to strengthen
international and regional cooperation, in particular
through the adoption of timely and effective measures
to eliminate this scourge and the establishment of
relevant partnerships; this will be very important.
The Movement is of the view that the fight against
terrorism must be waged in strict adherence to existing
regional and international instruments in this area,
including the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, human rights and fundamental
freedoms, in line with the rule of law and obligations
under international law.
Moreover, the provision of technical assistance, on
request, for capacity-building and the development of
appropriate infrastructure, mechanisms and processes,
including through the exchange of information, good
practices and the identification of areas of vulnerability,
will all be decisive in the fight against terrorism.

S/PV.7882

In this regard, the support and the resources that
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre could
provide to Member States upon request and in line with
its mandate would be very useful in efforts to combat
and prevent terrorism. The same is true of the expertise
that could be provided to Member States that make such
a request by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force Working Group on Protection of Critical
Infrastructure including Vulnerable Targets, Internet
and Tourism Security.
In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement
reiterates its full commitment to the fight against
terrorism. It is important that we undertake such efforts
in a frank, decisive and coordinated manner, including
through the full and balanced implementation of the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Likewise, we must also
adopt in the near future a comprehensive convention
on international terrorism under the auspices of the
United Nations, which would strengthen multilateral
cooperation in this area.
I should now like to make a few remarks in my
national capacity.
We wish to emphasize the fact that Venezuela’s
position in response to the threat posed by terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations has been reiterated on
various occasions in the bodies charged with addressing
this issue. We have always robustly condemned terrorist
acts, irrespective of their motivations or perpetrators,
because of their egregious effects on international peace
and security, human rights and development. During
our membership in the Security Council, we lobbied
hard for the strengthening of international cooperation
efforts to prevent, combat and eliminate the horrific
phenomenon that is terrorism. We also made it clear
that we needed to take a comprehensive approach to the
issue of terrorism.
We welcome the adoption today of resolution 2341
(2017) as well as the resolutions adopted by the Council
last year, particularly resolution 2286 (2016), on the
protection of hospitals and humanitarian personnel in
conflict situations.
We are convinced that an effective fight against
terrorism requires a shift away from the policy of
double standards and other misconceptions that
hamper the united efforts of Member States to achieve
concrete results for international peace and security.
Unfortunately, in recent years terrorism has been

17-0382143/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

boosted by interventionism and the armed aggression
of foreign Powers, of which fraternal countries such as
Iraq, Libya and Syria, among others, have been victim.
This is aimed at overthrowing legitimately established
Governments and has provoked the collapse of the
institutional fabric of those States and made them
vulnerable to violence and to the narrative of hatred
and intolerance promoted by terrorist groups.
Nor can we ignore the terrorist acts perpetrated
by State actors, such as the terror sown by the Israeli
military aggression almost three years ago against
the Palestinian population of the Gaza Strip. That
caused the loss of human lives, including women and
children, and the destruction of critical infrastructure
essential for the alleviation of the already dramatic
humanitarian situation of the Palestinians resulting
from the imposition of an illegal blockade since 2007.
Hospitals, drinking water services, access roads and
schools, among other targets, were indiscriminately
and deliberately bombed during that armed conflict
to punish and attack all the civilian population. The
aftermath of the destruction continues to be felt today.
It manifests itself in a population beset by despair as
they confront a reconstruction process hampered by the
policies of the Israeli authorities that block access to
materials and services.
For that reason, when we speak of the prevention
and fight against terrorist barbarism, it is necessary to
bear in mind that policies of interventionism and foreign
occupation are a fundamental cause of instability,
and therefore constitute favourable conditions that
contribute to the birth and expansion of violent
non-State actors who become terrorist groups. In that
regard, we call for the cessation of armed aggression
and interventionism in the internal affairs of countries
as illegal practices of foreign policy as elements of
power at the international level.

13/02/2017

against the civilian population, and massive violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
Those opprobrious acts constitute a list of war crimes.
The fight against terrorism in general and the
protection of critical infrastructure in particular
requires that the international community activate
a global strategy against terrorism that includes, on
the one hand, a genuine cooperation scheme based
on international law, and, on the other, an impetus to
national public policies to prevent and combat terrorist
acts. Those must be designed and implemented in
accordance with the rule of law, including respect for
human rights and without generating discrimination or
prejudiced views of an ethnic or religious nature that
could be a breeding ground for resentment and violent
extremism promoted by terrorist groups. In that regard,
we sympathize with those countries whose citizens may
be included in restrictive lists for no other reason than
their national origin and religious faith. We believe that
this approach is not an appropriate way to deal with the
terrorist threat.
Finally, we reiterate that the United Nations and
its States Members are responsible for overseeing
the effective and timely implementation of General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions and of
the obligations arising from the relevant international
treaties in order to address this global phenomenon and
to safeguard critical infrastructure and the population
from the indiscriminate violence of terrorist groups.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.

Likewise, any sincere discussion about the scope of
the strategy to successfully confront the terrorist threat
necessarily involves recognizing the current problem of
financing, training and supplying weapons to violent
non-State actors by foreign Powers.

Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin my statement today by thanking Ukraine
for organizing this open debate and by congratulating it
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I wish it every success. We also thank the
briefers for their statements. In Jordan we too welcome
the adoption of resolution 2341 (2017) today, which
will undoubtedly represent an important addition to the
current state of work in combating terrorism in general
and in increasing protection for critical infrastructure
in particular.

Those factors have had a serious impact on the
peace, stability and development of Syria, Iraq, Libya
and other nations affected by terrorism, with the wellknown consequences of the destruction of critical
infrastructure, including the productive apparatus
and cultural heritage, the use of chemical weapons

Terrorism continues to be one of the most important
threats to world peace and security. The horrendous
attacks around the world by entities such as Da’esh and
the growing phenomemon of foreign fighters are proof
of the global nature of terrorism, which now targets
critical infrastructure as well as individuals. We have

44/58

17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7882

seen the targeting of tourist sites and airports, seaports,
oil facilities, energy plants, water facilities, bridges and
roads and information systems. These all directly impact
other service sectors and lead to a situation of fear and
distrust towards State institutions. Therefore we cannot
separate the protection of critical infrastructure from
the general framework of countering terrorism, and we
must protect infrastructure as an integral part of all
efforts aimed at improving security and the protection
of all potential targets.

convinced that terrorism can be eliminated only
through a common international effort and the sincere
political will of all parties.

That should be done by implementing the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in addition
to including and developing national plans on counterterrorism to include protection of critical infrastructure.
In that context, we must emphasize the importance of
strengthening international and regional cooperation
in responding to that threat, and of protecting lives
and infrastructure more effectively through moving
forward in developing the mechanisms that could
build capacities in countries so that they can protect
their infrastructure, and through sharing information,
experience and intelligence between the United Nations
and other organizations, such as INTERPOL.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Venezuela on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

In that regard, we reiterate our support for the
Secretary-General in establishing an office for
countering terrorism. We hope that it will strengthen
United Nations efforts, increase their coherence
in countering terrorism and guarantee a balanced
implementation of the United Nations Strategy. We
reiterate the importance of continuing the Working
Group on Infrastructure Protection so that it can
continue to support countries to combat terrorism in an
international context, by activating public and private
sector partnerships and by developing an expert panel
on information systems in this connection.
We believe that human resources are the most
important factor in countering terrorism and protecting
infrastructure from armed attacks or through social
networks. In alliance with NATO, Jordan held a workshop
on investing in human resources as a most important
priority to counter terrorism through spreading values
of coexistence and tolerance, particularly in the minds
and hearts of youth.
In conclusion, I emphasize Jordan’s continued
approach to counter-terrorism in seeking to uproot
terrorism from its sources. We have always emphasized
the importance of increasing cooperation among
all parties to confront this scourge, because we are

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Bessedik (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to congratulate Ukraine on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
to wish the Ukrainian delegation every success.

(spoke in English)
I would like to express my delegation’s appreciation
for the convening of today’s open debate and the
relevant choice of topic, one whose connection to the
security of my country and the life and well-being
of my people is critically important. We would like
to take this opportunity to once again reiterate our
strong condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of motive and wherever,
whenever and by whomever it is committed. Algeria
also reiterates its determination to continue fighting
terrorism and violent extremism, as well as warning
against any misconceptions or tendentious associations
of terrorism with specific religions, civilizations or
geographic areas.
From our point of view, the fight against violent
extremism and terrorism must also include the fight
against xenophobia and Islamophobia. Algeria strongly
believes that preventing and combating terrorism,
including protecting critical infrastructure from
terrorist attacks and threats, require a high level of
vigilance and mobilization. It is clear that this battle
cannot be limited exclusively to the security dimension;
it must deploy a coherent national strategy, upstream
and downstream.
In the specific area of the protection of infrastructure,
Algeria has enacted significant qualitative measures
and made major efforts that have helped to ensure a
secure environment for all its infrastructure, public and
private. We won our battle against terrorism, a scourge
that affected much of our national infrastructure during
the 1990s. In addition, we have taken significant steps
to ensure the security of our borders. The protection of
our infrastructure remains at the heart of our national
strategy, through action that is well coordinated among

17-0382145/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the various security forces, each in its specific field
of action.
Resolution 2341 (2017), adopted earlier today,
puts the emphasis on international cooperation and
timely information-sharing. For its part, Algeria’s
efforts to combat terrorism and to improve regional
and international awareness and cooperation in
that connection predate the manifestation of major
international acts of terrorism. From the beginning, we
have striven to strengthen anti-terrorism efforts at the
national, regional and international levels. We would
like to underline the importance of consolidating efforts
with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy by enhancing cooperation at bilateral, regional
and international levels, strengthening capabilities
and exchanging best practices and expertise on
combating terrorism.
Algeria continues to make every effort to enhance
coordination and cooperation, especially in the Sahel
region. The current context requires both coordination
and strengthening the capacities of the countries of
the region on the basis of the principle of ownership.
Algeria has engaged in a concerted approach via
many cooperation mechanisms, thereby ensuring a
great contribution to facilitating the deepening of
security cooperation among the countries concerned,
by coordinating and strengthening border-control
measures and sharing intelligence. The significant
military forces deployed at Algeria’s borders participate
in the Government’s efforts to ensure not just our own
national security but also that of our neighbours.
While we support the importance of protecting
critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks, we
firmly believe that the battle against that dreadful
scourge must be waged every day and in every area
of activity, whether political, institutional, economic,
cultural, religious, educational or social. Any hope of
success requires the active involvement of all national
institutions, all societal stakeholders and all citizens.
Lastly, Algeria will remain actively engaged in
efforts to counter terrorism and violent extremism
at every level, and will contribute constructively to
advancing efforts to put an end to terrorism, including
through the work of the General Assembly.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
46/58

13/02/2017

Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s important meeting. I would like
to affirm Syria’s support for the Security Council’s
credible and genuine efforts to combat terrorism, which
reflects the international unanimity about the fact that
today terrorism is one of the world’s greatest challenges,
and that the international community, through the
United Nations and the Security Council, must do its
part to coordinate our efforts and cooperation aimed at
countering terrorism and extremist ideology. The war
against terrorism is a cultural and information battle,
not just a military one.
For the sixth consecutive year, my country has been
a target for terrorism through the systematic destruction
of its technological and educational installations,
economic, cultural and social infrastructure and
historic sites. This atrocious assault has targeted dozens
of hospitals, medical buildings, schools, universities
and other centres of culture and education, besides
destroying power stations, road networks, bridges,
railways and telecommunications and Internet links.
Terrorist armed groups, with the support of
known Governments, have continued to commit their
terrible acts, some of the worst of which have been the
targeting of historical, religious and civilizational sites
in Syria, particularly in Palmyra, Aleppo, Maaloula
and Idlib, destroying or mutilating many ancient and
historic sites and monuments — churches, convents,
mosques, temples, mausoleums and theatres, all
defaced or destroyed in a barbaric manner. None of this
has anything to do with human civilization. From the
very beginning, certain Governments have partnered
terrorists in Syria by financing and manipulating them,
or by imposing coercive, unilateral economic measures
against the Syrian people. That has had a devastating
effect on various service sectors, on the economy,
education and health, and on Syrians’ lives. It also
reduced the Syrian Government’s ability to meet its
citizens’ needs. To all that must be added the crimes
committed by armed terrorist groups against Syria and
its people and infrastructure.
The unfortunate irony is that the very Governments
that utilize the United Nations as a platform attempt
to talk about the humanitarian tragedy experienced
by the Syrian people are themselves causing it. In
the framework of the very same policy, they target
Syrian infrastructure. Illegal military intervention
occurs under the guise of what is referred to as the
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

international coalition, which violates the Charter of
the United Nations and international law and targets
Syria. These individuals justify their actions — which
violate Article 51 of the Charter and the sovereignty
of Syria — by professing to fight Da’esh or against
terrorism in general,
We have sent many letters to the Secretary-General
and to the President of the Security Council that contain
accurate information and statistics on the harm inflicted
on civilian Syrians and the damage to economic
infrastructure, social services, education and oil and
gas refineries, damage totalling more than $120 billion.
Such damage was caused by the atrocities, the military
and air strikes by the so-called international coalition,
targeting the Syrian people and their infrastructure.
The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates its appeal to
the United Nations and the international community
to implement Security Council resolutions seeking to
combat terrorism so as to prevent terrorists, sponsored
by others, from receiving financial, technological,
telecommunications and other support given in the
name of personal agendas. Those Governments should
compensate the Syrian people and the Syrian Arab
Republic itself for destruction of Syrian infrastructure.
If not, Security Council resolutions and statements
by the representatives of Member States will not go
beyond the Council Chamber and the Organization’s
official records and other documents. That would
send the wrong message to terrorists and the sponsors
of terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s important open
debate on the protection of critical infrastructure
against terrorist attacks.
The Netherlands aligns itself with the statement
made earlier by the observer of the European Union.
We also support the statement made by His Excellency
Mr. Vincenzo Amendola, Undersecretary of State of
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Italy,
in the context of the split term in the Security Council
for the period 2017-2018.
I will focus on our national approach to protect our
own critical infrastructure, on some lessons derived
from it and on the need for international cooperation.
My full text will be available via Twitter.

S/PV.7882

In our national approach, we believe that it is
important to have a comprehensive framework to
determine the threats that pose a danger to our national
security, including to our critical infrastructure. We
should have a comprehensive framework to address
those threats. The protection of a critical infrastructure is
part of the national security strategy in the Netherlands.
It is based on the answer to three questions. First, what
threatens us and how bad is it? Secondly, what are we
already doing to address the threats and what more can
and must we do? Thirdly, how do we implement the
necessary policies and strengthen our capacities?
The answer to the last question in particular is key,
and of course it is complicated. Eighty per cent of the
critical processes that make up our vital infrastructure
are owned by private actors. Engaging them is not a
choice, but a necessity. But many other actors, such as
semi-government bodies, play an important role as well.
In our approach, those critical providers, as we call them,
are themselves first and foremost responsible for the
continuity and resilience of the critical infrastructure
they own. The national Government provides legal and
policy frameworks and oversight and inspection.
There are some lessons that we drew from our
own national experiences in our own context. In the
Netherlands, we follow a general approach to the
protection of our critical infrastructure. This includes
the threat of terrorist attacks. By assessing the risks
of different types of threats in the same way, the risks
become comparable, and that makes it easier to prioritize.
With the help of the public and the private sectors, we
have compiled a complete list of critical infrastructure,
containing two categories of vital processes, A and B.
Disruption of A processes has greater consequences
than the disruption of B processes. That allows for
more effective and efficient allocation of means.
We also work with a counter-terrorism alert
system. If our intelligence services detect a serious
terrorist threat to a particular vital process, providers
and other stakeholders are immediately informed. At
that moment, predetermined, heightened security plans
are triggered to reduce the threat and limit the potential
effects of a terrorist attack.
That brings me to my third point, the need
for international cooperation. National efforts are
important, but a response to terrorist threats against
critical infrastructure can never be only national.
Critical infrastructure, such as airports, energy systems

17-0382147/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and the Internet, are international by their very nature,
and therefore our response to threats in that regard
should be equally international.
In that spirit, last week my Government approved
our first international cyberstrategy. It outlines where
and how to cooperate with international partners
to ensure a free and open cyberdomain, safe from
terrorists. According to our Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Koenders, by cooperating in coalitions
with other countries, we can better counter the threats
we face. Security Council resolution 2341 (2017),
which the Netherlands co-sponsored, was drafted in
the same spirit. I commend Ukraine for facilitating the
unanimous adoption of resolution today.
As mentioned in the resolution, the first important
step towards an international response is greater sharing
of information and know-how. We have to be creative
and think outside of the box to get the right people
around the table. The Netherlands currently co-chairs
the Global Counter Terrorism Forum together with
Morocco, and we are very supportive of the initiative
launched in that Forum by the United States and Turkey
on the protection of soft targets. Its focus is broader than
only critical infrastructure, with a set of non-binding
good practices that will be produced and be relevant for
the United Nations and its Member States in our future
work on today’s topic.

13/02/2017

General, Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, and to all
other briefers.
Brazil is aware that no country is immune
to terrorism and has been attentive to prevention
domestically and at the regional and subregional levels.
We recently updated our legislation to include the crimes
of preparatory acts of terrorism and of recruitment
of foreign terrorist combatants. We also simplified
the procedures for freezing the assets of terrorists so
listed by the Council. We were successful during the
2014 World Cup and in the last year’s Olympic Games,
when we consolidated inter-agency cooperation, at both
national and international levels, to specifically prevent
acts of terrorism or the entry of suspected terrorists to
critical places like airports.
Critical infrastructure is indeed a preferred target of
terrorist organizations. The disruption of the provision
of basic services can, after all, have a destabilizing
effect in our societies. As highlighted in the concept
note (S/2017/104, annex) prepared for this debate, one
of the side effects of the advances in information and
communication technologies (ICTs) is the increased
vulnerability of critical infrastructure. Establishing
norms that identify and proscribe the misuse of ICTs
and a framework to enhance cooperation among States
in countering it would contribute to better addressing
this challenge.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.

The United Nations Group of Governmental
Experts on Developments in the Field of Information
and Telecommunications in the Context of International
Security had called on the international community
to assist in improving the security of critical ICT
infrastructure, developing technical skills and advising
on appropriate legislation, strategies and regulation
in that area. The need to support capacity-building
in less developed countries is integral to any strategy
to combat the malicious use of ICTs, and will require
greater and sustainable investment in infrastructure
and services, capacity-building, the promotion of
joint research and the development and transfer of
technology. Differences in the ability to use and develop
ICTs represents a knowledge divide that perpetuates
inequalities, such as between developed and developing
countries, and that may increase vulnerabilities in an
interconnected world.

Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing today’s open debate. I would like to extend
my gratitude to the Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-

The use of the Internet and social media by terrorist
groups illustrates the evolving nature of the challenge
that we are facing. Those platforms are also being used

We must learn from our experiences to prevent
terrorist attacks against critical infrastructure as
much as possible. We must be well prepared in case an
unfortunate incident does occur. And, most important,
we must do all of that together. Terrorism knows no
boundaries; neither should our cooperation to fight
it. We should be better prepared. We should be better
protected. We should have stronger partnerships. We
should work better together.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands stands ready to
continue its cooperation with the United Nations and
its States Members in protecting our way of life from
terrorists. We will continue to be the Council’s partner
in making the world a safer place.

48/58

17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

for inciting hatred, for recruitment and for unleashing
attacks on critical infrastructure. As we seek to
counter those trends, we must safeguard the freedom
of expression and the right to privacy. In that context,
we highlight the joint initiative by Brazil and Germany
that led to the General Assembly and Human Rights
Council resolutions on that issue (resolution 68/167 and
resolution 28/16, respectively).
Repressive measures are necessary but not
sufficient to eliminating terrorism. Border control,
air and maritime security and law enforcement must
be coupled with efforts to address structural factors
conducive to terrorism — in particular those associated
with protracted social, political, economic and
cultural exclusion.
We must take action against measures that do not
respect diversity and ignore our common humanity,
such as those that associate terrorism with specific
cultures, religions or ethnic groups. We must be wary
of rhetoric that fuels xenophobia and prejudice. Certain
responses to the refugee crisis and to recent migration
movements are also of concern, as they might increase
rather than decrease the risks associated with violent
extremism conducive to terrorism.
Let us also not lose sight of the protracted conflicts
that may directly or indirectly fuel terrorist agendas.
The failure to deal with ongoing crises in the Middle
East, including the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, is a case
in point.
Terrorist groups seek to provoke Governments into
overreacting, so as to exploit their narratives of abuse
and oppression. Counterterrorism will be effective only
to the extent that it is consistent with the Charter of
the United Nations and other norms of international
law, including human rights law and humanitarian and
refugee law.
We have noted an increase in the number of letters
submitted to the Security Council under Article 51 of
the Charter, seeking to justify resorting to military
action in the context of counter-terrorism, usually ex
post facto. At the most recent open debate on working
methods (see S/PV.7740), Brazil stressed the need
for follow-up to such communications and for an
assessment as to whether the obligations laid out in the
Charter were being fulfilled.
There can be no justification for terrorism. Brazil
reiterates its commitment to a multidimensional

S/PV.7882

response to that threat and remains convinced that
cooperation and dialogue within the United Nations
will enhance our capacity to achieve the needed results.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Salarzai (Afghanistan): Afghanistan thanks
Minister of Foreign Affairs Pavlo Klimkin of Ukraine
and his delegation for convening today’s debate on the
protection of critical infrastructure against terrorist
attacks. We are pleased to see so many countries
participating in today’s discussion, which reflects the
importance of the topic under consideration.
Infrastructure provides a key component for the
normal and effective functioning of society, enabling
citizens’ access to fundamental services, such as food,
water, shelter, adequate health care, transportation
facilities and economic opportunities — each of
which are critically important for the stability of
any environment. An attack that damages a nation’s
infrastructure in essence does irreparable harm to the
very social fabric of society. The protection of physical
and social infrastructure should therefore comprise a
key component of any strategy for ensuring peaceful
and stable societies.
Terrorism and violent extremism constitute
dominant factors of instability in the current
international landscape, bringing untold suffering and
devastation on peoples and communities. As evident in
the case of my country, Afghanistan, and many other
countries where terrorists operate, extremist forces
have gone to great lengths to advance their vicious
agenda — wreaking havoc, undermining the rule of law
and terrorizing populations. They openly target many
kinds of infrastructure to amplify the effects of their
barbarity and to attract global media attention.
Afghanistan has been a primary victim of global
terrorism for over two decades — long before the start
of the international community’s engagement in our
country in 2001. Today, our people remain defiant in
the face of a multitude of terrorist groups, such as the
Taliban, the Haqqani Network, Al-Qaida, Da’esh, Jamaat
Dawah, Lashkar i Jhangvi , the Islamic Movement
of Uzbekistan and other foreign terrorist fighters,
all of which are symbiotically linked to one another,
come from abroad and receive, inter alia, political,
ideological, moral and material support. Aside from
targeting our security forces and those of international
partner countries present in Afghanistan, extremists are

17-0382149/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

attacking our political and legal institutions; mosques
and schools; health and medical facilities; and other soft
targets, such as non-governmental organizations, which
are working to improve the lives of ordinary Afghans.
Just last week, in the continuation of their carnage,
a suicide bomber conducted an attack on our Supreme
Court, the highest judicial institution in our country,
killing 21 people and wounding close to 50 others. The
victims included several female judges, prosecutors
and court employees who were simply returning home
to their families after a hard day’s work.
Last month, on 11 January, the Taliban carried out
an attack on our Parliament, resulting in more than 120
people dead, with many more left severely maimed
or injured. That act of barbarism was widely viewed
as an attack on the infrastructure of our democracy,
which is among the most significant achievements of
Afghanistan since 2001.
In August of last year, extremists attacked the
American University in Kabul, which is seen as a
beacon of hope for a better future among our educated
and talented youth. Sixteen people were tragically
killed in that attack.
Moreover, there are many cases of local hospitals,
clinics and international humanitarian relief agencies
coming under attack or otherwise being negatively
affected by the activities of extremist groups. A few
days ago, Da’esh militants in northern Jowzjan province
killed six members of the personnel of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in northern
Afghanistan. The ICRC convoy was attacked while
travelling to distribute aid to a storm-stricken area.
The overall security environment has only
complicated humanitarian conditions for our people, to
the point where 9.3 million people, mainly women and
children, are in dire need of immediate humanitarian
assistance. This figure marks a notable increase from
last year. We reiterate our call on the international
community to support the 2017 humanitarian
response plan of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
Terrorists also pose a threat to economic and
development infrastructure projects, in which we
have invested heavily. We are currently working to
implement 18 cooperation and investment projects
in the areas of energy, transport and trade and the
commercial and labour sectors. Once completed, those
50/58

13/02/2017

projects will benefit the prosperity of Afghanistan and
our wider region.
The ongoing cycle of violence in Afghanistan
is not, by any means, a homegrown phenomenon. Its
roots lie elsewhere, outside Afghanistan, emanating
from a strategic plan crafted from within our region
to advance an ill-fated political agenda that serves
no one, defies international law and constitutes a
blatant violation of the very spirit and tenets of the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as the relevant
counter-terrorism resolutions of the General Assembly
and Security Council. We believe the fight against
international terrorism stands at a crossroads. At this
critical juncture, a refined global effort is needed
to combat this menace with greater precision and
accuracy. In that context, we welcome the efforts of
the Secretary-General to strengthen the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture, including his decision
to establsih an office for counter-terrorism and to
appoint an Under-Secretary General to head that office.
Despite the difficult security environment in
Afghanistan, we are a nation that is making steady
progress towards lasting stability and self-reliance.
The National Unity Government is working, in greater
cohesion and coordination, on tackling a difficult set of
challenges facing our people. In that effort, our security
forces are serving valiantly to enhance security, while
defending and protecting our sovereignty, infrastructure
and people against terrorism and violent extremism.
In conclusion, we believe today’s meeting
marks an important step forward in devising a more
effective United Nations approach to protecting
critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks. As the
principal organ of the United Nations responsible for
the maintenance of peace and security, we hope the
Security Council will continue to give due focus and
attention to this important matter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to congratulate Ukraine on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February and for scheduling this open debate on the
protection of critical infrastructure against terrorist
attacks. The relevance and timing of the issue are
testimony to its importance.
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Although since the beginning of its existence
humankind has sought to create, innovate and build
for its own well-being and that of future generations,
terrorist groups — on the contrary — have chosen
the path of destruction, anarchy, and nothingness.
The terrorist threat has continued to grow and
spread. Terrorist groups such as Da’esh, Al-Qaieda,
the Taliban, Boko Haram and others, as well as their
affiliates, are constantly developing new methods of
destruction. They miss no opportunity to perpetrate
attacks against sensitive and easily accessible elements
of infrastructure, including airports, metro stations,
trains, buses, hospitals, banks, markets, schools,
universities and institutes. The attacks perpetrated
against the airports in Brussels and Istanbul, as well
as against the train stations of London and Madrid,
access to bank data, State establishments are all acts
that illustrate the readiness of terrorist groups to
attack any part of infrastructure, and to exploit the
slightest vulnerabilities in security and monitoring.
Even places of worship — mosques, synagogues and
churches — have not escaped their macabre acts,
despite the fact that they are places the faithful go
to in search of peace, tranquility and spirituality.
Moreover, nuclear and chemical facilities, storehouses
for radioactive material, electricity systems and dams
are very sensitive sites and are vulnerable to terrorist
acts in the absence of adequate security. They could be
turned into weapons of mass destruction.
The terrorist threat has been exacerbated by the
phenomenon of the return of foreign terrorist fighters
to their countries of origin or third countries. In the
most recent report (S/2016/92) of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat, elaborated
in accordance with the resolution 2253 (2015), the
Secretary-General warns of the phenomenon of the
return of foreign terrorist fighters following the military
defeats of Da’esh in several theatres of war. The report
estimates the number of foreign terrorist fighters in
Iraq and in Syria to be 40,000 individuals from more
than 100 countries. As such, the return of those foreign
terrorist fighters, well trained in guerrilla tactics and
the manufacture of explosives, constitutes a threat
to society and sensitive infrastructure. They can act
individually as lone wolves, which led the SecretaryGeneral to point out that terrorist organizations have a
great capacity for adaptation. He indicated that the threat

S/PV.7882

to civil aviation also remains quite high. That is why
the responsibility for protecting sensitive infrastruce
lies primarily with States, which must integrate such
protection in their national strategies, as well as their
strategies to combat terrorism and violent extremism.
The State must ensure the implementation of effective
means of protection and security, including through
the adoption of the necessary legislation in accordance
with international standards and requirements.
Morocco has adopted a comprehensive, coherent
approach oriented to prevention and action. We believe
that terrorism is a global phenomenon that requires and
calls for a global response paired with and supported
by robust cooperation at the regional, subregional
and international levels. Morocco attaches particular
attention to international cooperation, strengthened
border security, information exchange and sharing,
the use of the INTERPOL database and the roll out
of deradicalization and re-integration to ensure that
terrorist plans fail.
At the regional and subregional levels Morocco
engages in the exchange of information, expertise
and experience both in the framework of South-South
cooperation as well as with African countries, with
countries in the Mediterranean basin, including in the
framework of the 5+5, and other regional partners.
Morocco hosted conferences in 2013 and 2015 on border
security in the Maghreb and the Sahel and participated
in the 2015 Madrid meeting. Morocco also took part
in the Nuclear Security Summit held in Washington,
D.C, the final communiqué of which called for greater
efforts to prevent non-State actors from obtaining
nuclear or radioactive materials for malicious purposes
or attacks against sensitive infrastructure.
Finally, conscious of the importance of combating
nuclear terrorism, Morocco has actively participated
in the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism
since its launch in 2006. Morocco participated in all
relevant meetings and conferences and even organized
several meetings and awareness-raising workshops for
its African peers. The experience of Morocco in that
area was shared just last week in New Delhi during a
meeting of the working group to assess the strategy.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Poland.
Mr. Winid (Poland): I thank the President for
organizing this meeting and introducing the issue of

17-0382151/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

protecting the critical infrastructure against terrorist
attacks on the Security Council agenda.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union earlier today,
but I would like to add some comments in my national
capacity. While Poland participated in the Arria Formula
meeting on this topic, organized by the Ukrainian
delegation in November 2016, today we take yet another
opportunity to discuss this topic of utmost importance.
Terrorism poses a growing threat to both national
and international security. It also violates and abuses
human rights, including every basic right to life, and
undermines development. The Security Council has
repeatedly underlined that terrorism constitutes a threat
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
Threats do not respect borders in today’s
globalized world. Terrorists can easily infiltrate our
most vulnerable energy and transportation hubs. It is
recommended that we broaden cooperation within a
wider geographical context. The United Nations is a
proper, or even the best, forum to initiate the discussion
of how to do it.
The protection of critical infrastructure is, first
and foremost, the responsibility of national authorities.
The ultimate condition for achieving that protection is
to have efficient national security systems. However,
there is also space for closer international cooperation.
That results from the fact that the potential threats
are of a transboundary nature and that many useful
lessons learned can be shared among States. In that
context, Poland is ready to share its experiences
with partner countries and to support security-sector
reform programmes.
One good example of such cooperation, which
Poland and Ukraine have initiated, concerns chemical
security, including critical chemical infrastructure.
Projects dedicated to that area have also been developed,
both bilaterally and multilaterally, in the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
the European Union (EU) and have been supported
by the Group of Seven’s Global Partnership: Chemical
Security Sub-Working Group. The continuation of those
efforts is becoming more and more important, owing
to the fact that many chemical facilities are located in
Ukraine, in particular in Donetsk and Luhansk, the
areas affected by the hostilities and the war imposed on
Ukraine from the outside.
52/58

13/02/2017

Poland and Ukraine also shared close cooperation
in 2012 when we co-hosted the Union of European
Football Associations European Championship.
That collaboration included, among other things,
the protection of transportation infrastructure and
the provision of the safety and security needed for
organizing mass sporting events.
Let me also highlight the growing role of the
international
aspects
of
critical-infrastructure
protection. Regional organizations, such as the OSCE
and the European Union, have introduced programmes
aimed at structured cooperation and the exchange
of information. For instance, the OSCE framework
includes travellers’ security and the protection of
energy infrastructure. The EU cooperation envisages
an air-passengers database, cooperation among border
guards and European Police Office reports. It has been
recommended that cooperation in this area be extended
into a wider geographical context. The role of the
State-private sector link is also quite vital.
Finally, let me welcome resolution 2341 (2017) on
the protection of the critical infrastructure, which was
initiated by Ukraine and adopted this morning with the
co-sponsorship of Poland.
I thank you once again, Sir, for organizing
this meeting.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Bonser (Canada): Canada is proud to have
co-sponsored resolution 2341 (2017) today.
Terrorist groups are evolving, and we need to
continue to work to understand their strategies in order
to protect our populations. For example, as Da’esh
faces losses in Iraq and Syria, it is transforming from
a territory-based entity into a global virtual network.
Foreign terrorist fighters still loyal to D’aesh and with
training and battlefield experience pose a renewed
threat as they move to new locations. The threat of lone
actors inspired by violent extremist ideologies persists.
As terrorists seek to impose maximum damage in
new areas of operation, critical infrastructure is a
vulnerable target.
Attacks on physical assets, information-technology
systems, networks and services essential to health,
safety and security can be devastating in terms of loss
of life and the harm they can cause to the collective
economic well-being and the erosion of the public’s
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

sense of safety. Attacks that succeed in inflicting great
harm and damage also bolster the propaganda efforts
of terrorist groups. Member States must work together
in a coordinated effort to respond to that aspect of
the global terrorist threat as an integrated part of
our collective efforts. We therefore welcome today’s
resolution, presented by Ukraine, which encourages
Member States to develop or further improve their
strategies for reducing risks to critical infrastructure
from terrorist attacks.
In our national context, Canada is working to
leverage our critical infrastructure networks to share
information and strengthen our resilience against
terrorist attacks. Canada’s national strategy and
action plan for critical infrastructure establishes
a collaborative federal, provincial and territorial
approach to the security of the critical infrastructure
sector so as to mitigate the full range of risks and threats
facing Canada’s vital assets and systems. The national
strategy aims to build partnerships, implement an allhazards risk-management approach and to advance the
timely sharing and protection of information among
partners. Ultimately, protecting our vital assets and
systems from threats demands a cooperative approach
across a broad range of stakeholders at every level.
(spoke in French)
We underscore the need for legal and regulatory
frameworks to address this threat and encourage
United Nations agencies to incorporate that into
their needs assessments aimed at supporting Member
States’ capacity-building efforts. We appreciate the
resolution’s language reinforcing the protection of
critical infrastructure as part of a holistic national/
global counter-terrorism strategy that balances vital
security concerns with rights and freedoms. Canada
wholeheartedly endorses cooperation in that area
within and among Member States at all levels. We
firmly support the resolution.
In conclusion, we take this opportunity to underscore
Canada’s strengthened commitment to inclusion and
diversity, following the massacre targeting a mosque in
Quebec City that killed six Canadians this past January.
As Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said at the 2 February
funeral service for three of the victims,
“We will combat all extremism in any form and ...
we will be there for all citizens and protect their
fundamental freedoms — the freedoms of religion

S/PV.7882

and of conscience — so that anyone can fulfil
their destiny”
in complete security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Onn (Malaysia): I wish to thank you, Sir,
for convening today’s open debate, and I join earlier
speakers in congratulating you on your delegation’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also wish to thank the briefers for their
briefings and insights on today’s issue.
Malaysia stands firm in the fight against terrorism.
It is without a doubt that damage to the critical
infrastructure that is essential for the maintenance
of vital societal functions, whether through natural
disasters, terrorism, criminal activity or malicious
behaviour, has a negative impact on the security of a
country and the well-being of its citizens. It is therefore
important that national critical infrastructure be
protected against terrorist attacks.
All Governments recognize the threat posed by
terrorism against critical infrastructure and the sustained
preventive and mitigation efforts that such threats
demand. While the responsibility for the protection
of critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks rests
primarily with the State, the implementation of steps
to reduce the vulnerability of privately owned and
corporate assets is also highly dependent on the owners
of such assets.
Nevertheless, private firms may not have
adequate commercial incentives to fund initiatives to
reduce vulnerability. For some, the cost of reducing
vulnerabilities may seem to outweigh the benefits of
reduced risks from terrorist attacks, as well as from
natural and other disasters.
While Governments have a primary role to play in
the protection of critical infrastructure, it is a matter of
responsibility, necessity and good governance for the
owners of such critical infrastructure to address the
security needs of their assets. There is therefore a need
for Governments and businesses to share intelligence
and information on threats and vulnerability and on
measures to protect infrastructure and mitigate the
risk involved.
We
believe
that
the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force’s Working Group on

17-0382153/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the Protection of Critical Infrastructure Including
Vulnerable Targets, Internet and Tourism Security
has an important role to play in the international
community’s efforts to protect critical infrastructure
against terrorist attacks. Those efforts may
include promoting international and public-private
cooperation; capacity-building; the sharing of best
practices; improving responsiveness and resilience
through planning, prevention, crisis management and
recovery; promoting the exchange of information and
best practices; and establishing a network of experts on
the protection of critical infrastructure.
At the domestic level, Malaysia’s efforts in the area
of the protection of critical infrastructure are divided
into two levels, namely, the federal level and the state
level. At the federal level, those efforts fall under the
Central Committee on Critical National Infrastructure,
which is led by the Secretary General of the Ministry
of Home Affairs. At the state level, the Committee on
Critical Infrastructure is led by the State Secretary.
Under these committees, the audit or monitoring teams
have been tasked with monitoring the level of security
at all critical infrastructure sites in order to detect any
non-compliance and to advise the operator or owner
accordingly on how to improve the security level in
the entities concerned. National legislation related to
the protection of critical infrastructure against terrorist
attacks includes the National Security Council Act 2016
and the Protected Areas and Protected Places Act 1959.
A national cybersecurity policy is also in place aimed
at ensuring the security of Malaysia’s critical national
information infrastructure.
Malaysia’s sponsorship of resolution 2341 (2017),
adopted by the Council earlier this morning, signifies
Malaysia’s commitment to the efforts of the international
community in this field through the sharing of best
practices, experience, expertise and intelligence aimed
at further strengthening our capacities to safeguard and
protect critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Wilson (Australia): Safeguarding our critical
infrastructure is an economic and security imperative.
Australia supports Ukraine’s initiative aimed at
mobilizing international cooperation in the area of
preventing and responding to terrorist attacks against
critical infrastructure.
54/58

13/02/2017

The threats posed by terrorism to critical
infrastructure are enduring and require sustained
mitigation efforts by Governments. The United Nations
has a key role to play in that regard, including by working
with Member States to ensure the full implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Countries define what constitutes critical
infrastructure in different ways. For Australia, critical
infrastructure refers to the physical facilities, supply
chains, information technologies and communication
networks that — if destroyed, degraded or rendered
unavailable for an extended period — would
significantly impact the social or economic well-being
of the nation or affect Australia’s ability to conduct
national defence and ensure national security.
In January 2017, Australia established the Critical
Infrastructure Centre, which provides a coordinated
and cohesive approach to the security of Australia’s
critical infrastructure. The Centre brings together
expertise and capability from across the Australian
Government to better manage the national security
risks to our critical infrastructure. Australia relies
upon a strong intelligence-led prevention and
preparedness regime to support our counter-terrorism
arrangements. That approach encompasses targeted
prevention and preparedness measures based on riskmanagement principles and on maintaining capabilities
to manage various types of terrorist threats, attacks
and their consequences. The Australian Government
also works with owners and operators in a businessGovernment partnership to share information, tap into
the experiences of others and develop collaborative
mitigation measures for dealing with the most serious
risks to critical infrastructure.
From an information-technology perspective,
the Australian Cyber Security Centre is the
Australian Government’s primary source of advice on
cyberthreats. It is firmly of the view that establishing
a strong cybersecurity posture, increasing awareness
of potential vulnerabilities and implementing effective
security measures are vital to efforts to deter and
prevent incidents against critical infrastructure,
including from terrorists. The safety and security of
critical infrastructure require the concerted efforts of
public and private partners around the globe. Australia
looks forward to continued practical collaboration with
international partners, including the United Nations, to
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

enhance and promote cross-border and global critical
infrastructure security and resilience.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Mr. Mažeiks (Latvia): Latvia welcomes the
initiative of Ukraine, during its presidency of the
Security Council for this month, to hold this important
debate, which brings the issue of the protection of
critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks to the
forefront of the international discourse. I thank all the
speakers for their valuable briefings.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union (EU).
The spread and intensity of global terrorism
is, without a doubt, one of the greatest threats to
international peace and security that we face today.
In the past year, in Europe alone, we have witnessed a
number of heinous acts of terror, some of which were
committed ruthlessly and purposefully against critical
infrastructure. The attacks on the airport and subway
station in Brussels last March illustrate all too painfully
that terrorists have spread and will continue to spread
fear and disarray by striking where they deem that their
attacks will have the most impact.
Attacks on transportation systems, as well as on
telecommunications networks, energy infrastructure
and water-supply systems, can often multiply the
perceived terrorist threat, causing a ripple effect of fear
that reaches far beyond those immediately affected by
the attack. Therefore, the prevention of such attacks
by creating adequate protection measures for critical
infrastructure is of paramount importance.
In support of the President’s call for the consolidation
of international efforts to increase resilience against
terrorist threats, Latvia joined the sponsors of today’s
resolution 2341 (2017) on the protection of critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks.
In Latvia, the measures adopted for the protection
of critical infrastructure reflect the common approach
established by the European Union and employ the EU
tools designed for that very purpose. Our legislation is
closely attuned to the requirements set out by the EU
directive on European critical infrastructure, thereby
contributing to the unification of identification and
protection standards for critical infrastructure objects
on a regional, European scale.

S/PV.7882

We have established a cross-sectoral Government
commission tasked with the regular identification
and assessment of existing and potential critical
infrastructure objects in order to improve the safety
and security of all potentially critical infrastructure
objects. The security and protection requirements
for those objects are equally high for nationally,
municipally or privately owned structures. Moreover,
all structures deemed to be national or European critical
infrastructure objects in Latvia have a designated
point of contact so as to facilitate the exchange of
information with national security institutions. In order
to strengthen public-private partnerships and build
capacity with regard to the security and protection of
critical infrastructure objects, the responsible internal
security institutions hold regular training seminars and
on-site workshops for both private and public entities
tasked with ensuring oversight and the security of
critical infrastructure objects.
In the increasingly globalized and interconnected
world, the digitalization and integration of critical
infrastructure with the help of information and
communication technologies add a new sense of urgency
for the need for comprehensive and internationally
coordinated protection efforts. In our view, that is
the area where the United Nations can play a key role
by providing the best platform for the exchange of
knowledge, experiences and best practices among the
Member States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): Let me begin by welcoming
Ukraine on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and expressing our
appreciation for its organization of today’s open debate
on the protection of critical infrastructure against
terrorist attacks.
Given the insightful briefings provided by those
who have spoken before the Security Council today,
and in the interests of time, I shall limit our intervention
to four key points, relating in particular to the need to
take an integrated and coordinated approach in the
protection of infrastructure against terrorist attacks.
First, it is essential that efforts to improve the security
of critical infrastructure with respect to the threat of
terrorism be part of a broader, institutionalized whole of
preventing violent extremism and the counter-terrorism
agenda at the national level. That is only inevitable,

17-0382155/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

given the complex and interlinked nature of today’s
terrorist threats and modern infrastructure networks
alike. Work carried out on the basis of strengthening
such protection will almost always rely on the strength
of counter-terrorism efforts in other areas, coinciding
with the aims of other initiatives seeking to prevent
acts of terrorism. Duplication needlessly undermines
our national efforts and wastes what are usually limited
financial, physical and human resources.
Secondly, the need for coordinated efforts is
especially strong for small countries, including small
island developing States (SIDS) such as the Maldives.
Cognizant of those facts, the Government of the
Maldives has developed a robust institutional framework
for taking a coordinated and whole-of-society approach
to countering terrorism and violent extremism through
concrete measures and cross-cutting policies. Last
year, we implemented a State policy on terrorism and
violent extremism and are currently in the process of
formulating a national counter-terrorism strategy and
counter-terrorism response plan as part of that policy.
The implementation of those programmes will be guided
by the National Counter-Terrorism Centre, which was
also established last year, with an express mandate to
lead and coordinate the work of all State institutions
with respect to terrorism and violent extremism.
A key component of that State policy is the
development of programmes aimed at safeguarding
tourist resorts and the travel industry, which is a critical
sector of our economy, and security programmes for
sea ports, airports and sectors of major economic
infrastructure. Those are focal points of policies for
protecting critical infrastructure in any country, but
their importance is only magnified for SIDS given their
small size, geographic isolation and limited resources.
A terrorist attack on critical infrastructure would be
devastating regardless of where it took place. But
whereas an attack, while tragic, would ultimately be
local in its impact for a large country in which such
infrastructure exists in abundance, for a small island
country that relies entirely on one or just a handful of
such infrastructural facilities, such an attack would be
systemic in its impact. For SIDS, an attack on a sole
international airport, sea port, major power plant or
water distribution network would not merely exact
a costly human toll but cut off an entire people from
their livelihoods, material necessities or even the rest
of the world.
56/58

13/02/2017

Thirdly, in the light of the amplified magnitude
of the threat for countries, such as SIDS, that face
considerable geographic, economic or social constraints,
capacity-building and the exchange of best practices
are critical if all nations are to be able to effectively
respond to such threats. The Maldives is fortunate to
have benefited from cooperation with international
partners with regard to capacity-building in the
security, health-care and public utility sectors in areas
that serve to improve its ability to address and respond
to those emerging threats to critical infrastructure.
Fourthly, the transnational and increasingly
multisectoral nature of contemporary terrorist
organizations, particularly with respect to transnational
organized crime, requires us to increase, at the bilateral,
subregional, regional and global levels, cooperation
in countering terrorism and protecting critical
infrastructure. Likewise, it means that we must improve
the ability of intergovernmental organizations — first
and foremost among them the United Nations — to assist
in the coordination of counter-terrorism strategies.
In that respect, we must collectively rededicate
ourselves to finalizing the comprehensive convention
on international terrorism so that we may, at long
last, be able to address those issues in the framework
of a detailed and comprehensive international legal
instrument. We need to deepen both our respective
national participation in regional initiatives aimed at
countering terror and preventing violent extremism,
and our support for multilateral efforts on the part
of the United Nations and other intergovernmental
organizations, such as the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. In that regard,
we take note of the efforts of the Working Group on
Protection of Critical Infrastructure Including Internet,
Vulnerable Targets and Tourism Security
Just as the threats posed by terrorism to all parts of
our societies, including critical infrastructure, continue
to evolve, so too must the methods with which we are
to respond to those threats. That is and must continue
to be a collective, collaborative and coordinated
effort for the dangers that we will face. In that aim,
Sir, we assure you that you can rely on the Maldives’
wholehearted support.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for your invitation in French to take the floor.
17-03821

13/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

First, on behalf of the Government of the Republic
of Haiti, I would like to thank the Government of
Ukraine for its kind invitation to this open debate
in the Security Council devoted to a topic of major
importance — the protection of critical infrastructure.
I welcome the presence of His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, Mr. Pavlo Klimkin,
this morning, and commend him on the quality of his
statement and his suggestions on the paths for us to take
in reflecting upon the issue and taking action.
The United Nations has made the implementation
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy a key priority.
The protection of critical infrastructure undeniably
plays a major role in that regard. My delegation fully
supports the goals of the comprehensive and integrated
response Strategy at the national, regional and
international levels.
The likelihood of large-scale terrorist acts being
committed and targeting civilians through attacks
on critical infrastructure has only increased over the
past several years. To varying degrees, of course,
that danger is felt everywhere. The emergence of
new threats, amplified by the rapidly evolving nature
of communications technologies, has dramatically
increased the probability of such an attack as well as
the seriousness of such a threat’s consequences with
regard to international peace and security.
In the merciless struggle that must be waged against
terrorism, Haiti is party to the United Nations counterterrorism system and to several regional cooperation
mechanisms established at the level of the Caribbean
Community and the Organization of American States,
in particular the Inter-American Committee against
Terrorism. At the national level, the Government of Haiti
strives to maintain a level of vigilance commensurate
with the threats posed by movements influenced by
extremist ideologies. To this end, it fully supports
international efforts to strengthen the capacity of States
to act collectively in the prevention of incitement to
terrorism and to improve the security and protection of
particularly vulnerable targets, such as infrastructure
and public places, as specifically called for by the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
However, we must recognize that, while acts of
incitement to terrorism are frequent, the international
counter-terrorism regime, particularly with regard
to the protection of essential infrastructure, remains
tragically inadequate. This is evidenced by the threats,

S/PV.7882

thwarted attacks and incidents by which many countries
in Europe, Asia, Africa and America have been targeted
in the recent past. If the rise of terrorism seems on
occasion to have been slowed, its momentum is far from
broken. Its sphere of action, while contained in certain
theatres of operation, is elsewhere in full expansion.
It is therefore essential to redouble efforts, intensify
international cooperation on all fronts, including judicial
and police cooperation, the exchange of information,
the provision of relevant and adequate technical
assistance to States that require it, in particular the
least developed among them, so as to maintain a high
level of protection of critical infrastructure, increase
resilience against terrorist threats, and prevent the loss
of human life and the disruption of essential services,
as outlined in the concept note issued by the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine (S/2017/104, annex). In
that regard, I should like to make a few brief comments
on the terrorist threat and the overall response strategy.
First, it is essential to pinpoint the terrorist threat in
order to defeat its actions, which no rationale — including
the national, political and religious demands generally
advanced by the perpetrators — can justify. Terrorism
cannot be associated with any religion, nationality or
civilization. However, there is undeniably a number of
conditions conducive to its spread, be it the perpetuation
of regional conflicts that are often at the root of violent
extremism, discrimination, exclusion, socioeconomic
marginalization, poor governance and poverty.
It is therefore urgent for the international
community to address these issues and to provide
the developing countries, particularly the poorest
among them, with the adequate support they need to
acquire the necessary infrastructure and overcome the
serious economic and social challenges they face. My
delegation, moreover, believes that no State, however
powerful it may be and whatever the degree of priority
it attaches to the fight against terrorism, can alone
achieve the overriding objective of protecting its
citizens and its critical infrastructure. Partnerships are
therefore essential at the international, regional and
national levels. Similarly, regional counter-terrorism
mechanisms should be significantly strengthened and
adequately resourced in order to enable them to respond
more effectively, taking into account the realities and
needs on the ground, as well as the evolution of the
terrorist threat to critical infrastructure.

17-0382157/58

S/PV.7882

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Finally, the development of integrated national
responses for the prevention of terrorism and the
protection of critical infrastructure is of particular
importance. In that regard, I offer my delegation’s
support for the Ukrainian proposal to incorporate
a critical infrastructure protection component into
all national and international programmes for the
prevention of terrorism.
The Government of Haiti, for its part, will continue
to pay the utmost attention to measures to prevent
and combat terrorism, including those relating to the
protection of essential infrastructure. Recent changes
have been made to the Haitian penal code, reinforcing
the range of legislative and legal measures to prevent

58/58

13/02/2017

and contain ideologies of hatred and violent extremism.
The strengthening of the rule of law, the judicial system
and law enforcement agencies is one of the main lines
of action of the programme of action defined by the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Jovenel
Moïse. At his inauguration on 7 February, he reiterated
the high importance he personally attaches to the
consolidation of the rule of law in Haiti. There can be
no doubt that the new Government of Haiti, which shall
soon assume power, will stay true to that spirit and
strive to take the necessary measures in response to the
evolution of the terrorist threat to critical infrastructure.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

17-03821
