S/PRST/2008/1

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 January 2008
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5818th meeting of the Security Council, held on 11 January 2008, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council condemns in the strongest possible terms the
January 7 attack by elements of the Sudanese Armed Forces, as confirmed by
the United Nations African Union Mission in Darfur (UNAMID), on a
UNAMID supply convoy. The Security Council stresses that any attack on or
threat against UNAMID is unacceptable, and demands that there will be no
recurrence of attacks on UNAMID. The Security Council welcomes the
commitment of the Government of the Sudan to undertake a complete and full
investigation into the incident, together with the United Nations/African
Union.
“The Security Council welcomes the transition of authority from the AU
peacekeeping operation (AMIS) to UNAMID, which occurred on
December 31. The Security Council commends AMIS for its prompt action to
begin to re-establish peace and security in Darfur.
“The Council calls on the Government of the Sudan to expedite full
compliance with Security Council resolution 1769, including through
concluding all the necessary arrangements for the expeditious deployment of
an effective UNAMID force.
“The Council further urges the Government of the Sudan and all armed
groups to respect an immediate and complete ceasefire and demands that all
parties cooperate fully with the deployment of UNAMID and respect its
security and freedom of movement.
“The Security Council reiterates that an inclusive political settlement and
the successful deployment of UNAMID are essential for re-establishing peace
and stability in Darfur. The Security Council urges all parties, including rebel
groups, to engage fully and constructively in the political process under the
leadership of United Nations Special Envoy Mr. Jan Eliasson and African
Union Special Envoy Dr. Salim Salim, who have the Council’s full support.
The Security Council expresses its readiness to take action against any party
that impedes the peace process, humanitarian aid, or the deployment of
UNAMID. The Council also recognizes that due processes must take their
course.

08-20583 (E) 110108

*0820583*

S/PRST/2008/1

“The Council expresses concern about the deterioration of security and
humanitarian conditions in Darfur and calls upon the UN and all member
states to facilitate the rapid and complete deployment of UNAMID. The
Council urges capable member states to contribute the helicopter and
transportation units necessary to ensure the successful implementation of
UNAMID’s mandate.”

2

08-20583
