S/PV.8340

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8340th meeting

Wednesday, 5 September 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
The situation in Nicaragua

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-27658 (E)
*1827658*

S/PV.8340

The situation in Nicaragua

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
The situation in Nicaragua
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Costa Rica, Nicaragua and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Denis Ronaldo Moncada Colindres, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Nicaragua.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Gonzalo
Koncke, Chief of Staff to the Secretary General of
the Organization of American States, and Mr. Felix
Maradiaga, civil society leader and former SecretaryGeneral of the Ministry of Defence of Nicaragua.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Koncke.
Mr. Koncke (spoke in Spanish): I am grateful
for the invitation extended to the General Secretariat
of the Organization of American States (OAS) to
participate in this Security Council meeting and to
brief it on the efforts that the General Secretariat has
been undertaking in Nicaragua, as well as to provide
an overview of the situation from the perspective of a
regional organization. I wish to convey the greetings of
OAS Secretary General Luis Almagro.
The situation involving death, violence, repression
and political and social crisis in Nicaragua is the subject
of extreme concern in the western hemisphere. The OAS
General Secretariat is closely following the situation in
the country, which, according to the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights (IACHR), has resulted
in 322 deaths since 18 April. Among the dead are
23 children and adolescents, as well as a number of
detained persons. We also lament the deaths of 21 police
officers between 18 April and 24 August. Tragically, the
2/23

05/09/2018

number of deaths in the country has been increasing.
Again according to the IACHR, 76 people had died by
the end of May, 212 by the end of June, 264 by the end
of July and, as I said earlier, 322 by the end of August.
As has unfortunately become routine, the OAS General
Secretariat extends its condolences to the families and
friends of the victims.
As is well known, the OAS Secretariat is
continuously following the situation with a growing
sense of concern at the loss of life and the deterioration
of democracy and political and social coexistence
in the country, as well as the corresponding effect
on the economic situation, which disproportionately
impacts the most vulnerable. Since 18 April, in line
with the Inter-American Democratic Charter and its
own Charter, the OAS has employed the tools at its
disposal in the quest for peace, democracy, the rule
of law, justice, truth and the re-establishment of the
institutional order in the country. In that context,
Secretary General Almagro secured authorization from
the Government of Nicaragua for an IACHR mission to
the country, which took place from 17 to 21 May and
produced 15 recommendations that form the basis for the
restoration of respect for, and the promotion of, human
rights. Likewise, on 30 May, the Secretary General, the
Government of Nicaragua and the IACHR Executive
Secretary signed a document on the establishment of
the Interdisciplinary Group of Independent Experts
(GIEI), in line with recommendation 3 of the IACHR
preliminary report.
Moreover, the Special Monitoring Mechanism for
Nicaragua (MESENI) was established in the country
pursuant to recommendation 15 of the preliminary
report, mandated, as its name indicates, with
monitoring the human rights situation on an ongoing
basis. Similarly, the General Secretariat of the OAS
has been working with the Government of Nicaragua
for the necessary electoral reforms that will identify
democratic solutions through popular expression in
the country.
The Permanent Council of the OAU set out its
position on the situation in Nicaragua in resolution
1108/18 of 18 July, by which, among other things,
it reiterated
“its vigorous condemnation of and grave concern
over all acts of violence, repression, and human
rights violations and abuses committed by police,
parapolice groups, and others against the people
18-27658

05/09/2018

The situation in Nicaragua

of Nicaragua, as documented by the IACHR;
to encourage that steps be taken to identify the
individuals responsible, through the corresponding
legal procedures; and to demand that parapolice
groups be disbanded”.
Similarly, the Permanent Council has created a working
group composed of 12 countries in order to provide
solutions to a problem of concern to the entire region.
It is regrettable that the situation in the country
has not improved in terms of democracy, respect for
human rights and social and political coexistence. The
322 deaths that I mentioned earlier were the result of
repression, violence, the actions of irregular armed
pro-Government groups, and violations of human
rights. In its report of 22 June, the IACHR concluded
that the State of Nicaragua had infringed on the rights
to life, personal integrity, health, personal freedom,
assembly, freedom of expression and access to justice.
The Commission found especially worrisome
“the assassinations, extrajudicial executions,
abusive treatment, possible acts of torture and
arbitrary detentions committed against the
country’s majority young population”.
The IACHR conclusions concerning repeated violations
delegitimize the Nicaraguan Government. The OAS
General Secretariat believes that this process of
delegitimation must end as soon as possible.
As pointed out by Secretary General Almagro, the
solution for Nicaragua incontestably requires peace,
truth, justice and democracy. To ensure truth and justice,
it will be necessary for the Government of Nicaragua
to facilitate and cooperate with the work of GIEI and
MESENI, provide free access to places of interest,
documents and necessary files, grant guarantees and
facilities, offer the prescriptive answers of the State and
not to hinder the work of those bodies. These are the
fundamental demands that the General Secretariat of
the OAS has made of the Nicaraguan Government.
In the same way, the General Secretariat of the
OAS asserts that there can be no genuine solution
for Nicaragua without heeding the voice of its
people through the holding of free, fair, democratic
and transparent elections, in accordance with
inter-American standards. In that regard, the General
Secretariat reiterates its invitation to the Government
of Nicaragua to resume and accelerate the work that is
being done with the Nicaraguan State to ensure that the

S/PV. 8340

pertinent electoral reforms are completed by January
2019, as agreed by both parties.
Secretary General Almagro has openly stated his
opinion that the more timely holding of elections will be
critical and represents a genuine solution to the crisis of
democracy in the country. In situations of maximum
polarization and tension, the validation of the voice of
the people in the polls is the necessary path. The date
for the holding of elections should be agreed among
Nicaraguans — there is no other way — but we believe
it essential to consult with the sources of political
power. It is also important that the Government and the
opposition, represented by the Civic Alliance for Justice
and Democracy, revisit the possibility of holding talks
that could lead to good-faith agreements between the
parties, in which the participation of the Nicaraguan
Episcopal Conference would be critical.
In conclusion, Nicaragua is at a crossroads on
which its peace, democracy and future depend. We
believe that this crossroads could have been avoided
because the inter-American system has tools that it has
made available to the Nicaraguans to find solutions,
including electoral reforms and electoral monitoring to
identify the will of the Nicaraguan people, and GIEI
and MESENI to promote truth justice. At the centre
of this crossroads is the Nicaraguan Government, on
which depend the decision-making and the democratic
gestures that will restore the country’s institutions
and find the path to the rule of law. After 18 April, we
cannot apply to Nicaragua the same tools that led to the
tragedy, because that would lead to more confrontation
and more suffering for the people.
It is necessary to apply irreversibly democratic
mechanisms that will restore to the Nicaraguan people
the possibility of choosing and reviving political
coexistence. At this crossroads, the Nicaraguan
Government can opt for the revival of democratic
institutions. There is still time to do so. Failure to do so
would be to choose the erroneous path taken by other
countries of the region that have fallen into dictatorial
Governments in which the rule of law and democracy
do not exist and that have led their people into misery,
social and family disintegration, and emigration.
In the Americas in particular, crises of democracy
and human rights affect more than just the country they
afflict. The example of the migration crisis originated
by the Venezuelan regime must serve as a warning.
Nicaragua is not in a position to endure the exacerbation

18-276583/23

S/PV.8340

The situation in Nicaragua

of a social, economic and political crisis. At the same
time, we in the General Secretariat of the OAS believe
that Central America is not in a position to endure
the exacerbation of a crisis of democracy and human
rights in Nicaragua that amplifies migratory variables,
encourages the actions of criminal gangs, and ends up
generating elements harmful to regional stability and
security.
That is why the General Secretariat of the OAS will
continue advocating to find solutions for the country.
We reiterate to the Nicaraguan Government the need to
advance jointly in the work of electoral reform, agree
on an electoral calendar for Nicaragua, facilitate the
tasks of the Interdisciplinary Group of Independent
Experts and the Special Monitoring Mechanism for
Nicaragua, and resume dialogue, with guarantees of
non-repetition, in order to achieve peace, justice and
human rights in the country.
The President: I thank Mr. Koncke for his briefing.
We certainly appreciate the time he has taken to come
to brief the Council on the situation in Nicaragua. We
also appreciate the Organization of American States
getting involved and taking charge of something that
is happening in the region that we view with concern.
I now give the floor to Mr. Maradiaga.
Mr. Maradiaga (spoke in Spanish): We thank you,
Madam President, for your leadership in placing the
situation in Nicaragua on the agenda.
Few nations of the world have had such a difficult
history of seeking peace as Nicaragua. The armed
conflict that we suffered in the 1980s, which caused
thousands of deaths and destabilized all of Central
America, is still fresh in our memory. In that cyclical
history of conflicts, Nicaragua has enjoyed the help
of the international community when too much blood
has already been spilled. I come before the Council
to convey the urgency of a situation that threatens
the peace and security of an entire region, as can be
clearly deduced from the more than 23,000 Nicaraguan
refugees who, in less than four months, have had to
leave for neighbouring Costa Rica .
I know from my own experience the consequences
of a conflict that spins out of control and expands
throughout a region when it could have been prevented
using the instruments allowed by the Charter of the
United Nations and the inter-American system. When I
was 12 years old, I lived in a refugee camp in the state of
4/23

05/09/2018

Texas, after having crossed alone, as an undocumented
person, the border between Mexico and the United
States of America, trying to escape the armed conflict
in Nicaragua. I returned to Nicaragua in 1990, full of
enthusiasm for the reconstruction of my country.
The experiences of my childhood defined my
commitment to human rights, disarmament and
non-violence. It was thus that, in 2003, I became
a Disarmament Fellow thanks to a United Nations
programme here at Headquarters. A short time later,
I returned to Nicaragua and started an academic
programme to train emerging youth leaders in the
principles of the culture of peace in my country.
It was through my contacts as a university professor
that, on the night of 20 April, I received desperate calls
from several of my students. One of those calls, with
the noise of firearms in the background, still tears at
my heart. They said to me: “Professor, they are killing
us — help us”. That day, hundreds of young university
students sought refuge in Managua Cathedral after
Nicaraguan police shot at protesters indiscriminately.
That afternoon, Álvaro Conrado, a 15-year-old boy,
who went out to give the students water, died from a
gunshot wound to the neck.
Over the next few weeks, I watched in awe as tens
of thousands of people peacefully took to the streets to
protest for their civil rights. In April, like thousands
of Nicaraguans, I joined several ad hoc groups to help
the wounded who had not been admitted to public
hospitals. I do not have time today to talk about the
pain of seeing the bodies of so many young people shot
by snipers. On 30 May, at the Mother’s Day march, I
saw a teenager’s brains blown out by a bullet before my
very eyes. I personally managed to survive an attack
on 28 May, when paramilitaries tried to shoot me a few
yards from my office.
One of the most worrying aspects of this crisis
is the criminalization of civil protest through the
enactment of an anti-terrorism law that classifies
any civic act of protest as terrorism. I was one of the
first to be officially denounced, on 3 June, when the
police apparatus that serves the Government accused
me of terrorism and organized crime while I was in
Washington, D.C., meeting with the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights. That accusation has
been a kind of death sentence for me, because since
then I have received hundreds of death threats, police
18-27658

05/09/2018

The situation in Nicaragua

and paramilitaries have surrounded my home and
office, and my family members have been intimidated.
On 11 July, a group of at least 20 paramilitaries
stopped my car. When they recognized me, they made
me get out and detained me and my companions,
keeping AK-47 rifles and other high-calibre weapons
trained on me the whole time. They asked me if I was
ready to die. In a video that they recorded themselves,
which went viral, they released me unharmed, saying,
“Thank Commander Ortega that you are still alive.”
They said they had not yet been given permission to kill
me. However, on 13 July, while I was meeting privately
with students in the city of León, more than 30 people
broke into the meeting room and beat me up, leaving me
with several fractures. As I was being attacked by these
Government-associated groups, I felt the same agony
that I had experienced at 12 years old when I swam a
freezing river to cross the border, with the feeling that
I had lost the right to live peacefully in the country of
my birth.
Despite the pain, I now have the opportunity to
tell the Council my story, while the voices of hundreds
of other Nicaraguans have been silenced forever.
More than 300 people, which is a highly conservative
estimate, have been murdered, including a friend of
mine, the journalist Ángel Gahona, who was shot in
the head at the beginning of the crisis. My colleagues
Cristhian Fajardo and his wife María Adilia are in
jail, as are the leaders of the Movimiento Campesino,
Medardo Mairena and Pedro Mena, as well as Irlanda
Jerez and the university leaders Levis Rugama, Yaritza
Mairena, Victoria Obando, Edwin Carcache and
Alejandro Centeno. Another 240 other activists have
been imprisoned for participating in the protests, and
the number of political prisoners continues to rise.
Today Nicaragua has become a huge prison that
pretends to be under control. However, an atmosphere
of terror and indiscriminate persecution reigns every
day. Masked gunmen, accompanied by police, burst
into private Nicaraguan homes without a warrant. They
consider possessing a blue-and-white national flag
to be a crime. Human rights defenders and religious
leaders of all denominations are being persecuted and
threatened with death. Paramilitary groups have been
invading private homes, arresting citizens at random
and taking away their mobile phones. The slightest trace
on a phone of an anti-Government tweet or message
means imprisonment and serious forms of torture, such
as genital amputation or the forced anal penetration of

S/PV. 8340

men and women using objects such as guns and rifles.
There are doctors in Washington, D.C., today who are
testifying under oath about the diagnoses that they have
made of that type of violation. Nicaragua is becoming a
country without hope.
I realize that there are many crises in the world and
that the international community must prioritize its
efforts, and I sympathize with that. However, for more
than a decade, Daniel Ortega’s regime has benefited
from being under the international radar. We are
currently facing a situation that, in addition to causing
unprecedented widespread atrocities within Nicaragua,
is creating dangerous instability in a volatile region of
the world. This is not just another human rights crisis
that can be resolved internationally. This is a State
policy of mass and systematic violence against unarmed
civilians. A time bomb is ticking in Nicaragua. Crimes
against humanity are taking place every day, creating
an environment conducive to an internal conflict of
major proportions that we still have time to prevent.
That will require the engaged attention of the United
Nations if we are to ensure peace and security before
it is too late.
With regard to the Security Council’s mandate, I
call on it to consider adopting a specific resolution on
the critical situation in Nicaragua. I ask the members to
allocate resources and create monitoring mechanisms
for Nicaragua and for disarming the paramilitary
groups. I recommend that the United Nations support
the process of restoring the rule of law in Nicaragua.
I leave the Council with the cry of a country that
while small in size is huge in its desire to have a new
opportunity for peace and justice.
The President: I want to say that this is the reason
we are having this Security Council meeting, because
the international community needs to pay attention to
the situation in Nicaragua. I thank Mr. Maradiaga for
giving the Nicaraguan people a voice and for taking the
time to be at this meeting. It is important for us to hear
his statement.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on the United States delegation’s
assumption of the presidency of the Council, and to
wish you every success.

18-276585/23

S/PV.8340

The situation in Nicaragua

However, I will begin my statement not with words
of gratitude for organizing today’s meeting but rather
by affirming our firm position. The Russian Federation
is categorically opposed to a discussion of the situation
in Nicaragua in the Security Council. We have major
concerns about the invited briefers. I am not sure that
the members of the Council who supported the format of
today’s meeting grasp the potential consequences if this
type of practice should continue. What message can the
Security Council send if it is clearly split on a particular
issue? What value does it add to our discussion overall?
Does the Council’s mandate really include putting
pressure on the authorities of a sovereign State to force
it to make changes, whatever they may be, and thereby
conniving with anti-Government forces? After today’s
discussion, the polarization in Nicaragua can only
worsen. It is difficult not to believe that that is what the
ringleaders of today’s meeting had in mind.
We see support for this notion in that some people
cannot deal with the fact that there are States in the world
capable of carrying out self-sufficient, independent
policies in the interests of their citizens while not
playing up to the regional ambitions of major Powers.
Instead of building relations with such States on a basis
of mutual respect, they all rush to inflict maximum
damage on their economies in order to provoke social
unrest and foment intolerance with the sole purpose of
achieving regime change. It is extremely regrettable
that international and regional organizations are getting
involved in these processes.
The initiators of today’s discussion are trying to
ignore the fact that thanks to the Government’s efforts,
the situation in the country has recently stabilized.
The outstanding disagreements should be resolved
through a direct, peaceful dialogue, without destructive
outside pressure.
I want to say it once again. It is obvious to us that
the issue of Nicaragua has no place on the Security
Council’s agenda. The Council is responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
the domestic political situation in Nicaragua does not
pose those kinds of threats. Rather, it is a vivid, sad
example of destructive outside interference. And what
we heard at the beginning of this morning’s meeting
compels us to conclude that the Security Council
appears to be becoming something like a court of trial
for Nicaragua.
6/23

05/09/2018

Taking the words of its initiators on faith, an
unsophisticated listener could get the impression that
the United States really cares about Nicaraguans. It
is no secret to anyone, however, that Washington’s
subversive relationship to Managua has a long history.
The fact of the open interference of the United States
in Nicaragua’s internal affairs was confirmed by the
27 July 1986 decision of the International Court of
Justice in The Hague with regard to the so-called IranContra affair, when the United States tried to circumvent
its own laws in order to finance Nicaraguan insurgents.
And since the American presidency of the Council
has used a regional rationale in order to shovel the
Nicaraguan issue onto the Security Council’s agenda,
we should not fail to mention some examples of
Washington’s interference in the internal affairs of
other Latin American States as well. Cubans have
never forgotten the Bay of Pigs invasion; Chileans are
unlikely to forget the role that the United States played
in overthrowing the Government of Salvador Allende;
and to this very day Venezuelans are still receiving
direct threats of the use of military force, which is a
gross violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
And all of that is far from being Washington’s complete
record of service in one region alone. I have not even
touched on earlier episodes, or the Monroe Doctrine,
which, it is true, has not been in operation with regard
to Europe for a long time. The peoples of Africa, Asia,
the Middle East and the Pacific also have some things
to say about this issue. Against the backdrop of this
dictatorial policy, which you do not even bother to
disguise, Madam President, your accusations about third
countries’ mythical interference in American domestic
political life with the supposed goal of undermining
America’s great democracy look particularly clumsy.
We in the United Nations talk a lot about the
importance of conflict prevention. And we often hear
claims that human rights situations are indicators of
looming crises. In fact, as we have once again been
convinced today, blatant interference in the affairs of
a sovereign State has replaced so-called preventive
diplomacy and is discrediting the very notion of
preventive diplomacy itself. Reality is presenting
us with more and more examples of the fact that the
concept of human rights violations as indicators of
conflict is one of trickery and hypocrisy. More often
than not the reality is just the opposite — it is conflicts,
including those stirred up from outside, that result in
major violations of human rights. So let us not interfere
18-27658

05/09/2018

The situation in Nicaragua

in the internal processes of sovereign States. After
all, you yourself are always exhorting everyone about
that, Madam President. Or is it only others who are not
allowed to do it?
We call on Washington to refrain from its efforts
in the colonial tradition to influence the situation in
Nicaragua, and in particular those specifically aimed
at it, such as its Nicaraguan Investment Conditionality
Act initiative, its visa and other restrictions on
Nicaraguan officials and the abolition of temporary
protected status for migrants from Nicaragua. And
if the United States is really concerned about the
situation of Nicaraguan citizens, it would be logical to
lift the economic restrictions that have been imposed
on them for political reasons. We genuinely hope that
all of Nicaragua’s political forces will demonstrate
common sense and will work consistently to establish
constructive and respecful cooperation within the
framework of its existing laws and Constitution.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Gonzalo Koncke, Chief
of Staff to the Secretary-General of the Organization
of American States, and Mr. Felix Maradiaga for
their valuable briefings. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Denis Moncada Colindres, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Nicaragua, to our meeting.
We are here today in the absence of a consensus
among the members of the Security Council on holding
this meeting. In that regard, we note Article 34 of
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations, which
states that
“The Security Council may investigate any
dispute or any situation which might lead to
international friction or give rise to a dispute, in
order to determine whether the continuance of
the dispute or situation is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security.”
That underscores the role of the Security Council to
apply preventive diplomacy in order to prevent conflicts
and address situations and crises as early as possible
if there are any early-warning signs of such conflicts
that could endanger international peace and security, in
accordance with the Council’s mandate as outlined in
Article 24 of the Charter.
Regional and subregional organizations also
play an essential role in dealing with regional issues
before they escalate, as expressed in Article 52 of the

S/PV. 8340

Charter, which calls for enabling them to deal with
matters relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security provided that such activities are
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations. All such preventive measures in the
Charter are available to the Security Council so that it
can address crises at an early stage and often prevent
conflicts and destabilization. Preventive diplomacy
has been one of the priorities of the State of Kuwait
during its membership of the Council, as we believe
that addressing unrest and crises at an early stage can
spare enormous losses on the financial, economic, and
political fronts, and especially losses of human life.
We are concerned about the recent events in
Nicaragua and regret the violence and the many
dead and wounded. We underscore the importance
of holding the perpetrators accountable and averting
similar incidents in the future. We call on the parties
concerned to abide by international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. We also urge that
a national dialogue be launched in good faith, aimed at
reaching a peaceful solution to the crisis and avoiding
repercussions that could affect security and destabilize
Nicaragua and the region. This should be done while
taking into consideration the interest of the country
and the the people’s right to a free and dignified life.
We therefore urge the Government of Nicaragua to
continue taking the steps necessary to de-escalate
tensions and cooperating with all the relevant parties,
including the Organization of American States, in order
to get through this difficult period.
The State of Kuwait emphasizes the importance
of acting based on the principles established in
international law for addressing such situations. We
also emphasize our full commitment to the principles
stipulated in Article 2 of the Charter, which call for
respecting States’ sovereignty and refraining from
interfering in their internal affairs.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): This is the first
time I am taking the floor under your presidency,
Madam President, so I would like to congratulate you
and your team on your assumption of the stewardship
of the Council for September. I would also like to thank
Mr. Koncke of the Organization of American States
(OAS) for his informative briefing and Mr. Maradiaga
for his harrowing testimony.
I think the Ambassador of Kuwait very clearly set
out the legal framework under the Charter of the United

18-276587/23

S/PV.8340

The situation in Nicaragua

Nations for why we are having this debate today, and we
are grateful to the United States delegation for putting
it on the Council’s agenda. I will not rehearse that legal
framework, since in my view Ambassador Alotaibi
gave a very good account of it, but what I do want to say
is that it is right that the Council is made aware by the
regional organization concerned of that organization’s
concerns and of the worry that this could begin to have
effects throughout the region. I do not think we should
ever reach a stage where the Council cannot hear from
a regional organization about its concerns about what is
happening in territory for which it is responsible.
But more than that, I think we also need to remember
that the Nicaraguan Government has expelled a United
Nations agency — the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR). I
think that is a very important fact, independent of the
points regarding regional organizations and Chapter
VI of the Charter of the United Nations. The Council
needs to defend the United Nations entities. Therefore,
even if there were no other reason, we would support
discussing this issue today.
Lastly, I note that there has been a situation
of refugees created. By definition, refugees cross
international borders. It is therefore right that the
Council should be able to debate the implications of
that act, which may or may not constitute an unfriendly
act, but also risks being destabilizing to international
peace and security. I am not making a judgement that
it is destabilizing but, as we heard from the Kuwaiti
representative, the Council has the responsibility
to investigate situations that may give rise to those
implications — and I stress the word “may”. I think
that is exactly what we are doing today.
My Government has been watching the events in
Nicaragua very closely. We regret the loss of life that
has occurred since the protests began in April, and we
call for an end to the violence and for the Government
of Nicaragua to comply with its international human
rights obligations. Those obligations include the
people’s right to freedom of expression and to
demonstrate peacefully and lawfully. We have been
deeply concerned by the excessive use of force by the
authorities and pro-Government paramilitaries against
the people of Nicaragua.
We call on the Nicaraguan Government to
demobilize paramilitary groups and to end the
repression against its citizens. We have been alarmed
8/23

05/09/2018

by the many reports we have seen that give rise to
human rights concern. Those include the use of live
ammunition against protesters. We call for those reports
to be thoroughly investigated.
Maintaining press freedoms is always important.
It is particularly so during times of unrest. We urge the
Nicaraguan Government to respect those freedoms and
to allow the independent press to report freely, without
suffering persecution and harassment. And we are very
concerned at reports of violence against independent
media outlets, journalists and their families.
I would also like to register our deep concern about
reports of arbitrary detentions of dissenters. Again, we
urge the Nicaraguan Government to respect the right to
a fair trial and prisoners’ right to due process, a proper
defence and to respect the rights of their families.
Looking ahead, I think we are all aware that the
challenges in Nicaragua can be overcome only through
a meaningful and inclusive dialogue that addresses
the legitimate concerns of the protesters. The United
Kingdom was encouraged by the establishment of a
national dialogue in May. We welcome the role that the
Episcopal Conference of Nicaragua was able to play in
convening that dialogue and mediating, but we regret
that the dialogue has had many breaks because of the
violence, and the recent decision by the Government to
abandon the process is very regrettable. I once again urge
the Nicaragua Government to fulfil its commitment to
engaging sincerely in a dialogue, including by ensuring
peaceful conditions for the dialogue to resume.
Turning to the OAS, the United Kingdom
supports its work. We also support the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights, and of course the
United Nations, in attempting to resolve the current
crisis. Those organizations have important roles to
play in supporting dialogue and ensuring that human
rights transgressions are fully investigated. I referred
earlier to the expulsion of OHCHR. That followed the
publication of its report on human rights violations and
abuses in the context of protests in Nicaragua. I would
like to urge the Nicaraguan Government to reconsider
that decision, to permit the OAS working group to enter
the Nicaragua to carry out its important work and not
to impede the work of the Interdisciplinary Group of
Independent Experts established by the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights.
In conclusion, a return to peace and security in
Nicaragua benefits not only the people of Nicaragu
18-27658

05/09/2018

The situation in Nicaragua

but also the whole region. We heard from the Russian
representative a long catalogue of history. History is
important. It provides context, but it is not the reason
we are here today. We are here today for all the
arguments Ambassador Alotaibi and I set out at the
beginning — we want to see stability, we want the
violence to end and we hope and urge the Nicaraguan
Government to engage meaningfully in an inclusive
and constructive dialogue and to ensure that all human
rights transgressions are fully investigated.
The President: I personally thank the United
Kingdom for its presidency last month and for its
delegation’s work.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we congratulate you, Madam President, for
having assumed the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of September. You can count on our
delegation’s support for a successful mandate. We also
wish to congratulate Ambassador Karen Pierce and the
delegation of the United Kingdom on their successful
presidency during the month of August. And we
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nicaragua.
We also welcome the holding of this meeting and
the briefing on the situation in Nicaragua, as presented
by Mr. Gonzalo Koncke, from the Organization of
American States (OAS), and Mr. Felix Maradiaga, civil
society leader in Nicaragua.
My delegation finds the holding of this meeting
relevant under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, which, among other things, provides
that the Council must be kept fully informed of the
activities undertaken by regional organizations for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Peru looks on with great concern at the situation
in Nicaragua, which is being monitored by the OAS.
We reiterate our emphatic condemnation of the
grave violence that has led to the regrettable loss of
hundreds of human lives, thousands injured and an
indeterminate number of missing persons. Our concern
and condemnation applies to all repressive acts and
violations of human rights committed by police and
paramilitary groups, which, as has been noted, include
extrajudicial executions, forced disappearances, cases
of torture and sexual violence in detention centres, as
well as attacks against the clergy and the press.
We underline that such acts have been duly
documented by the Inter-American Commission on

S/PV. 8340

Human Rights and, more recently, by the United Nations
Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees, among
other independent specialized agencies. We highlight
that the majority of anti-Government citizen protests
have been peaceful. Nevertheless, we also regret that
attacks against Government employees — Government
party members and security force personnel — have
been carried out.
Peru and the OAS Permanent Council have
demanded the immediate cessation of violence and
intimidation, including selective prosecution and
arbitrary detention. We also call for the dismantling
of paramilitary groups and for those responsible for
human rights violations to be held accountable through
fair trials. The OAS, pursuant to its founding Charter,
as well as the American Convention on Human Rights
and the Inter-American Democratic Charter — binding
instruments to which Nicaragua is a signatory
party — has urged Nicaragua and all parties to engage
in dialogue with a view to generating peaceful and
sustainable solutions, thereby strengthening democracy.
In order to contribute to that effort, the OAS has
created a working group for Nicaragua, in which
Peru is an active participant, alongside elevn other
member States. The group has repeatedly expressed its
willingness to engage in constructive dialogue with the
Government of Nicaragua. Regrettably, that offer has
thus far been rejected and the Government of Nicaragua
has limited its cooperation with various entities of the
inter-American and United Nations systems, including
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights.
Peru notes with deep concern the ongoing status
quo in favour of impunity, which has been forcing
tens of thousands of Nicaraguans to seek refuge in
neighbouring countries and could ultimately lead to
new acts of violence, which must be prevented. Given
that and the recommendations made by the SecretaryGeneral in his recent report on the role of regional
organizations in conflict prevention and resolution, we
consider it appropriate that the members of the Council
be duly informed and that they be able to express their
support for OAS efforts to promote a peaceful and
sustainable solution in Nicaragua. Once again, we urge
the Government of Nicaragua to take advantage of the
good offices available and to resume dialogue with
all parties, within the framework of its internal order
and the inter-American system and in accordance with
international law and international human rights law.

18-276589/23

S/PV.8340

The situation in Nicaragua

In conclusion, we recall that Peru’s commitment
to peace, stability and democracy in our region, and
in particular in Nicaragua, is neither new nor foreign
to the history of the Council. Last century, in the
1980s, through the efforts of the so-called Contadora
support group, Peru actively contributed to achieving
sustainable, democratic and inclusive peace in Central
America. Today we reaffirm our commitment to and
solidarity with the brotherly Nicaraguan people, while
reiterating our readiness to assist in finding peaceful and
sustainable solutions and in continuing to consolidate
Latin America and the Caribbean as a region of peace.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): As this
is the first time I am taking the floor in the Security
Council during the month of September, allow me to
begin by warmly congratulating the United Kingdom
on its presidency of the Council in August and wishing
every success to the United States presidency. It can
rest assured of the resolute support of France and on my
support, in particular.
First of all, I would like to thank our two briefers,
Mr. Gonzalo Koncke, Chief of Staff to the Secretary
General of the Organization of American States, and
Mr. Felix Maradiaga, former Secretary General of
the Ministry of Defence of Nicaragua, for their very
insightful briefings. I would also like to welcome the
Nicaraguan Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Denis
Moncada, to the Council.
Since last April, there have been more than 300
deaths and 2,000 injuries in Nicaragua as a result of the
violent suppression of demonstrations and numerous
incidents. Once again, the Council faces a crisis with
potential regional consequences, in particular in
terms of the movement of people, including refugees.
It is clear that the Council has the responsibility to
support and assist conflict-prevention diplomacy in
this and other crisis situations, while maintaining a
watchful eye on the situation, without ideology and
in full respect for the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. France has had the opportunity, either
in public or in private face-to-face meetings with the
Nicaraguan authorities, to express its expectations for
a peaceful settlement of the current situation. Today, I
will focus on three aspects of the crisis that deserve our
full attention.
The first and perhaps most urgent issue is an end to the
repression. France calls on the Nicaraguan Government
to put an end to arbitrary arrests, the excessive use
10/23

05/09/2018

of force and all pressure exerted on demonstrators,
human rights defenders and persons critical of the
Government, including through violent groups. In that
regard, we strongly condemn the violence perpetrated
by paramilitary units, in particular the kidnapping on
20 August of attorney Carlos Cárdenas Zepeda, and
the intimidation and arrests of representatives of trade
unions and human rights organizations. It is the primary
responsibility of the Government to ensure the safety
of its people and respect for their rights. All judicial
proceedings against persons who have been arrested
must be conducted according to the rule of law. If
they are not, the Nicaraguan authorities will gradually
lose all legitimacy and the stability of the Nicaraguan
State will ultimately be undermined. More than ever,
France believes that respect for fundamental rights is
the cornerstone of legitimacy and political stability in
Nicaragua and elsewhere.
My second point concerns national dialogue.
France calls on the Nicaraguan Government to preserve
the national dialogue process, which was launched
under the auspices of the Episcopal Conference of
Nicaragua. The national dialogue is essential to a
peaceful and negotiated resolution to the current crisis
and to progress in discussions on democratization
and justice. We deplore the fact that it has stalled. It
should be noted that the Civic Alliance for Justice and
Democracy has officially requested the resumption
of such dialogue and the Episcopal Conference has
recently expressed its readiness to pursue its mediation
work. It is now up to the Nicaraguan Government
to take this opportunity to start a credible national
dialogue process, without preconditions, with the aim
of resolving the crisis peacefully.
Thirdly, a lasting improvement in the situation
in Nicaragua will depend on close cooperation with
multilateral organizations, primarily the Organization
of American States and the United Nations. In that
regard, France deplores the decision of the Nicaraguan
authorities to request the departure of the mission of
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
following the publication of its report on the situation
in Nicaragua. We call on the Nicaraguan authorities
to reconsider their decision and cooperate with the
Office of the High Commissioner, in accordance with
its mandate and independence. Such cooperation is
essential to identifying those responsible and bringing
them to justice.
18-27658

05/09/2018

The situation in Nicaragua

France has therefore expressed its support for
the establishment of an autonomous and independent
international
investigation
mechanism,
as
recommended by the Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights. The Special Monitoring Mechanism
for Nicaragua, which was established in June, must,
under the supervision of the Interdisciplinary Group of
Independent Experts, shed light on issues of extreme
gravity. We also welcome the establishment of the
Verification and Security Commission — to include
12 members of the national dialogue, representatives
of the Church, the United Nations, the Organization of
American States the Inter-American Commission and
the European Union — to verify the establishment of
conditions for peace in the country.
It is true that mechanisms for resolving the crisis not
only exist but are within reach. We therefore strongly
encourage the Nicaraguan Government to use them in
order to return Nicaragua to the path of prosperity and
political stability to which its people aspire.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let me
thank Ambassador Pierce and her team for their
effective and efficient presidency of the Council last
month. Their time management was commendable.
Secondly, we warmly congratulate you, Madam
President, and your team on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. Let me assure
you of the support of our Mission and of my personal
support for your presidency in this ambitious month.
We welcome the opportunity to discuss the
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations with regard to the
situation in Nicaragua. We thank Mr. Gonzalo Koncke
and Mr. Felix Maradiaga for their valuable briefings.
Historically, warm relations have existed between
the peoples of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and
of Nicaragua. That is the premise of our continued
engagement with Nicaragua and why we have had
intense conversations with Minister Moncada about
our deep concerns with regard to recent developments
in Nicaragua. We welcome Nicaragua’s Minister for
Foreign Affairs to the Council today and believe that
dialogue is a crucial element of prevention. We thank
him for being here with us.
I will focus on three issues today: first, our concerns
about the situation in Nicaragua; secondly, the issue of
prevention and, thirdly, support for mediation efforts.

S/PV. 8340

My first point involves our concerns about the
current situation. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is
deeply concerned about unfolding events in Nicaragua
since 18 April. More than 350 people have been killed
and more than 2,000 people have been wounded since
then. The Government has not protected its civilians.
It has not guaranteed the right to peaceful protest. It
has not protected freedom of the press. On the contrary,
there have been many serious human rights violations,
including the disproportionate use of violence,
extrajudicial killings and disappearances. According
to reliable sources, a majority of those crimes has
been perpetrated by Government officials, para-police
groups and armed third persons. We are specifically
concerned about the violence, repression and arbitrary
detentions that have been taking place since the start of
those protests. In addition, there are signs that access
to health care for protesters has been obstructed, while
more than 100 medical personnel have been dismissed.
We have a simple message — the repression must stop.
That brings me to my second point: the issue of
prevention. We welcome the fact that we are discussing
the situation in Nicaragua in the Security Council
today, and we see this as an opportunity for dialogue.
We therefore welcome the briefing by Mr. Maradiaga,
and we look forward to the statement to be delivered
by Minister Moncada. Early warning and conflict
prevention are important priorities for the Kingdom
of the Netherlands. We see a key role for the Security
Council to play in conflict prevention by addressing root
causes, such as human rights violations. The Council
should therefore support preventive and mediation
efforts with regard to the situation in Nicaragua, with
a view to sustaining stability and promoting peace in
the region.
That brings me to my third point: the role of
local and regional organizations. In our view, the
engagement of local and regional actors is essential to
addressing the current crisis. We applaud the hard work
of the Bishops of the Catholic Church in Nicaragua
as mediator. We applaud the important efforts of the
Organization of American States (OAS) to support the
dialogue in Nicaragua. We also welcomed the early
invitations by the Nicaraguan authorities to the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Inter-American Commission for Human
Rights and the European Union to visit Nicaragua and
support the dialogue.

18-2765811/23

S/PV.8340

The situation in Nicaragua

However, the lack of progress regarding the
dialogue is worrying. We regret the decision of the
Nicaraguan Government to terminate the presence
of the mission of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, which runs contrary to the spirit of dialogue and
the principles of full accountability for human rights
violations and securing justice for victims of violence.
We expect the authorities to seriously consider the
findings of the High Commissioner and to take urgent
action to implement recommendations in his report. We
urge the Nicaraguan authorities to fully cooperate with
the relevant international organizations and to provide
the necessary access to information. The independent
investigation into human rights violations is paramount
to a sustainable solution. Perpetrators of human rights
violations must be brought to justice.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands, in that
regard, supports the activities of the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights, as well as those of
the Interdisciplinary Group of Independent Experts
of the OAS, which aim at strengthening Nicaraguan
institutions and contributing to investigations into
recent violent events. We urge Nicaragua to fully
cooperate with the OAS and the United Nations.
I should like to conclude my statement in Spanish.
(spoke in Spanish)
We call on the Nicaraguan authorities to immediately
cease the violence and to protect their citizens and
their right to peaceful protest. We welcome and further
encourage the firm engagement of the Organization of
American States and other regional actors in addressing
the current situation. We call on the Nicaraguan
authorities to implement the recommendations made
by the Inter-American Commission for Human
Rights and by the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights without delay, and in particular to
take all the steps necessary to reactivate the dialogue
on democratization and justice, which will pave the
way to a sustainable peaceful solution to the situation
in Nicaragua.
The President: I am quite impressed by the Spanish
of the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me to extend to you, Madam, my delegation’s
warm congratulations and wishes for your country’s
every success during its presidency of the Security
Council for the month of September. I am also pleased
12/23

05/09/2018

to offer my delegation’s thanks to Ambassador Karen
Pierce and her entire team for the mastery with which
they conducted the work of the Security Council,
as well as for the relevance of the topics addressed
during the month of August under the presidency of the
United Kingdom.
I thank Mr. Gonzalo Koncke, Chief of Staff to the
Secretary General of the Organization of American
States, and Mr. Felix Maradiaga, civil society
representative, for their briefings. I welcome the
presence among us of Mr. Denis Ronaldo Moncada
Colindres, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nicaragua.
Since April, Nicaragua has been in the throes of
sociopolitical demonstrations that hardly seem to have
let up. The vicious cycle of repressed social protests
has left more than 300 people dead and led to the
displacement of more than 23,000 Nicaraguans to
neighbouring Costa Rica, where shelters are struggling
to cope with the increasing flow and needs of refugees.
The dialogue for peace between the Government and
civil society, led under the auspices of the Episcopal
Conference of Nicaragua with a view to achieving
a peaceful solution to the crisis, has yet to achieve
the hoped-for results. Mutual mistrust between the
Government and civil society organizations has spread
to the Episcopate, which the Government is accusing of
bias by favouring the protesters, thereby adding to the
complex nature of the situation.
The urgent calls of the international community for
the immediate cessation of violence — a prerequisite
for establishing an environment conducive to the
resumption of the sociopolitical dialogue — have
gone unanswered. In that regard, the recent expulsion
from Nicaragua of members of the mission of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights does not bode well. Concerning the
current stalemate and the ongoing deterioration of the
sociopolitical situation, Côte d’Ivoire would like to
express its deep concern about the risks associated with
the deteriorating conflict, the long-term humanitarian
consequences of which — although it is internal in nature
at present — could be unprecedented for Nicaragua and
neighbouring countries. My country therefore urges the
Government and civil society organizations to renounce
violence and resume negotiations without delay for a
peaceful resolution of the crisis in the best interests of
the people of Nicaragua.
18-27658

05/09/2018

The situation in Nicaragua

The recent history of humankind reminds us of
many instances in which what were initially lowintensity crises developed into armed conflicts with
various and often tragic humanitarian consequences.
Such tragedies, which continue to shake our collective
conscience, have arisen owing to the obstinacy of the
parties concerned in failing to recognize the gravity
of the situation in their country, on the one hand,
and, on the other, to a lack of interest and adequate
reaction on the part of the international community.
As preventive diplomacy is unanimously accepted as
the most effective means of conflict prevention and
management, my country urges the United Nations and
the Organization of American States to use the range of
tools available to them in the framework of a preventive
approach so as to establish a constructive dialogue with
and among all the actors in the crisis in Nicaragua.
That is the gist of our support for the proposal made
by members of the Council to include the Nicaraguan
issue on the programme of work for September. My
country therefore echoes the call made by SecretaryGeneral António Gutteres for an immediate end to
the violence and the resumption of inter-Nicaraguan
political dialogue — the only guarantee for a lasting
return to peace and stability.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire remains convinced
that a return to a peaceful situation in Nicaragua
will be possible only if Nicaraguans themselves are
willing and committed to take ownership of existing
mechanisms to assuage tensions within Nicaragua and
the subregion. In our opinion, it is imperative for the
Council to support them in that regard.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I thank you very much,
Madam President, for convening this meeting. I
offer you our full support during your presidency in
September. Allow me, as well, to thank our briefers,
Mr. Gonzalo Koncke and Mr. Felix Maradiaga, for their
briefings. I also welcome among us His Excellency
Mr. Denis Moncada Colindres, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Nicaragua.
Just a week ago, we discussed mediation and the
peaceful settlement of disputes in this Chamber (see
S/PV.8334). More than 70 Member States reaffirmed
their commitment to preventive diplomacy and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, whether inter-State and
internal conflicts. Therefore, let me just remind members
of the Security Council that we strongly agree with
the Secretary-General’s policy of prioritizing conflict

S/PV. 8340

prevention and addressing the root causes of conflicts
before they escalate and have an irreversible impact.
It is our responsibility, as members of the
international community, to not turn a blind eye to
crises, such as the one occurring right now in Nicaragua.
Instead of shying away, we need to see — just as the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights calls us to see in its recent report on
Nicaragua — the current situation in a broader context
and realize what possible consequences it might
provoke in the region.
Poland is deeply worried about the recent
developments in Nicaragua. We are concerned about the
repression and violence, which have resulted in hundreds
of deaths and thousands of injured. The Nicaraguan
authorities must fully respect and comply with the
applicable human rights standards regarding the right to
peaceful assembly and freedom of speech. There is no
justification for the excessive and disproportionate use
of force against peaceful demonstrators, just as there is
no justification for the harassment and intimidation of
civil and political activists.
Regional organizations can often prove themselves
far more efficient in mediation. Their geographical
proximity to the actors involved in conflicts leads to the
deeper comprehension of the specificity of a particular
problem, and they are better prepared to identify key
nuances that we might simply overlook. They also
demonstrate an excellent ability to lay the foundation
for more profound and sustainable reconciliation.
That is why Poland takes note of the efforts
undertaken by the Organization of American States
(OAS) to resolve the crisis, followed by attentive
monitoring of the situation. We would like to express
our strong support for the work that is carried out by
the OAS, and we hope that the inclusive and fruitful
dialogue, with the participation of the Interdisciplinary
Group of Independent Experts for Nicaragua, will
commence. At the same time, we are very concerned
that the parties so far have demonstrated little will or
ability to participate in such a dialogue. We encourage
the conflicting parties to take up an open and genuine
dialogue, start cooperating with the OAS and take
advantage of the forum it offers. If they are unwilling
to do so, perhaps a need for an external peace broker or
dialogue facilitator should be recognized.
We have to once and for all leave behind the
delusion that we have the luxury of time to spend on

18-2765813/23

S/PV.8340

The situation in Nicaragua

discussions or deliberations. Given the high stakes
in this case — such as the lives of our Nicaraguan
friends — time is a comfort we simply cannot afford.
Therefore, we call upon the Nicaraguan Government to
not perceive the discussion we are having today as an
attempt to stigmatize its country. We believe that our
meeting is not about any sort of blame game or pointing
fingers, but rather about acknowledging the gravity of
the problem and offering a helping hand in solving it.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): My delegation congratulates
you and your team, Madam President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September, and conveys our felicitations to our United
Kingdom colleagues for their able stewardship of the
Council last month.
At the outset, we would like to thank our briefers
for their interventions. We also welcome the presence
of Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nicaragua Dennis
Moncada Colindres.
Kazakhstan is closely monitoring developments
in Nicaragua. We acknowledge the right to peaceful
assembly and condemn all acts of violence and attacks
on civilians. We express our deepest sympathy and
condolences to the families of those killed.
We firmly believe that the Government and the
people of Nicaragua will be able to overcome the
current situation and find a solution to the problems
for the sake of peace and security, with due respect
for fundamental rights and freedoms. Such a solution
should be peaceful and democratic and found within
the framework of the Constitution, in particular by
promoting dialogue between the country’s political
actors. We also believe that all stakeholders should
refrain from violent or provocative actions.
We note with satisfaction that the level of tension in
Nicaragua has decreased and the situation is gradually
normalizing. We positively commend the launch of the
national dialogue in Nicaragua, with the mediation of
the Catholic Church, which is called upon to develop an
algorithm for resolving existing problems in the interest
of ensuring the sustainable development of the country.
Kazakhstan is a firm proponent of the preventive
diplomacy principle, but is against external influence
in the internal affairs of independent countries under
that pretext. Kazakhstan is strongly committed to
the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States.
14/23

05/09/2018

The situation in Nicaragua does not constitute a
threat to international peace and security, and therefore
should not fall under the mandate of the Security
Council. At this stage, the United Nations involvement
should be only through the mediation efforts of the
Secretary-General’s good offices.
Lastly, we believe that stronger engagement and
respectful cooperation by regional organizations,
particularly the Organization of American States, in
resolving the situation would be a crucial step towards
the normalization of the political situation in Nicaragua.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I extend congratulations
to you, Madam President, and the United States for
assuming the presidency of the Security Council.
We offer our respect, gratitude and admiration to
the United Kingdom for the way it presided over the
Council last month.
I would like to thank Mr. Gonzalo Koncke from the
Organization of American States (OAS) and Mr. Felix
Maradiaga for their important briefings to the Council
this morning, and also acknowledge the presence of
Foreign Minister Moncada Colindres at the Council
this morning.
Both the OAS and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) have
reported on the unfolding of the human rights crisis
in Nicaragua. Hundreds have been killed. There are
worrying reports of targeted violence and persecution
of peaceful protesters and human rights defenders,
as well as of incidents of torture and sexual violence
against detainees. Accounts of the existence and use of
armed elements loyal to the Government — or so-called
shock forces and mobs — are particularly alarming. The
crisis has potential regional implications, and needs to
be addressed in a spirit of preventive diplomacy. The
Security Council’s role is, first and foremost, to support
those efforts.
We urge the Government to revive national
dialogue with all the parties concerned, including the
opposition, civil society and human rights defenders.
Women’s participation in that dialogue is crucial. That
is the only way to ensure a peaceful solution to the
current crisis.
We condemn all violence, including from protesters.
The Nicaraguan authorities must act in accordance
with international human rights law. Protests that are
peaceful should never be hindered, and violence against
18-27658

05/09/2018

The situation in Nicaragua

those who use their right to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly can never be justified.
Regional and subregional organizations are key to
preventing emerging crises from evolving further, as
everyone has said today and the briefings illustrate. We
commend and support the OAS for its role in promoting
a peaceful solution to the situation in Nicaragua. In
that regard, we call on the Government to fully engage
with the OAS, as well as with the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights.
The United Nations also has an important role to
play in supporting a peaceful solution to the crisis,
not least in supporting regional efforts and with
preventive diplomacy. We regret the expulsion of the
OHCHR mission last week, and hope that they will be
invited back without delay. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts and encourage him to continue to stay
actively engaged. The European Union will continue its
dialogue with all parties and actively support efforts of
the broader international community.
Sweden has long-standing and friendly relations
with Nicaragua. We are fully committed to supporting
the country in finding a peaceful solution to the current
crisis. Resuming inclusive, meaningful national
dialogue, reinvigorating democracy, restoring the rule
of law, respecting human rights and re-engaging with
the international community, including the United
Nations and the OAS, will be crucial to that.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Mr. Gonzalo
Koncke, Chief of Staff to the Secretary General of
the Organization of American States, and Mr. Felix
Maradiaga for their respective briefings. We would
also like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Nicaragua, His Excellency Mr. Denis Moncada Colindres.
We have been following the developments in
Nicaragua. Since we are not from the region, we do
not claim to have knowledge and/or expertise of the
unfolding situation, but we have listened very carefully
to the different views that have been expressed.
We maintain that, when it comes to issues related
to our region, and Africa as a whole, the views of the
countries concerned, as well as the region and the
continent, need to be fully considered. Past experiences
have shown that international engagement in any
situation, including by the United Nations, can be
effective and meaningful only if it is carefully calibrated
and coordinated with regional efforts.

S/PV. 8340

When it comes to the situation in Nicaragua
in particular, we have not seen any indication that
convinces us that it constitutes a threat to international
peace and security. That is the basis for any involvement
by the Security Council, as provided for by the Charter
of the United Nations. We are concerned by the
increasing violence in the country, but at this stage the
situation remains an internal matter of Nicaraguans,
which needs to be addressed through genuine dialogue
and negotiation among the political stakeholders to
find a peaceful solution to the crisis. We appreciate and
support the ongoing efforts in that direction.
We know the history of the region and the sensitivities
surrounding any perceived external involvement
from outside the region. That is why there is a need
for caution in handling the situation in Nicaragua. We
understand that some members think there is a case for
preventive diplomacy. It is indeed very important that
every possible effort be made to prevent the situation
from getting out of hand. We know that is best done
discretely through the deployment of good offices.
Otherwise, there is a possibility that such action may
send the wrong signal to the Nicaraguan stakeholders
and undermine the ongoing dialogue process.
We are aware that the Secretary-General has
already been approached to assist, and we note his
readiness to do so. That, in our opinion, is the best way
forward. We hope that kind of constructive engagement
will continue with a view to de-escalating the political
tension and finding a peaceful solution to the crisis.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
Ambassador Karen Pierce and the delegation of the
United Kingdom for their very successful presidency
of the Security Council in August. We also wish you,
Madam President, and your delegation success during
your presidency, and we guarantee you all the necessary
support from the delegation of Equatorial Guinea.
Allow me to welcome to this meeting His Excellency
Mr. Denis Moncada Colindres, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Nicaragua. I also thank Mr. Gonzalo Koncke,
Chief of Staff to the Secretary General of the Organization
of American States, and the representative of civil
society, Mr. Felix Maradiaga, for their comprehensive
briefings, which have provided a very timely and detailed
explanation of the situation in Nicaragua.
Over the past decade, we have witnessed numerous
situations that have resulted in death, injury and other

18-2765815/23

S/PV.8340

The situation in Nicaragua

atrocities as a result of civil war and acts of terrorism,
where the devastating effects of weapons have become a
reality, leaving victims in many parts of the world.
In accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, we, the Member States, entrust to the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, and we agree that, in
carrying out its functions under that responsibility, the
Council act on our behalf. Such a task, in spite of all the
difficulties, continues to be vigorously undertaken.
In view of the continuing threats to international
peace and security, the action of the Security Council,
although notable in many areas, needs to substantially
and significantly improve, envisaging what is set out
in Chapter VIII of the Charter, which defines the
mechanisms and means necessary for interaction among
the Security Council and regional and subregional
organizations, in order to strenthen the prevention,
management and peaceful settlement of conflicts. Our
Government recognizes, appreciates and greatly values
the concern of both the Security Council and regional
and subregional organizations in the face of any threat to
international peace and security.
In Nicaragua’s case, our Government expresses its
great concern about the political crisis that began in
the country in April and the popular uprisings that are
taking place in several cities of the country, which are
led by students and supported by workers, professionals
and entrepreneurs. Such events have claimed hundreds of
lives and led to numerous injuries, considerably affecting
the socioeconomic situation of the country, as illustrated
in the briefings we have just heard.
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea recognizes the right of citizens to demonstrate,
which is also recognized by the Nicaraguan legal system.
Such demonstrations must be peaceful expressions of
the population and their convening, development and
conclusion must be regulated by the law, while also
respecting the rights of those who do not support them.
We are convinced that any differences must be
resolved through an ongoing quest for a peaceful solution,
through consultation and dialogue, always in accordance
with the principles of international law and in accordance
with absolute respect for human rights. We therefore urge
the parties to continue the national dialogue and, to that
end, seek the support of international organizations to
act as mediators.
16/23

05/09/2018

I should like to conclude my statement by, on the one
hand, encouraging the international community — in
particular the Organization of American States and
the Catholic Church — to continue its constructive
mediation role so as to establish the necessary external
conditions to facilitate consultations, dialogue and
agreement to avert a deterioration of the situation and
help the parties find a negotiated solution and, on the
other hand, by calling on the Government of Nicaragua
to open up to the international community and facilitate
the putting in place of the mechanisms needed for a
resolution of the serious political crisis the country
is experiencing. That is how we truly believe we can
address the situation in Nicaragua, and not by including
it on the programme of work of the Security Council.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, allow me to
join in the expressions of gratitude and congratulations
to Ambassador Pierce and her team on their steering
of the presidency of the Security Council last month. I
also wish you and your delegation, Madam President,
the greatest success this month.
It is also a privilege for me to join in welcoming His
Excellency Mr. Denis Moncada Colindres, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Nicaragua, a fraternal country.
I also wish to welcome someone whom I consider
as a personal friend, Mr. Gonzalo Koncke, Chief of
Staff to the Secretary General of the Organization of
American States.
I take the floor to reiterate our rejection of the
holding of today’s meeting in the Security Council.
This is a place for considering matters related to
threats to international peace and security, and
Nicaragua does not constitute any kind of threat to
the region or the world. The members of the Security
Souncil, in particular its permanent members, have
the responsibility of avoiding turning this organ into
an instrument for political or ideological ends. We
therefore think it absurd that, under the theme “regional
and subregional cooperation”, our attention is being
drawn to the internal situation of a Member State of
this Organization.
Likewise, Bolivia believes that the argument for
addressing the situation in Nicaragua today under
Article 34 of the Charter of the United Nations is
not applicable, for no dispute or situation is being
investigated that could lead to international friction
or give rise to a dispute whose continuance could
18-27658

05/09/2018

The situation in Nicaragua

endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security, since at present the reality in Nicaragua is
relatively calm.
Along the same lines, in accordance with Article
54 of the Charter of the United Nations, regional bodies
shall keep the Security Council informed of activities
undertaken or being contemplated under regional
arrangements for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
None of those conditions are met when one
considers the situation in Nicaragua.
By way of a review of the events, the mobilizations
in Nicaragua took place in April and May. The
Nicaraguan State resorted to legal and constitutional
domestic mechanisms to pacify the country and called
for a national dialogue with the mediation of the
Catholic Church, all with the primary aim of pacifying
Nicaragua and identifying and bringing to justice those
responsible for fanning and perpetrating the violence.
All of us are aware of the regrettable toll of hundreds
of people killed or wounded. We are convinced that,
with the efforts by Nicaragua’s democratic institutions,
those responsible will be duly identified, tried and
punished to the fullest extent of the law.
Bolivia opposed the holding of this meeting based
on the Charter of the United Nations, which clearly
establishes the principle of non-interference in the
internal affairs of Member States. We also oppose
the manipulation of agenda items whose legitimate
purpose is to support cooperation mechanisms with
regional organizations to serve as an umbrella under
which everything can fit.
We oppose the manipulation of the SecretaryGeneral’s strategy for preventive diplomacy for
purposes far removed from helping to alleviate a crisis
situation, which in fact serves to make the situation
worse by trying to put a Member State on the stand as
accused and giving the right to take the floor to persons
who represent only a single point of view on the conflict.
This approach undermines multilateralism, saps the
momentum of preventive diplomacy, puts dialogue
between the parties further out of reach and violates the
principles of sovereignty and equality among States.
Not to agree with the representative of the United
Kingdom when she referred to history, but history is
indeed very important. Not only does it make it possible
for us to have perspective on what is happening, but it

S/PV. 8340

lets us learn relevant lessons. Regrettably, Nicaragua’s
history over the course of almost two centuries has
been marked by the interventionist obsession of the
United States. It is worth mentioning the lunacy of
the incursion by the mercenary William Walker who,
supported by American businessmen and politicians,
invaded Nicaragua militarily and proclaimed himself
President of Nicaragua in 1856. Mercenary invasion
was followed by military invasion when the United
States Marines invaded Nicaragua in 1912, where they
remained until 1933 when the rebellion of Augusto
César Sandino managed to expel them from the country.
Later, the United States left in power the national guard
headed by Anastasio Somoza — one of the cruellest
dictatorships ever in Latin America — who governed
for the benefit of himself and his family for more
than 40 years, with the full financial, economic and
military support of that country. When, in 1979, the
Sandinista National Liberation Front finally managed
to defeat the Somoza dictatorship, the United States
intervened again, arming and supporting the contras
and sabotaging the Nicaraguan economy until it almost
destroyed it.
That is why history is important.
It could be said that there has not been a moment
in its history in which Nicaragua has not been subject
to intervention, abuse, interference and threats. In fact,
as the representative of the Russian Federation aptly
reminded us, in 1986 the International Court of Justice,
one of the main organs of our system, found the United
States responsible for
“training, arming, equipping, financing and
supplying the contra forces, to the detriment of
the Nicaraguan republic ... infringing upon the
obligation incumbent upon it under customary
international law not to intervene in the affairs of
another state”.
Interventionism, interference and the financing of
opposition groups constitute the big elephant in the room
that is not discussed in this Chamber. The real interest
of the United States is not the defence of democracy;
were it so it would not employ double standards or
give speeches about defending democracy while at
the same time financing coups d’état and destabilizing
democratically elected Governments.
The real interest is not in defending human
rights; otherwise States claiming to do so would sign
all the international agreements under our system

18-2765817/23

S/PV.8340

The situation in Nicaragua

on defending and promoting human rights. If human
rights were the real reason, the United States would not
have abandoned the Human Rights Council, one of the
greatest achievements of our system. If it were really
about human rights torture would not be promoted and
asylum seekers would not be put in jail, giving rise to
the inhumane separation of parents from their children.
The recent history of interventionism is a long one.
We need only consider what happened in regions such
as the Middle East. As we have said on many occasions,
in Libya, Syria and in Iraq these policies have created
the worst situations in this century. What is the true
interest? The true interest is to promote situations of
instability and to exploit them to change regimes and
to control natural resources. That is the key objective.
We listened closely to the briefing given by the Chief
of Staff to the Secretary General of the Organization of
American States, and we agree with him on several of
the issues, including with respect to the fact that it is
not just Nicaragua but all countries of our region and
the world that need democracy, justice, truth and peace.
To that I would add that, in addition to democracy,
justice, truth and peace, it is absolutely essential that
States be free of interference and interventionism.
How many millions of dollars have been earmarked to
finance opposition groups in Nicaragua? What is the
source of those millions of dollars to finance instability
in countries such as Nicaragua? Moreover, in speaking
of the multilateral system, we also need to consider
the enforcement of unilateral sanctions, which are
violations of international law.
If the international community truly wishes to
help Nicaragua to resolve its problems, it must do so
in the framework of the Charter of the United Nations.
It must respect Nicaragua’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity, while also condemning any
interference, interventionism or policy of regime
change. The response to the problems of Nicaragua
must be provided by the Nicaraguans themselves within
the framework of the rule of law.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate you, Madam
President, and your team on assuming the September
presidency of the Security Council. I also thank the
United Kingdom for its work in the presidency of the
Council in August.
China has consistently called for respect for
countries’ sovereignty, independence, unity and
18/23

05/09/2018

territorial integrity, as well as for adherence to the
principle of non-interference in internal affairs. China
is of the view that the situation in Nicaragua does not
constitute a threat to international peace and security
and that the Security Council should not get involved.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
One month ago, I stood on the Simón Bolívar
International Bridge that connects Venezuela with
Colombia, and watched an unending line of desperate
people trying to escape tyranny. The irony and the
tragedy of this bridge should not be lost on any of
us. Named for a great liberator, the Simón Bolívar
International Bridge is now an escape route for a people
starved and imprisoned by a dictator.
But there is also a lesson in the thousands of
Venezuelans who cross the Simón Bolívar International
Bridge every day. Fundamental human rights are denied
when a man’s ability to feed his family is destroyed.
Human rights are denied when a woman loses her
voice in determining her own future and when human
rights are denied. The violence and instability that
follow spill over borders. One nation’s crisis becomes
a region’s crisis — even a global crisis. This process is
well advanced in Venezuela. To those who say that this
is only a matter of Venezuelan internal affairs, I would
say: “Tell that to the people of Colombia. Tell that to
the people of Peru. Tell that to the people of Brazil. And
tell that to the people of Ecuador”. We are long past
the point at which the narco-State of Venezuela stopped
being a Venezuelan security problem.
And now we are seeing the start of this disastrous
cycle in Nicaragua. The spread of tyranny follows a
predictable pattern. Media and opposition parties are
silenced. Corruption chokes off economic opportunity.
Institutions that people rely on outside the State, such as
universities, trade unions and the church, are attacked
and demonized The regime unleashes its militants to
kidnap, torture and execute dissidents. The dictator
hides behind those forces that terrorize and surveil
their neighbours — all at the regime’s instruction and
on its behalf. And when the people inevitably rise
up in protest, they are met with more violence, more
imprisonment and more death. Then the exodus begins.
All of this has already happened in Venezuela.
All of this is now happening in Nicaragua. Daniel
Ortega has adopted the tactics of the dictators he
once claimed to oppose. We should not be surprised.
18-27658

05/09/2018

The situation in Nicaragua

Daniel Ortega and Nicolás Maduro are cut from the
same corrupt cloth. They are both students of the same
failed ideology, and they are both dictators who live
in fear of their own people. The Ortega regime has
long controlled the media by ensuring that television
and radio stations are in the hands of family, friends
and corrupt allies. Ortega banned opposition parties
and rigged the Nicaraguan Constitution to allow him
three uninterrupted five-year terms, and he named his
wife Vice-President to continue to hold the power and
dominate Nicaragua when he passes from the scene.
In classic authoritarian fashion, Ortega is attempting
to destroy the most respected institution that is rightfully
standing up for the Nicaraguan people — the Catholic
Church. Clerics have been attacked. Catholic charities
have been looted. Churches have been desecrated. Now,
he is clinging to power in an equally authoritarian
fashion by killing, detaining and brutalizing anyone
who dares to oppose him. According to the Nicaraguan
Association for Human Rights, over 448 people have
been killed and over 2,000 have been injured.
Predictably, the Ortega regime has unleashed
its allied forces and turned citizens against citizens.
Hundreds of the regime’s opponents have been
kidnapped, including six national dialogue student
leaders who were taken just yesterday. Hundreds more
have disappeared, and just last week he expelled the
United Nations human rights delegation. All of the
detained students and other political prisoners should
be released immediately.
The result is the beginnings of the exodus of
desperate Nicaraguans out of their homeland. Over
25,000 Nicaraguans have migrated to Costa Rica
since the start of the crisis, with Honduras, Panama
and Mexico also receiving Nicaraguan migrants and
asylum seekers.
With each passing day, Nicaragua travels further
down a familiar path. It is a path that Syria has taken.
It is a path that Venezuela has taken. The Security
Council should not and cannot be a passive observer
as Nicaragua continues to decline into a failed, corrupt
and dictatorial State, because we know where this path
leads. The Syrian exodus has produced millions of
refugees, sowing instability throughout the Middle East
and Europe. The Venezuelan exodus has become the
largest displacement of people in the history of Latin
America. A Nicaraguan exodus would overwhelm its

S/PV. 8340

neighbours and create a surge of migrants and asylum
seekers in Central America.
Today, the United States stands in solidarity with
the people of Nicaragua, not just because we believe
in fundamental human rights and expect them to be
honoured, but also because our future is bound up with
our neighbours in the Americas. Their prosperity is
our prosperity, and their security is our security. On
my trip to Colombia, I met with Venezuelan families
who walked three hours in the blazing heat every day
to cross the Simón Bolívar International Bridge for just
a single meal — the only meal that they would have
that day.
Nicaraguan families are not that desperate yet, but
we know what is coming if nothing changes. We still
have the opportunity to prevent history from repeating
itself. We still have the opportunity to prevent tyranny
from threatening peace and security. The Nicaraguan
people are demanding a voice in their future. They are
calling for the release of arbitrarily jailed protesters.
They are calling for an end to the dictatorship. They are
calling for their own freedom.
On 18 July, the Organization of American States
(OAS) overwhelmingly adopted a resolution holding
the Nicaraguan Government responsible for ongoing
human rights abuses, and has since established a
working group to consider the situation in Nicaragua.
The OAS has shown great leadership in addressing the
tragic developments in Nicaragua. The United States
fully supports the efforts of the OAS.
For the sake of the people of Nicaragua, for the
security of the region and for the respect for human
rights that we are bound to uphold, I applaud the
Security Council for adding its powerful voice to those
calling for an end to tyranny in Nicaragua.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Nicaragua.
Mr. Moncada Colindres (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): Nicaraguans love peace. We comprehensively
strengthen security and promote and champion human
rights. The Government and the people of Nicaragua
defend the principles of independence, sovereignty
and self-determination of peoples, as set forth in the
Charter of the United Nations. As such, we call for
and demand an end to all interventionist policies that

18-2765819/23

S/PV.8340

The situation in Nicaragua

violate international law. There is consensus in the
Security Council that Nicaragua does not represent
a threat to international peace and security. That
is why its inclusion on the agenda of this meeting is
clear interference in the internal affairs of Nicaragua
and a violation of the United Nations Charter and
international law.
The reality, as recognized by the international
community, including United Nations organs and
agencies, is that our country has been a factor for
regional stability, peace and security — with strong
positive indicators of economic, political and social
development, poverty reduction, gender equality and
citizen security. It has been an example and a protective
barrier in the fight against transnational organized
crime, terrorism and drug trafficking activity in
the region.
According to the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and the Economic Commission for
Latin America and the Caribbean, Nicaragua has shown
an average sustained economic growth of 5.2 per cent
in recent years, which has allowed it to almost double
its gross domestic product. One of the most significant
advances in Nicaragua is a sustained reduction of
poverty. General poverty and extreme poverty at the
national level have been halved in recent years, as
recognized by various international organizations.

05/09/2018

within our family. That is the dialogue that the people
of Nicaragua have built, and we will continue to ensure
the peace, stability and progress of our country.
We thank the States members of the Security
Council and our brother States that have recognized
that Nicaragua poses no threat to international peace
and security and that it does not deserve being included
on the Council’s agenda. That solidarity is consistent
with the reality of our country and with the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.
We recall that the United States was condemned
by the International Court of Justice in The Hague in
1986 for military activities, paramilitaries activities
and acts of terrorism against Nicaragua. The people of
Nicaragua and the international community waits for
the United States to fulfil the terms of its conviction
by compensating Nicaragua and ceasing all acts of
aggression and interference. That is how the United
States can respect the human rights of the people
of Nicaragua.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.

Nicaragua is party to human rights agreements and
conventions and honours its commitments. The Council
is not the appropriate body to address this issue. The
topic of human rights should be discussed through
constructive, non-confrontational and non-politicized
dialogue, based on the principles of universality,
impartiality, objectivity and non-selectivity. Our people
will continue to champion the peace, stability, security
and progress that we have been building.

Mr. Carazo Zeledón (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica thanks the presidency of the
Council for having convened this meeting on the
situation in Nicaragua. We believe it to be appropriate,
timely and necessary. The report entitled “Violations of
human rights and abuses in the context of the protests in
Nicaragua”, issued by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, attests to the
“systematic erosion of human rights” in that country.
This meeting should give us the opportunity to find the
way to guarantee the full respect of human rights in
Nicaragua in order to maintain social peace and ensure
sustainable regional peace.

The people of Nicaragua has a right to live and
progress in peace. It has the right to continue to make
progress in eradicating poverty and to pursue its quest,
in sovereignty and dignity, for sustainable development
and a decent life for our people, without exclusion of
any kind, in order to reach the Sustainable Development
Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

We have listened carefully to the briefings of
Mr. Gonzalo Koncke, Chief of Staff to the Secretary
General of the Organization of American States, and
Mr. Felix Maradiaga, to whom we express our gratitude.
We paid close attention to the statement made by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nicaragua, Mr. Denis
Moncada Colindres.

Our Government and people reaffirm their deep
commitment to peace and therefore promote real
dialogue among Nicaraguans. That is the path; that
is the route that we are taking and the most effective
dialogue there can be — dialogue within our people and

The situation in the brotherly country to the north
is a priority issue for the Nicaraguan people and for
the Costa Rica, for everything that occurs in that
small, interconnected geographical area has a direct
or indirect impact on us and, similarly, on the entire

20/23

18-27658

05/09/2018

The situation in Nicaragua

Central American region. Costa Rica cannot and will
not be indifferent to the suffering and uncertainty of
those whom we consider our brothers and sisters. Costa
Rica has been consistent in expressing its concern
about the deterioration of the rule of law and respect
for human rights in Nicaragua. Since April, when the
conflict began, we have expressed our dismay about the
escalation of violence and repression, which, according
to the report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, has already claimed
hundreds of lives and led to a regrettable wave of
serious human rights violations, thereby threatening
the security and safety of thousands of Nicaraguans.
As we have stated and as the report reflects,
we believe that extrajudicial executions, forced
disappearances, the obstruction of access to medical
care, widespread arbitrary or illegal detentions, illtreatment and cases of torture and sexual violence in
detention centres are all unacceptable. They have led
to the systematic erosion of the human rights of the
Nicaraguan people, as well as to the selective repression
and intimidation of demonstrators and their families,
students, journalists, social leaders, human rights
defenders and mediators, among others. In line with
international law, it must be recalled that each country
has the primary responsibility to guarantee the security
and protection of its inhabitants and, failing that, the
international community must protect the human rights
of those people.
For months we have seen the serious migration,
social and economic repercussions, which have not
remained confined to Nicaragua but have spread
beyond its borders. The deepening of the political,
social and economic crisis in Nicaragua, repression
and lack of respect for fundamental freedoms and
human rights on the part of the authorities could cause
an unbridled escalation of the crisis, which would
have a direct impact on the stability and development
of the countries and peoples of Central America.
Since the first set of student demonstrations, which
were repressed with unusual violence, Costa Rica
has experienced a considerable increase in refugee
applications and migration flows from Nicaragua.
The number of Nicaraguan migrants has increased
considerably, including in particular vulnerable people
seeking safety and better opportunities. The number of
refugee applications has also increased — from four
applications in January this year to 4,074 in August
alone. In total, during the first eight months of this year,

S/PV. 8340

more than 12,830 refugee applications were received
from Nicaraguan citizens.
As a country of destination, transit and origin that
respects human rights, Costa Rica’s priority has always
been the protection, respect, dignity and safety of
people. In order to meet those objectives, Costa Rican
institutions have always responded responsibly, as it
has in this case, in an orderly manner and in compliance
with national and international standards. Similarly,
since the beginning, we have worked closely with the
relevant international organizations and United Nations
agencies, such as the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration, among others, with which
we maintain a close relationship and from whom we
have received considerable support.
Our country wishes to reiterate its conviction that
the path to committed and effective dialogue must be
the solution to the political conflict that plagues the
Nicaraguan people, with whom we share deep historical
ties of neighbourliness, closeness and brotherhood.
We urge the Nicaraguan Government to re-establish
conditions that ensure that dialogue among all parties is
possible. Given the current circumstances, Costa Rica
cannot remain silent. We will continue to speak out in
defence of a population subjected to arbitrary actions
that constitute a breach of the obligations under various
different human rights covenants and principles. Costa
Rica urges a prompt response from the Nicaraguan
Government and the international community to
address the grave and unsustainable situation. We will
continue to speak out until reason, good judgement and
full respect for human rights return to Nicaragua.
Costa Rica reiterates its support for, and
commitment to, actions promoted by the Organization
of American States (OAS), which are now being
presented to the Council. Our country welcomes in
particular the adoption of resolution CP/RES. 1108 of
the Permanent Council of the OAS, which resolves to
“reiterate its vigorous condemnation of and grave
concern over all acts of violence, repression, and
human rights violations and abuses committed by
police, parapolice groups, and others against the
people of Nicaragua”.
We echo the Permanent Council’s request to the
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, the
Department of Electoral Cooperation and Observation,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for

18-2765821/23

S/PV.8340

The situation in Nicaragua

Human Rights, the Secretary General of the OAS and
the European Union to take steps to help curb the crisis
in Nicaragua. We request the international community
and the Security Council to urge the Government of
Nicaragua to immediately cease its disproportionate
use of force, comply with all the recommendations of
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights on the current situation in Nicaragua
and resume a serious dialogue, based on respect,
commitment and trust — the only path to a consensusbased solution among Nicaraguans and for Nicaraguans.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, as a responsible member of the
international community, has requested to participate
in this Security Council briefing, with an unwavering
commitment to preserving the Latin American and
Caribbean region as a zone of peace, as agreed by the
Heads of State and Government of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States in 2014.
Allow me first refer to the relevant procedures and,
accordingly, express our rejection of the practice of
exploiting items on the agenda of the Security Council,
such as today’s, so as to force us into addressing the
domestic situations of sovereign countries. This
constitutes a flagrant violation of the mandates of this
organ and of the Charter of the United Nations itself,
while at the same time it sets a dangerous precedent
and once again attests to the arbitrary nature of this
presidency. In that regard, Venezuela also rejects the
Security Council’s continued appropriation of topics,
especially when dealing with matters such as that being
addressed today, which in no way constitutes a threat to
regional, much less to international peace and security.
We therefore emphasize that the consideration of the
situation in Nicaragua lies outside of the mandate of
the Council, whose competencies are clearly conferred
upon it under the Charter.
Venezuela welcomes the social peace and stability
enjoyed by the brotherly Nicaraguan people today, after
having fallen victim to a four-month wave of terrorist
violence that was encouraged, organized and financed
by external factors, with the aim of overthrowing the
country’s legitimate, constitutional and democratically
elected Government. We nevertheless sound the alarm
22/23

05/09/2018

that the external aggression is continuing, including
through interventionist initiatives imposed by the
Organization of American States (OAS), an authority
that, as expressed in the budget legislation allocating
funds for the United States Department of State for the
2018 fiscal year, responds to the strategic interests of
that country. That is why the spokesperson of that agency
who spoke earlier is no more than a spokesperson for
those interests, which exemplifies once again a flagrant
violation of the principle of sovereignty and the right
to self-determination of peoples, enshrined in the
founding Charter of the Organization, which seems to
place an obstacle in the way of the imperial domination
of various United States Administrations.
As we have always done, we insist that the norms of
international law must be respected. The purposes and
principles enshrined by the Charter must be upheld. The
peaceful resolution of conflicts must be encouraged and
multilateralism maintained. Unilateralism is contrary
to the maintenance and building of peace, to which
the signatories of the Charter committed themselves.
The Nicaraguan people have the wisdom and necessary
tools under their national Constitution, inter alia, to
resolve their internal affairs and decide their future as
a sovereign country without interference of any kind.
The treatment to which Nicaragua has been
subjected is very similar to that accorded to Venezuela.
Let me give several examples.
Is it not true that United States officials threaten
OAS member countries to vote against Venezuela
and Nicaragua in that regional forum? Is it not true
that Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, the Director
of the United States Central Intelligence Agency at
that time, said in July 2017 that he had worked with
the Governments of Colombia and Mexico to promote
a transition in Venezuela? Is it not true that former
Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said in August 2017
that he was creating the conditions for a change of
Government in Venezuela? Is it not true that in August
2017 President Donald Trump threatened Venezuela
with a military intervention? Is it not true that in August
of 2017 Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said that the
Government of the United States of America is doing
everything possible to harm Venezuela economically?
Is it not true that in February, former Secretary of
State Rex Tillerson openly called for a military revolt in
Venezuela? Is it not true that in May, Madam President,
you said that the time had come for President Maduro to
18-27658

05/09/2018

The situation in Nicaragua

leave, which you reiterated in August on the ColombianVenezuelan border. Is it not true that in Brazil, in June,
Vice-President Mike Pence said that the time had
come to take firmer and additional actions to isolate
Venezuela? Is it not true that in July, the United States
Agency for International Development acknowledged
that the United States Embassy in Caracas was
encouraging the Venezuelan opposition? Is it not
true that in August the White House Spokeswoman
threatened Venezuela, warning that all options were
on the table? Is it not true that in August, following a
meeting on Venezuela with National Security Adviser
John Bolton, Senator Marco Rubio declared that the
time had come for military intervention?
Is it not true that just this past weekend the
representative of the United States to the OAS threatened
the integrity of President Nicolás Maduro Moros if he
attended the high-level segment of that organization,
to be held in the coming weeks? Is it not true that in
September the representative of the United States of
America to the OAS advocated for a military attack by
Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Peru against Venezuela,
proposing that the pretext would be an alleged military
clash on the borders shared by Brazil and Colombia with
Venezuela? Is it not true that in September the United
States representative to the OAS labelled as corrupt

S/PV. 8340

those countries of the Caribbean that had not joined the
United States plan of aggression against Venezuela?
We now ask the honourable members of the Security
Council: Who is the aggressor? Nicaragua? Venezuela?
We are talking about empirical facts and not fake
news, as the Administration likes to describe evidence.
Venezuela reiterates its rejection of the manner in which
some countries invoke the humanitarian pretext to use
the Security Council as a tool to promote their policy of
regime change that has caused so much damage to the
peoples of Africa and the Middle East, while leading
to a humanitarian crisis of a previously unimaginable
proportions and fuelling xenophobia in the very
countries that yesterday endorsed and applauded the
Western invasions of Iraq and Libya under arguments
that have proven to be false. Let us not be dragged
back into the quagmire of history by one of the most
obscurantist Administrations of recent times.
Lastly, since Ambassador Nikki Haley invoked his
memory, in 1829 the liberator Simón Bolívar said that
the United States seemed to be destined to plague all
of the Americas with misery in the name of liberty.
History has shown the judiciousness of his premonition.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

18-2765823/23
