General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

154

Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme, the International Labour
Organisation, the United Nations Trust Fund for S<;mth
Africa and the World Food Programme, to contmue
assisting the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in carrying out the humanitarian function
entrusted to him;
6. Urges all States, United Nations agencies and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
to contribute generously to the assistance programmes
for these students, both through financial support and
by offering further opportunities for their educational
and vocational training, as well as by financial and
material contributions for their care and maintenance;
7. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to continue
all efforts necessary for an effective programme of
educational and other appropriate assistance for the
South African student refugees in Botswana, Lesotho,
Swaziland and Zambia;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep the matter under review and to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session,
through the Economic and Social Council at its second
regular session of 1979, on the progress made in these
programmes.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/165.

Status of persons refusing service in
military or police forces used to enforce

apartheid
The General Assembly,
Mindful that the Charter of the United Nations
sets forth, as one of the purposes of the Organization,
the achievement of international co-operation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights
and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Recalling article 18 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 75 which states that everyone has the
right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion,
Conscious that the Proclamation of Teheran,76 the
Lagos Declaration for Action against Apartheid77 and
other United Nations declarations, conventions and
resolutions have condemned apartheid as a crime
against the conscience and dignity of mankind,
Having regard to section II, paragraph 11, of the
Lagos Declaration, which proclaims that the United
Nations and the international community have a special responsibility towards those imprisoned, restricted
or exiled for their struggle against apartheid,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee
against Apartheid,78
75 Resolution
7 6 Final Act

217 A (III).
of the lnternational Conference on Human
Rights, Teheran, 22 April-13 May 1968 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.68.XIV.2), chap. II.
77 Report of the World Conference for Action against Apartheid, Lagos, 22-26 August 1977 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.
78 Official Records of thc General Assemb/y, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/33/22 and Corr.l).

l. Recognizes the right of all persons to refuse
service in military or police forces which are used to
enforce apartheid;
2. Calls upan Member States to grant asylum or
safe transit to another State, in the spirit of the Declaration on Territorial Asylum, 79 to persons compelled
to leave their country of nationality solely because of
a conscientious objection to assisting in the enforcement of apartheid through service in military or police
forces;
3. Urges Member States to consider favourably
the granting to such persons of all the rights and
benefits accorded to refugees under existing legal instrumen ts;
4. Calls upon appropriate United Nations bodies,
including the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations, to provide all necessary assistance to such persons.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/166.

Question of a convention on the rights
of the child

The General Assembly,

Having in mind its resolution 31 / 169 of 21 December 1976, in which it proclaimed the year 1979
International Y ear of the Child,
Recalling its resolution 32/109 of 15 December
1977, in which it, inter alía, reaffirmed that the major
focus of the International Year of the Child should
be at the national level, but that this should be supported by regional and international co-operation,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 20 (XXXIV) of 8 March 197880 and Economic
and Social Council resolutions 1978/ 18 of 5 May 1978
and 1978/40 of 1 August 1978,
Bearing in mind that, since the adoption of the
Declaration of the Rights of the Child, 81 nineteen
years have already elapsed, and that during this time
the principies of the Declaration have played a significant part in the promotion of the rights of children
in the entire world as well as in shaping various forros
of international co-operation in this sphere,
Considering that during these nineteen years the
conditions to take further steps by adopting a convention on the rights of the child have been created,
Conscious of the need to strengthen further the
comprehensive care and the well-being of children all
over the world,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the decision of
the Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-fourth
session, in its resolution 20 (XXXIV), to continue
at its thirty-fifth session, as one of its priorities, its
consideration of a draft convention on the rights of
the child;
7 9 Resolution

2112 (XXII), annex.
Official Rccords of the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
si Resolution B86 (XIV).
80 See

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
organize its work on the draft convention on the rights
of the child at its thirty-fifth session so that the draft
of the Convention may be ready for adoption if possible during the International Year of the Child;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session the question of a convention on the rights of the child.

90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/167.

Regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/127 of 16 December
1977,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 24 (XXXIV) of 8 March 1978 82 on regional
arrangements for the promotion and protection of
human rights,
Noting with serious concern the report of the Secretary-General83 on the implementation of the abovementioned resolutions, in which he reported that owing
to financial difficulties he was unable to organize any
seminar for the purpose of discussing the usefulness
and advisability of the establishment of regional commissions for the promotion and protection of human
rights in regions where no regional commission on
human rights exists,
Stressing the importance of the speedy and effective
implementation of the resolutions of the General Assembly on this question,
1. Reiterates its appeal to States in areas where
regional arrangements in the field of human rights
do not yet exist to consider agreements with a view
to the establishment within their respective regions of
suitable regional machinery for the promotion and
protection of human rights;

2. Requests once again that the Secretary-General,
under the programme of advisory services in the field
of human rights, give priority to the consideration,
in regions where no regional commission on human
rights exists, of seminars for the purpose of discussing
the usefulness and advisability of the establishment
of regional commissions for the promotion and protection of human rights and that at least one such
seminar should be organized during 1979;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the present resolution
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session
and also to include in his report to the Commission
on Human Rights, in accordance with paragraph 4
of Commission resolution 24 (XXXIV), such information as he may already possess on the implementation of this resolution.

90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
82 See Official Records of

the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supp/ement No. 4 (E/1978/34 ), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
83 A/33/219.

33/168.

155

Narcotic drugs

The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961,84 of that Convention
as amended by the 1972 Protocol Amending the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961,85 and
of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances, 1971,86
which form the main basis of all efforts in international
drug control,
Bearing in mind the numerous resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the World Health Organization on the
subject in recent years as well as the relevant recommendations of the Fifth United Nations Congress on
the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, 87
A ware of the comprehensive and valuable work of
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the lnternational Narcotics Control Board as the main technical
and treaty organs entrusted with specific functions in
order to ensure and supervise the proper implementation of the Conventions and Protocol and to foster
the most efficient international drug control,
Preoccupied by the persistence of serious health,
social and economic problems of drug abuse for individuals, young and old, and for societies as a whole,
Noting with great concern the detrimental effects of
the continued international drug traffic,
Reaffirming the responsibility of Governments as
well as the collective responsibility of the international
community to regulate and limit the cultivation, production, manufacture and use of drugs to quantities
required for medica! and scientific purposes, in accordance with the above-mentioned treaties,
Convinced that measures to reduce illicit demand
for narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, including prevention through proper information and education, treatment and rehabilitation, must be taken
concurrently with measures of adequate control to
reduce illicit drug supply and traffic,
Also convinced that co-ordinated efforts by all competent agencies and organizations concerned with the
fight against illicit drug traffic should be intensified
to bring about even better results in the interception
of illicit drug traffic,
Considering the response to paragraph 5 of General
Assembly resolution 32/124 of 16 December 1977
given by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs concerning the launching of a meaningful programme of
international drug abuse control strategy and policies
to be considered by the Commission at its twentyeighth session in February 1979,
1. Reiterates its appeal to all States not yet parties
to the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, the
1972 Protocol Amending the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs, 1961, 88 and the Convention on Psycho84 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 520, No. 7515, p. 151.
85 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.XI.3, p. 13.
86 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.XI.3, p.

7.

87 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.2 and cor-

rigendum, para. 28.
88 See Official Records of the United Nations Conference to
consider amendments to the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961, vol. I (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.73.XI.7), part three.
