General Assembly - J'hirty-ninth Session

154

-----------------------2. Expresses its gratitude for the support which Member States, specialized agencies and other United Nations
bodies and regional organizations have provided to assist
the people of Guinea in their reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts;
3. Appeals urgently to all Member States, specialized
agencies and other United Nations bodies, as well as to
international economic and financial institutions and other
aid donors, to contribute generously, through bilateral or
multilateral channels, to the reconstruction, rehabilitation
and development of Guinea;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts and to mobilize financial, technical and economic
assistance from the international community for Guinea.
so as to enable it to meet its short-term and long-term
needs within the framework of its development programme;
5. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the World Health Organization, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Bank. the International Fund for
Agricultural Development, the United Nations Children's
Fund and the World Food Programme to bring to the
attention of their governing bodies, for priority consideration, the special needs of Guinea, and to keep the Secretary-General informed of decisions taken in that regard:
6. Requests the Secretary-General to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of
1985, and the General Assembly, at its fortieth session, of
the results achieved in the implementation of the present
resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/203.

Assistance to the Gambia

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 381212 of 20 December 1983, in
which it, inter alia, noted that the Gambia is a least
developed country with acute economic and social problems arising from its weak economic infrastructure and
that it also suffers from many of the serious problems
common to countries of the Sahelian region. notahl)
drought and desertification,
Having considered the summary report of the SecretaryGeneral, 1 19 in which the recent economic situation in the
Gambia is described,
Concerned that the Garn bia continues to encounter serious balance-of-payments and budgetary problems and
noting that the lack of domestic resources is the most
important constraint on development, since the Government lacks the funds to meet the counterpart costs of
donor-assisted projects,
Noting that external assistance is still required to enable
the Government of the Gambia to implement the six projects recommended by the Secretary-General in his
report, 120
Aware that a round-table conference of donors was held
in the Gambia in November 1984, with the assistance of
the United Nations Development Programme, to discuss
the country's development needs and to consider ways and
means of helping the Government in its efforts to meet
those needs,
I l'l Ad9;:l92, sect. VII

I. Takes norc <1f the summary report of the SecretaryGeneraL
1
Expresses us apprcnat1on to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobili1e assistanre for the
Gambia;
3. Expresses ils appreciation also to those States and
organizations that have provided assistance to the
Gambia;
4. Draws the uttcnt1011 of the international community
to the need for assistanre for the projects and programmes
identified hy the Secretary-General in his report
5. Renews its 11rgcnr appeal to Member States. specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system, regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, as well as international development and
financial institutions, to give generous assistance to the
Gambia, through bilateral or multilateral channels, and to
provide financial, technical and material assistance for the
implementation of the projects and programmes recommended by the Secretary-General in his report;
6. {lrges donors, as appropriate, to provide financial
assistance to the Ciambia to help meet the local counterpart costs of externally-assisted projects, bearing in mind
that the Gambia 1s classified as a least developed droughtstricken country·;
7. l'rgcs Member States, organizations and programmes of the llnited Nations system, regional and interregional bodies, financial and development institutions, as
well as intergovernmental and non-governmental organi1.ations, to respond generously to the needs of the Gambia
at the round-tahk conference of donors held in November
1984:
8. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the l lnited Nations system - in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations Fund for
Population Activities, the World Food Programme, the
World Health Organization, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the International
Fund for Agricultural Development - to increase their
rnrrent and future programmes of assistance to the
(jambia, to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General
111 organizing an effective international programme of
assistance and tc1 report periodically to him on the steps
they have taken and the resources they have made available to assist that country:
9. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Food Programme. the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the World Bank and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development to bring to the attention of their
governing bodies, for their consideration, the special needs
of the Gambia and to report the decisions of those bodies
to the Secretary-General by the end of June I 985:
10. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To contmue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to the Gambia:
(/,) To keep the situation in the Gambia under constant
review. to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialiled agencies. regional and other intergovernmental

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of t~e Second Committe,·

organizations and the international financial institutions
concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of I 985, of the status of the
special programme of economic assistance for the
Gambia;
(c) To report on the progress made in the economic situation of the Gambia and in organizing and implementing
the special programme of economic assistance for that
country in time for the matter to be considered by the
General Assembly at its fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/204.

Assistance to Nicaragua

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/8 of 25 October 1979, 35/84
of5 December 1980, 36/213 of 17 December 1981, 37/
157 of 17 December 1982 and 38/223 of 20 December
1983 concerning assistance for the reconstruction of Nicaragua,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council decision
1982/168 of29 July 1982,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Nicaragua, 121
Noting with satisfaction the support that Member States,
the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system have given to the efforts of the
Government of Nicaragua for the reconstruction of the
country,
Bearing in mind that, in the past few years, the Nicaraguan economy has been negatively affected by various
events, among them natural disasters such as the floods
and drought of 1982,
Considering that, despite the efforts of the Government
and people of Nicaragua, the economic situation has not
returned to normal and continues to worsen,
Deeply concerned that Nicaragua is experiencing serious
economic difficulties directly affecting its development
efforts,

1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts regarding assistance to Nicaragua;
2. Expresses its appreciation also to the States and
organizations that have provided assistance to Nicaragua;
3. Urges all Governments to continue contributing to
the reconstruction and development of Nicaragua;
4. Requests the organizations of the United Nations
system to continue and to increase their assistance in this
endeavour;
5. Recommends that Nicaragua should continue to
receive treatment appropriate to the special needs of the
country until the economic situation returns to normal;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984
121 A/39/391.
I 22 A/39/386.

39/205.

155

Assistance to the drought-stricken areas of
Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, the
Sudan and lJRanda

Fhe <ienera/ Asscmhlr.
•
.
Rccalltng its resolution~ 35190 and 35/91 of 5 December
1980. 36/221 of 17 December 1981, 37/147 of 17 December 1982 and 38/2 I 6 of 20 December 1983 and Economic
and Social Council resolution I 983/46 of 28 July 1983 on
assistance to the drought-stricken areas of Djibouti, Ethiopia. Kenya, Somalia, the Sudan and Uganda,
!luring considered the note by the Secretary-General on
assistance to the drought-stricken areas of those
countries. 122
Alurmed by the catastrophic effects of the prolonged and
persistent drought that poses an imminent threat to
human survival and the development prospects of the
affected countries of the region.
Deeply disturbed by the grave food situation and the
spectre of widespread famine in the drought-stricken areas
of the region,
Takmg mto account the regional nature of the drought
and the practical and regional arrangements for co-operation that already exist among the affected countries,
Beanng 1t1 mind the urgent need for the international
community to render assistance to Member States in the
event of natural disasters.
l. Reaffirms its resolutions 35/90, 35/91, 36/221, 3 7I
I 4 7 and 38/216 on assistance to the drought-stricken areas
or Djibouti, Ethiopia, Krnya. Somalia, the Sudan and
Uganda;
2. Takes note of the note of the Secretary-General on
assistance to the drought-stricken areas of those countries;
3. Notes with satisfaction the decision taken by the
Governments of Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, the
Sudan and Uganda to establish an intergovernmental body
to combat the effects of drought and other natural disasters. 123 as recommended by the General Assembly in
resolution 35/90 and to meet in Djibouti on 15 January
1985 to finalize the necessary arrangements for the establishment of that body;
4. Notes with appreciation the assistance thus far rendered by the international community and the measures
taken by the Secretary-General, in co-operation with the
specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system, to ensure the speediest and most effective
relief aid for the victims of drought and other natural disasters in Djibouti, Ethiopia. Kenya, Somalia, the Sudan
and Uganda;
5. Urges all States, organizations of the United Nations
system, governmental and non-governmental organizations and international financial institutions concerned, to
give urgent consideration to the establishment of a programme or assistance for the six countries in the East
African subregion, supportmg their efforts:
(a) To meet the grave and urgent needs of the people of
those countries;
(b) To combat the effects of drought and other natural
calamities and to deal with the problem of medium-term
and long-term recovery and rehabilitation in a concerted
manner;
6. I 11v1tes the Secretary-General, in close co-operation
with the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme, and within existing resources, to extend
