S/2018/412

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 May 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 1 May 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to the request of the Security Council in paragraph 61 of its resolution
2409 (2018), I have the honour to submit the 30-day update covering the period from
21 March to 26 April 2018 on political and technical progress towards the holding of
elections on 23 December 2018 and obstacles to the implementation of the
31 December 2016 political agreement (see annex).
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

18-06635 (E)

030518

*1806635*

S/2018/412

Annex
Update of the Secretary-General on progress in the electoral
process and implementation of the 31 December 2016
political agreement, 26 April 2018
1.
The present update covers developments from 21 March to 26 April 2018 in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and is submitted pursuant to resolution 2409
(2018), in which the Security Council requested the Secretary-General to update it in
writing every 30 days on political and technical progress towards the holding of
elections on 23 December 2018 and on obstacles to the implementation of the
31 December 2016 political agreement.

I. Key political developments related to the electoral process
and implementation of the political agreement
2.
The government and other national institutions of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, including the National Council for Monitoring the Agreement and the
Electoral Process, took steps to achieve some key electoral benchmarks. On 21 and
29 March and 17 April, the National Council submitted recommendations to the
Ministry of the Interior and Security aimed at ending the duplication of some
opposition political parties. Subsequently, the government submitted the revised lists
of political parties and platforms to the Independent National Electoral Commission,
which has yet to publish the final lists of political parties eligible to contest the
23 December 2018 presidential and national and provincial legislative elections. On
27 March, the government sent a draft amendment to the 2015 law on public
demonstrations to the National Assembly for review. On 16 April, in Kinshasa, an
extraordinary session of the Council of Ministers, chaired by the President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Joseph Kabila, adopted the draft bill on the
distribution of seats for national, provincial and local elections. According to the
electoral calendar, the bill is expected to be pro mulgated by the President by 8 May,
after its adoption by Parliament.
3.
Discussions between the main opposition parties aimed at creating new political
alliances or platforms continued. Following his election as President of the Union
pour la démocratie et le progrès social on 31 March, Felix Tshisekedi announced his
intention to be a candidate in the presidential election and expressed his party ’s
willingness to forge political alliances to achieve a democratic transfer of power in
December 2018. The Mouvement de libération du Congo and the Union pour la nation
congolaise also called on the opposition to coalesce behind a single presidential
candidate.
4.
A debate emerged regarding nationality and eligibility for elections. The
Constitution and laws provide that Congolese nationality is “one and exclusive” and
that candidates must be Congolese nationals by origin. On 27 March, the Director of
Public Prosecutions, Flory Kabange Numbi, launched an enquiry into the nationality
of exiled presidential opposition candidate Moïse Katumbi following reports in the
media suggesting that he had held Italian nationality from 2000 to 2017. The identities
of several Congolese politicians, including members of Parliament and the
government, who are presumed to be dual citizens were published in the media. The
Permanent Secretary of the ruling Parti du peuple pour la reconstruction et le
démocratie, Emmanuel Ramazani Shadary, called on members of his party who held
more than one nationality to abide by the Constitution by re gularizing their situation
with the Ministry of Justice, failing which they might be barred from running for
2/6

18-06635

S/2018/412

office. Supporters of Mr. Katumbi perceived the judicial enquiry into the claim of
double nationality as a further attempt by the government to pre vent their candidate
from participating in the 23 December elections.

II. Key developments related to the implementation of
the agreement
Electoral developments
5.
On 6 April, the Independent National Electoral Commission published the final
voter registry following a review process that removed some 6 million duplicate
registrations and individuals who were not old enough to vote from the database. The
total number of voters currently stands at 40,287,387, 50 per cent of whom are
women. On 10 April, the Commission launched a tender process for the independent
audit of the registry in accordance with the electoral calendar. In addition, the
Commission finalized an electoral code of conduct for political parties that has been
signed by more than 200 political parties, which represents one third of the registered
parties. On 17 April, the President of the Commission, Corneille Nangaa, announced
that the Commission would launch an audit of the voting machines with a view to
addressing concerns raised by some national and international actors regarding their
use in the upcoming elections.
6.
The lack of a clear disbursement plan for the funding of the Independent
National Electoral Commission remains a key challenge. On 28 March, in line with
the government’s decision to assume full responsibility for financing the electoral
process, the Ministry of Finance disbursed $22.6 million to the Commission.
However, the Commission has not yet agreed to the revised multi -donor Projet
d’appui au cycle électoral au Congo, which amounts to $67 million. That could have
an impact on the Commission’s ability to undertake its logistical responsibilities and
the sensitization of voters, which are areas in which support from the project had been
foreseen.
7.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) has begun the second phase of the electoral
assistance logistics support plan, which runs from 1 March to 23 December 2018. The
plan entails the mobilization of the major assets required for the deployment of
non-sensitive and sensitive electoral materials; the recruitment of personnel and their
co-location with the Independent National Electoral Commission; and coordination
with partners for the timely deployment of assets. MONUSCO is currently preparing
a bid solicitation for the procurement of the required air assets and completing an
amendment to the existing fuel contract for the supply of additional aviation fuel to
support the deployment of electoral materials. The Mission is also conducting site
assessments at 3 reception centres and 15 hubs, in anticipation of the deployment of
voting materials across 129 sites.
8.
It should be noted that, at the time of reporting, MONUSCO had not received
an official request from the Independent National Electoral Commission to support
the deployment of voting machines. The timeline indicated in the Commission ’s
electoral calendar suggests that the procurement of electoral materials and equipment
should have been completed by 16 April 2018. However, the Mission has not yet
received clear information regarding the status of the procurement process. The late
arrival of electoral materials would reduce the time frame for deployment and require
adjustments to the Mission’s logistical preparations that could result in increased
costs for the Mission.

18-06635

3/6

S/2018/412

Restrictions on political space and violence as they relate to the implementation
of the agreement in the electoral context
9.
Restrictions on political space continued despite a relative decrease in the
number of violations of civil and political rights and fundamental freedoms. During
the thirty-seventh session of the Human Rights Council, held from 26 February to
23 March 2018, the Minister for Human Rights of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo announced that the general ban on political demonstrations would be lifted.
However, national security forces repressed peaceful protests held on 26 March by
the youth movement Lutte pour le changement in Kindu (Maniema province) and in
Beni, Goma and Kasindi (North Kivu province), to demand a stronger mandate for
MONUSCO. On 2 April, a peaceful sit-in, organized by civil society members in
Tshikapa (Kasai province) was also repressed by the police, who arrested four people,
including a journalist. On 7 April, four individuals, including a minor, were arrested
and detained in Lubumbashi (Haut-Katanga province) while on their way to attend a
political meeting organized by the opposition platform Ensemble pour le changement.
On 28 March, in Tshikapa, a journalist was arrested and detained for two days over
an article he posted on social media that denounced threats and intimidations against
the media by some agents of the provincial government. No political prisoners were
released during the period under review. At least 86 political prisoners remain in
detention, while some of the political prisoners mentioned in the 31 December 2016
political agreement are yet to be released.
Confidence-building measures
10. At its extraordinary plenary session on the duplication of political parties held
on 29 March, the National Council for Monitoring the Agreement and the Electoral
Process denied two high-profile political figures, Prime Minister Bruno Tshibala
(Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social/Tshibala) and Pierre Lumbi
(Mouvement social pour le renouveau/Lumbi) representation of their party. The
decision triggered further protests and calls for the resignation of the Chair of the
National Council, Joseph Olenghankoy. The extraordinary plenary ses sion was a
follow-up to the meeting of 21 March during which the National Council had
recommended an end to the duplication of the Group des sept (the “G7”) political
parties, but recognized the Mouvement social pour le renouveau led by François
Rubota (Majorité présidentielle) at the expense of the wing chaired by Pierre Lumbi,
on the grounds that the latter had failed to provide the necessary registration
documents.

III. Good offices efforts in support of the implementation of
the agreement
11. Deep-seated mistrust and suspicion among the key stakeholders regarding the
electoral process and the pace of progress in the implementation of the confidence building measures continue to fuel political tensions. In addition to the need to
vigorously pursue efforts to foster a coordinated and coherent approach among the
United Nations and regional and international partners in support of elections, the
government’s mistrust of some key international partners is a significant challenge
that needs to be overcome. Against that background, the United Nations continues to
use its good offices to promote dialogue among the political actors and encourage the
sustained engagement of regional and international partners to help create conditions
conducive to the holding of timely, peaceful and credible elections.
12. On 29 March, in Brazzaville, my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes region met
the President of the Congo, Denis Sassou Nguesso, in his dual capacity as Chair of
4/6

18-06635

S/2018/412

both the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Regional
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region, to exchange views on
the electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and related challenges.
13. During the reporting period, my Special Representative for the Democratic
Republic of Congo pursued her consultations with national stakeholders, focusing,
inter alia, on support for the organization of credible and inclusive elec tions. In that
regard, she met with the President of the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social
and leader of the opposition coalition Rassemblement, Felix Tshisekedi, on 23 March;
the Chief of Staff of the President on 2 April; the Governor of Kins hasa, André
Kimbuta, on 4 April 2018; President Kabila on 6 April 2018; the President ’s Special
Adviser on Security, Jean Mbuyu, the Minister in charge of relations with Parliament,
Jean-Pierre Lisanga Bonganga, and the Permanent Secretary of the Parti du peuple
pour la reconstruction et le démocratie, Emmanuel Ramazani Shadary, on 19 April;
and the Vice Prime Minister and Minister for the Interior, Henri Mova Sakanyi, on
20 April. My Special Representative also met with all the ambassadors of member
States of the Southern African Development Community accredited to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on 4 April to exchange views on the political, security and
electoral situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to highlight the
importance of the regional bloc’s efforts to address the situation. In addition, she
visited Bunia, Ituri province, where she discussed with the provincial authorities the
prevailing political and security situation in the province, including efforts to create
an environment conducive to the holding of elections there. On 13 April, she visited
Beni, North Kivu province, where she had similar discussions with the Mayor of Beni
town and the Territorial Administrator of Beni territory.
14. On 24 April, President Kabila attended the Double Troika Summit of Heads of
State and Government of the Southern African Development Community in Luanda.
Among other regional issues, the Summit’s final communiqué urged Congolese
political actors to stay committed to the implementation of the electoral calendar,
reaffirmed the Community’s commitment to supporting upcoming elections and
reversed the body’s decision to deploy a Special Envoy to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in the light of the progress made towards the holding of elections .

IV. Observations
15. I welcome the progress made towards some key electoral milestones and the
commitment shown by the Independent National Electoral Commission to meet the
deadlines laid out in the electoral calendar. However, persistent divergence s among
political stakeholders over the electoral process and the lack of political space remain
a threat to the holding of credible and inclusive elections. I call upon the government
to take the necessary measures to instil confidence in the electoral pr ocess and pave
the way for a democratic transfer of power in line with the provisions of the
31 December 2016 political agreement and the Congolese Constitution. Progress in
the implementation of confidence-building measures envisaged in the agreement
remains essential in order to ease political tensions and create an environment
conducive to credible, transparent and inclusive elections. The swift publication by
the Independent National Electoral Commission of the list of political parties and
platforms would help address existing suspicions and build trust between political
actors and the Commission.
16. The legitimate aspirations of the Congolese people can only be achieved through
the meaningful and constructive engagement of all stakeholders in the poli tical
process. I call on the ruling majority and the opposition to rise above partisan interests

18-06635

5/6

S/2018/412

and work towards consolidating democratic practices in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I encourage the government to ensure a level playing field for all political
actors and to take initiatives to increase the number of women running for office.
Lifting the ban on public demonstrations would greatly contribute to the opening of
political space, thereby allowing the Congolese people to freely exercise thei r
political and civil rights.
17. Key milestones in the electoral process, such as the commencement of the
deployment of electoral materials on 12 May, are fast approaching. The positive
momentum generated by the publication of the electoral calendar and t he timely
promulgation of the electoral law may be disrupted if adequate funding is not
provided to the Independent National Electoral Commission. I encourage the
government to disburse on a regular basis the necessary funds to the Commission.
Delayed funding could have an impact on the timely holding of elections and lead to
further political tensions.
18. Finally, I encourage international and regional actors to continue providing, in
close collaboration with the government, support to the Democratic Repu blic of the
Congo in addressing the political and security challenges it faces. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo needs our combined efforts more than ever. I call on the
Security Council and partners to spare no effort in supporting initiatives for dia logue
and the conduct of elections in a timely manner.

6/6

18-06635
