United Nations

12th
PLENARY MEETING

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
NINTH EMERGENCY

Friday, 5 February 1982,
at 3.15 p.m.

SPECIAL SESSION

Official Records

President: Mr. Ismat T. KITTANI

NEW

(Iraq)

YORK

discrimination, so that no zone where conflict prevails
and no case of aggression or violation of peoples’ rights
or the principles of the Charter is neglected.
6.
AS for acts such as the establishment or non-estabAGENDA ITEM 5
lishment of relations between one country and another,
Ecuador considers that they fall exclusively within the
The situation in the occupied Arab territories
sovereign jurisdiction of each State and therefore cannot
(concluded)
be subject to the decisions or exhortations of third parties.
1. The PRESIDENT:
As representatives will recall, the
Similarly, the conduct of international policy in gendebate on the item was concluded this morning. Thereeral of a country falls squarely within its own sphere of
decision-making, and it is precisely international law
fore, I shall now call on those delegations which have
alone, aided by the positive action of the organ concerned
expressed their desire to speak in explanation of vote
before the vote. I would remind representatives that
with peace, that can be invoked to bring about a meeting
of minds among States and thus promote harmony and
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should
peaceful coexistence as called for by the Charter of the
be made from their places.
United Nations.
2. Mr. ALBORNOZ
(Ecuador) (interpretation from
Spanish):The draft resolution on which we are about to
7. Since there are provisions of questionable legality in
the draft resolution on which we are about to vote and
vote [A/Es-9/1;.1] relates to a crucial subject that has
it is impossible to make express reservations on paraaggravated the already critical situation in the Middle
graphs such as operative paragraphs 11, 12 and 13, as
East, Parts of the text have our full support because they
well as the last paragraph of the preamble, my delegation
relate to the protection of the territorial integrity of a
will have to abstain in the vote on the draft resolution
country. In rejecting the unilatera1 decision to annex
in question.
Syria’s territory in the Golan Heights, our country has
already spoken in condemnation of that act, because no
S. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
semblance of legality can be given to the armed occupaThe draft resolution before this emergency special session
tion of territories. That was the point made by Ecuador
of the General Assembly is profoundly objectionable to
when it supported General Assembly resolution 36/226 B,
the United States. We oppose it because it doesnot conwhich states that the acquisition of territory by force is
tribute to peace in the Middle East: it will make peace
inadmissible according to the Charter and international
harder to achieve.
law, and that has been the invariable position of my
9. We oppose the end it seeks-which is revenge and
country’s foreign policy.
retribution, not conciliation and compromise,
3. Ecuador is against the use of force in international
10. We oppose the means it recommends, which are
relations and believes that only by means of the peaceful
unreasonably punitive and ill-suited to accomplishing any
solution of disputes, through dialogue and negotiation,
constructive purpose.
is it possible to bring about a reduction of tension with
11. We oppose the use of the United Nations involved
lasting results reflected in freely contracted agreements
here, because this body was and is meant to be devoted
enjoying the total support of public opinion in the counto building peace and security, and this draft resolution
tries concerned, and consequently the return of territories
seeks
neither. Instead it usesthis body as an instrument
to the country to which they belong, even though it may
to deepen divisions and exacerbate conflicts.
have been temporarily deprived of such territories by
12. We oppose this draft resolution because, like any
force of arms, Ecuador was among the 121 countries
other cynical use of power, it will leave this body weaker
which, in resolution 36/226 B, called upon Israel, as occuthan it already is, less fit to achieve its noble purposes.
pying Power, immediately to rescind its decision and all
related measures which constitute a flagrant violation of
13. By damaging the prospects for peace, this draft resoall the relevant principles of international law.
lution undermines the integrity-indeed,
the very raison
d’gtre-of the United Nations.
4. If we voted on the draft resolution A/ES-g/L.1 paragraph by paragraph, the delegation of Ecuador would14. Last month in the Security Council the United States
and if such is the case, will-vote in favour of the majorvoted against a draft resolution’ on Israel’s Golan
ity of the paragraphs.
Heights legislation because, as we stated at the time, the
draft resolution constituted “a perversion of the very
5. Furthermore, my country has a profound respect
purpose which the Security Council, is called upon by
for peace and believes that the organs of the United
C,o,zter VII of the Charter of the Un,rred Nations to perNations, in the present legal context, must abide strictly
“.2 That purpose is to prevent an aggravatlon of
by established procedures. Ecuador has placed its trust
the situation”. The draft resolution before us today, like
in the United Nations and therefore believes that care
the previous draft resolution, does not prevent an aggramust be taken to preserve the universality and solidarity
vation of the situation; it is itself a source of aggravation.
of the Organization, with the full participation of all its
It is also procedurally flawed in that it seeks to assign
Members and the use of the world forum to seek underto the General Assembly responsibilities that Chapter VII
standing, negotiation and concerted action to maintain
of the Charter properly and solely invests in the Security
peace. This universality should prevail and be respected
Council.
in all the Organization’s spheres of action, without any
A/ES-9/PV. 12
127

128

General Assembly-Ninth

Emergency Special Session-Plenary

15. The United Nations has discussed the Golan Heights
legislation now for nearly two months. As my delegation
made clear at the outset, we opposed this legislation
because it purported or appeared to alter unilaterally the
international status of the Golan Heights. Therefore, on
17 December, the United States joined other members of
the Security Council in adopting resolution 497 (1981),
thereby making clear our disapproval of the Israeli Government’s action in extending its civil law over the Golan
Heights. We communicated the same message in our
bilateral relations.
16. As we have stated often, the future of the Golan
Heights, like that of all the occupied territories, can be
resolved only through negotiations pursuant to Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Accordingly, we called upon Israel to rescind its legislation and
-most importantly-to
reaffirm its commitment to a
negotiated solution. In its letter of 29 December 1981 to
the Secretary-General,” Israel did, in fact, reaffirm its
readiness to enter into unconditional negotiations with
the Syrians over the international legal status of the
Golan.
17. At that point, the only constructive role for the
United Nations was to facilitate such negotiations, in
accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
But the draft resolution before the Security Council did
not even mention those resolutions and, needless to say,
the current draft resolution does not either.
18. We must go back to basics. Israel is accused of
threatening peace. Yet peace is not the situation that prevailed between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic before
Israel’s Golan Heights legislation was adopted. Security
Council resolution 338 (1973), which was the basis for
the 1973 cease-fire, called upon the parties to “start
immediately”
to negotiate the implementation of resolution 242 (1967) so that Israeli withdrawal could be
effected in exchange for recognition of Israel’s existence
within “secure and recognized” borders. But no such
negotiations took place.
19. There is no one in this hall who does not know
which party has refused to negotiate peace or even to
accept resolution 242 (1967). Yet the draft resolution
before us today and the speeches we have heard take no
account of this reality.
20. The United States greatly desires to have cordial,
co-operative, good relations with all the States in the
region. My country has devoted enormous effort, in this
Administration
and under previous Administrations,
to
finding a basis for peace and reconciliation. We also want
very much a strong United Nations acting in fidelity to
the principles of its Charter. For these very reasons we
are appalled by this draft resolution, which distorts reality, denies history and inflames passions,
21. The draft resolution before us calls the Israeli legislation an act of aggression. But no shots were fired, no
soldiers were brought into place. And the future of the
Golan Heights is no less negotiable than before.
22. It describes the Israeli legislation as an annexation.
It is not. The United States has not recognized it as such.
The Security Council in resolution 497 (1981) did not
recognize it as such. To call it annexation now only creates
an artificial obstacle to negotiations,
23. This draft resolution calls for comprehensive sanctions against Israel and for Israel’s total isolation from
the rest of the world. But can anyone truly believe that
such proposals, advanced in a spirit of vindictiveness, will
make a constructive contribution to peace?
24. The United States objects to this draft resolution
because it makes the search for peace more difficult and

Meetings

because it weakens this body. We also object to it for
less disinterested reasons: we object to the barely veiled
attack on the United States present here in the paragraph
that “strongly deplores the negative vote by a permanent
member . . .“.
25. The right to cast a veto is vested by the Charter in
five permanent members of the Security Council. The sole
purpose of that provision is to permit one of the permanent members to block a proposed action of the Council
if for any reason that action is deemed seriously flawed.
The United States used the veto for the purpose for which
it was intended: to block action which we deemed profoundly ill-conceived and imprudent and, moreover, one
incompatible with the pursuit of international peace and
security to which this body is dedicated. It is not at all
appropriate that an action taken in conformity with the
spirit and the letter of the Charter should be deplored.
26. Furthermore, as everyone present understands, this
draft resolution raises basic questions which go to the
heart of the relationship of a Member State to the United
Nations. This is a profoundly serious matter, fraught with
ominous portent. Questions of membership in this body
and its associated agencies should not, indeed cannot, be
settled by majority passions. The United Nations or any
similar organization can exist only if the principle of
majority rule is balanced by respect for minority rights.
This draft resolution strikes twice at the principle that
minorities also have rights: first when it deplores our use
of the veto, and second when it attempts to submit questions of membership to the General Assembly. Respect
for the United Nations means respect for its Charter.
27. We hope that the authors and supporters of the
draft resolution will think deeply about this aspect of their
approach, for the health, even the survival, of the United
Nations depends on respect for both majority rule and
minority rights. Nothing is more clear than this.
28. Suppose this draft resolution is adopted, as regrettably I suppose it will be; what will this exercise have
achieved?
-An Israeli withdrawal from the Golan? Of course
not.
-An embargo on economic, technological and military
goods destined for Israel? Of course not.
-A restoration of the occupied territories? Of course
not.
-A resolution of the problems of Palestine? Of course
not.
-Peace in the Middle East? Of course not.
-Will it intimidate the United States, causing it to
abandon its Middle East policy, its friendship with Israel,
its search for peace in the region? Of course not.
29. What then will this draft resolution accomplish?
What has already been achieved by these weeks of harsh,
seemingly endless attacks on Israel, on the United States,
on the spirit of reason, moderation, on peace itself? To
raise the question is to answer it.
30. There is a nursery rhyme in my country which goes
“Sticks and stones may break our bones but words will
never hurt us”. The rhyme is profoundly mistaken.
Words have consequences. Words express the ideas, the
values and the truths we live by. They are the principal
means available for reason to explain purposes and dispel
misunderstandings. The United Nations was conceived
as a palace of reason31. The PRESIDENT: May I inform the representative
of the United States that her 10 minutes are up and
request her to conclude her statement.

12th meeting-5

32. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
This miserable draft resolution before us today demonstrates the sad truth that any instrument can be made to
serve purposes remote from its raison d’ttre. The United
Nations itself can be used to polarize nations, spread
hostility and exacerbate conflict. Naturally, we shall
vote no.
33. Mr. PINIES (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):
The position of the Spanish Government concerning the
decision of the Israeli Government and Parliament to
extend the laws, jurisdiction and administration of the
State of Israel to the occupied Syrian territory of the
Golan Heights-a decision tantamount to a pure and simple annexation of the territory-is clear and unequivocal.
34. As soon as it knew the facts, on 15 December 1981
the Spanish Government issued a communique rejecting
and condemning this decision of the Israeli authorities
and calling this action a grave violation of international
law, the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions, which-as the communique concluded“constitutes an additional obstacle in the search for a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution of the Middle
East problem”.
35. On 16 December last I had occasion to reiterate my
Government’s position in the debate on the question in
the Security Council’* which culminated in the unanimous adoption of resolution 497 (1981).
36. When the question was again taken up in the Security Council last January, pursuant to the provisions of
resolution 497 (1981), I reiterated what I had said on
16 December and I indicated my delegation’s readiness
to support those measures which might compel the State
of Israel to rescind its decision concerning the Golan
Heights and to demand that Israel withdraw from the territories occupied since 1967. The Spanish delegation’s
decision was reflected in its affirmative vote when the
revised draft resolution sponsored by Jordan’ came to
a vote in the Security Council. It was not adopted by the
Council because of the negative vote of a permanent
member, which led to the convening of this emergency
special session, pursuant to Security Council resolution 500 (1982), adopted once again with Spain’s positive
vote.
37. The Spanish Government most firmly rejects the
expansionist policy of the State of Israel, which has just
been flagrantly manifested by the annexation of the
Syrian territory of the Golan Heights. It is impossible to
believe that the continual statements calling for peace and
the offers of negotiation are being made in good faith
when the facts day after day demonstrate that what Israel
is seeking is simply its territorial expansion. This irresponsible policy is postponing more and more the day
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace will come to the
Middle East.
38. In keeping with its unswerving policy of support for
the just cause of Syria, since what Israel did last December can only be called an act of aggression, my delegation
agrees with the general tenor of the draft resolution on
which we are going to vote, However, some of its paragraphs go considerably beyond the texts we supported in
the Security Council, and in one case raise problems with
regard to an interpretation of the Charter of the United
Nations with which we are not necessarily in agreement.
39. My delegation would have preferred the draft resolution vetoed in the Security Council to have been adapted
to General Assembly language and submitted to the General Assembly for our consideration. In that case, the
residual power of the Assembly when compared with the
primary responsibility of the Security Council would have

February 1982

129

demonstrated the overwhelming support which, in our
view justifies action vis-a-vis the Council, although the
decisions of the Assembly are mere recommendations.
40. In view of what I have said, my delegation will be
compelled to abstain in the vote on the draft resolution
in document A/ES-9/L, I.
41. However, in no way should the abstention of the
Spanish delegation be interpreted as indicating a change
in my Government’s unswerving position, which is to condemn and to reject the Israeli decision and to insist that
the occupying Power rescind immediately its decision of
14 December 1981.
42. Mr. MARTINI URDANETA (Venezuela) (interpreirrtionfrom Spanish): During this debate, the delegation
of Venezuela reaffirmed its position concerning Israel’s
decision to extend its laws, jurisdiction and administration to the occupied Syrian territory of the Golan Heights,
an act which we consider null and void, as we did when
we supported resolution 36/226 B of 17 December last,
in order to renew our appeal to the State of Israel to
rescind this measure which has been added to the other
factors standing in the way of the chances for peace in
the Middle East.
43. This decision of the Israeli Parliament constitutes
a serious act which undermines one of the fundamental
pillars of the Organization, the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force, and cannot
be viewed by Venezuela as anything but the plunder of
a territory covered by the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949.14
44. Venezuela reiterates its position, which has already
been expressed, to the effect that the plans for achieving
a stable and lasting peace in the area should include the
right of all States of the area to exist and to live in peace
within secure and recognized boundaries, as well as the
recognition of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people.
45. In this context, Venezuela views with sympathy any
peace initiative leading to a comprehensive settlement m
the Middle East on the basis of the participation of all
the interested parties.
46. However, in view of the terms used in some of the
paragraphs of both the preambular part and the operative
part, particularly operative paragraphs 11, 12, 13 and ,15,
which do not contribute to the achievement of the ObJectives of peace, the delegation of Venezuela will be obliged
to abstain in the vote on draft resolution A/ES-9/L.l.
47. Mr. HUTCHENS (Australia): The Australian delegation will vote against the draft resolution which is about
to be voted upon despite our support for much of what
has been said in the debate over the last week.
48. The Australian Government deplores the decision
of Israel to apply its laws to the Golan Heights. Our position was made clear by the Australian Foreign Minister
in a statement of 15 December 198 1, when he described
the Israeli decision as an act which would exacerbate tension in the region and make it more difficult to achieve
progress towards a comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.
49. Australia has applied the same principles to Israel’s
decision on the Golan Heights as it applied to the adoption by the Knesset of the “Basic Law” on Jerusalem.
These principles are contained in Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and the fourth Geneva Convention of
12 August 1949. I4 In line with these principles, we are
opposed to any action which might impede the search for
a negotiated settlement in the Middle East. Israel’s decision on the Golan Heights is one such action, and we join

130

General

Assembly--Ninth

Emergency

the rest of the international community in opposing it.
We have heard no arguments from the delegation of Israel
in the course of this debate which would cause us to
change this view.
50. The Australian delegation had hoped to vote in
support of a draft resolution built on the international
consensus embodied in Security Council resolution 497
(1981). Such a draft resolution would have enjoyed unanimous support and would have sent Israel a clear signal
of the strength of international opposition to its latest
action.
51. Instead, the sponsors of the draft resolution have
gone considerably beyond resolution 497 (1981) and have
included in their draft resolution formulations wholly
unacceptable to the Australian Government.
52. The Charter of the United Nations includes a specific division of competencies between different organs
of the Organization. Various paragraphs of the draft
resolution ignore that division.
53. Attempts to call into question the right of Israel to
membership of the Organization are unacceptable to the
Australian Government and pose a real threat to the
future of the Organization.
54. While the Israeli action has clearly hindered the
search for peace in the Middle East, the draft resolution
on which we are about to vote itself fails to advance that
search.
55. Mr. TRUCCO (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): The Middle East conflict deeply affects nations
whom Chile regards as friends, not only because of diplomatic ties and very cordial relations but also because of
the respect for, and gratitude due to, the numerous people
from those countries who, by integrating themselves into
Chile’s society, have strengthened and enriched it with
their own contributions.
56. Consequently, mine is the Friendly voice of a
country which wishes to collaborate in the search for a
constructive solution.
57, For this reason, my delegation is grieved by the fact
that recently, during the thirty-sixth session of the General
Assembly, we had to deal with the Middle East situation
and note once more the existence of a violation of a
fundamental and essential principle of the civilized coexistence of nations-the principle of not resorting to force
in international relations-and
one of its logical corollaries, the obligation not to recognize territorial acquisitions resulting from the use or threat of force.
58, Since the very founding of the Organization, the
international community has not accepted or recognized
any change in a territorial status quo other than by peaceful measures. This principle of modern international law,
respect for which is a requisite for peaceful international
coexistence, should not be eroded, and it is the responsibility of the Members of the Organization to prevent any
such erosion. Territorial annexations by force of arms
have been inadmissible and without any legal basis ever
since the promulgation
of the Charter of the United
Nations. No claim regarding security or geopolitical considerations can confer validity on such annexations. My
country has been and will continue to be unswerving in
its defence of this highly important principle.
59. As the Assembly and the Security Council have
declared, Israel’s annexation is null and void and without
any international validity. The Golan Heights constitute
Syrian territory occupied by Israel, and therefore the
fourth Geneva Convention is fully applicable. We said this
only a month ago, and we repeat it today.
60. My country has traditionally maintained, as is indicated in the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,

Special Session-Plenary

Meetings

especially resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), that the
search for a stable and enduring peace in the Middle
East is based on three essential elements which constitute
a whole and should be considered in the negotiations
between the interested parties. These elements are: Isr&s
withdrawal from all occupied Arab territories; the recdgnition and effective guarantees of the right of Israel and
all States of the region to live in peace within secure and
recognized boundaries; and free self-determination
for
the Palestinian people.
61. Those are the principles which we defend and which
should not be weakened by precipitate actions or dangerous omissions.
62. We are therefore puzzled and concerned that draft
resolution A/ES-g/L. 1, submitted for our consideration
at this session, has not included the necessary references
to Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
63. I have endeavoured to make the position of mY
Government clear with regard to our rejection of the
illegal occupation of Arab territories, our support of the
factors which we deem to be fundamental for peace in
the Middle East, our firm espousal of the principle of
the non-use of force in international relations and the
peaceful solution of disputes. Despite these profound
convictions and because we have serious reservations
regarding paragraphs 7, 8, 11, 12 and 13 and the tenth
preambular paragraph which make our acceptance
impossible, my delegation will abstain in the vote on the
draft resolution as a whole.
64. It is the opinion of my delegation that some of these
paragraphs pronounce judgement on matters which fall
within the purview of the Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter.
65. In addition, my delegation feels that the aforementioned paragraphs do not constitute a constructive contribution to progress along the road to peace, nor do they
reduce the scope of the conflict; on the contrary, they
might contribute to spreading it. My delegation regrets
that the draft resolution does not seek to create a propitious climate or feasible means of ensuring that all the
parties to the dispute fulfil their obligation to settle their
disputes solely and exclusively by peaceful means in conformity with the provisions of the Charter.
66. My Government is convinced that the road to peace
in the Middle East is necessarily through negotiations and
diplomatic dialogue. In this sense, the United Nations can
and must not only promote the holding of such negotiations but must also be a forum where all the parties have
an opportunity to express their ideas in an atmosphere
of respect and consideration conducive to harmonization
and narrowing of differences. My Government likewise
believes that the full compliance with the principle of the
universality of the United Nations is necessary for attaining the objectives of the Organization.
67, Mr. KERGIN (Canada): The Israeli Government’s
unilateral action in extending Israeli law to the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights has been considered in several contexts in the Assembly over the past two months. Canadian
views on it are already clearly on the record.
68. Canada regards the Israeli action as tantamount
to
annexation of the Golan Heights, and we strongly oppose
it as being contrary to international law. Canada firmly
supports Security Council resolution 242 (1967)) with its
reference to the “inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war”, Furthermore, we support the Declaration
On Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations [Genera[Assemb!y ?ZSOhtiOn
2625 (XXV)], which stipulates that: “The

12lh meeting-S

territory of a State shall not be the object of acquisition
by another State resulting from . . . the use of force.33
In our view, the Israeli action is directly contrary
to that
l$claration.
69. We also believe the Israeli action is detrimental to
the peace process. We have already witnessed an increase
in uncertainty in the area since that step was taken,Such
a situation does not increase the prospects for the success
of the negotiations that are now going on, or the willingness of others to join in the negotiation process.
70. In light of all these considerations, the Canadian
Government strongly endorsed Security Council resolution 497 (1981) of 17 December 1981 and hoped that Israel
would draw back from the action it had taken in order
to enlarge the prospects for attaining the goal of peace
in the Middle East. We made those views known directly
to the Israeli Government. We take the opportunity
afforded by this forum to urge once again that Israel
should rescind the legislation regarding the Golan Heights
and approved by the Knesset on 14 December 1981.
71. In view of the position which Canada has taken, it
should be clear that we are in sympathy with some elements of draft resolution A/ES-g/L. 1, We are, however,
deeply disturbed at the possible implication of operative
paragraph 11, which some might try to employ as grounds
to limit Israel’s participation in the General Assembly.
Canada would be extremely concerned by a move to
inhibit Israel’s right, or indeed that of any other State,
to participate fully and on an equal basis in the United
N@ns and its agen$ies. Canada firmly supports the
r;m;F
of universality of participation in the United
72, My delegation thinks, moreover, that it is not
appropriate for this Assembly to substitute itself for the
Security Council, as it appears to do in paragraphs 2,
6 and 12, to attempt to impose measures, albeit in a
more permissive manner than the Security Council, that
amount to Charter sanctions. Furthermore, we cannot
support paragraph 8 of the draft resolution.
73. Finally, we cannot support any provision which
attempts, as does operative paragraph 10, to prejudge the
outcome of negotiations that must take place to work out
a peace settlement in the Middle East. We adhere to the
framework for such negotiations that was carefully
worked out in Security Council resoIutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).
74, In view of these strong reservations, we are obliged
to vote against the draft resolution contained in document A/ES-g/L. 1.
75, Mr, SEWRAJSING
(Suriname): The ninth emergency special session of the General Assembly now has
before it for consideration draft resolution A/ES-B/L. 1,
regarding the situation in the occupied Arab territories.
76. The Minister of Justice and Foreign Affairs of
my country spoke in the general debate yesterday to
explain the views and position of the Government of
Suriname on the annexation of the Golan Heights bY
Israel [l&h meetiffg].
77. The Government of Suriname holds the view that
the seriousness of the violation of the principles of the
Charter and of international law warrants this emergency
special session and makes it incumbent upon the international community to deal with and to take appropriate
action against this illegal act by the State of Israel. Based
on this position, the Government of Suriname sharesthe
view that measures to curb Israel’s unlimited accessto
the most sophisticated weapons would lead to a restraint
of its appetite for resorting to force in its dealings with
the countries in the region. My delegation, however, has

February

1982

131

serious doubts with regard to the wisdom of certain
paragraphs in the operative part of the draft resolution
before us.
78. In that connection, my delegation wishes to put on
record its serious reservations with regard to operative
paragraph 11, sub-paragraphs 12 (c) and (d), and operative paragraph 13.
79. These reservations, however, will not prevent the
delegation of Suriname from voting in favour of draft
resolution A/ES-g/L.1 before us.
80. Mr. RAMLOGUN (Mauritius): It has not been possible for the delegation of Mauritius to participate in the
general debate of the ninth emergency special session on
the question of the situation in the occupied Arab territories. We are therefore &king this opportunity to explain
our vote before the vote to express our views on draft
resolution A/ES-g/L. 1.
81. It is without any hesitation that we say that Mauritius strongly condemns the illegal annexation of the
Syrian Golan Heights by the State of Israel. We do so
because we fully support Security Council resolution 497
(1981) of 17 December 1981. It is blatantly obvious that
this most unfortunate action by Israel is an act of aggression as defined in General Assembly resolution 3314
(XXIX) of 14 December 1974. Furthermore, there can
be no question that the acquisition of territory by force
is inadinissible under the Charter of the United Nations
and is against all the principles of international law and
relevant United Nations resolutions.
82. For those reasons alone, we consider the annexation
of the Syrian Golan Heights by Israel null and void and
we fail to see how such action can be recognized or even
tolerated by the international community. Indeed, it
seems to us that Israel has for quite a long time now been
begging to be isolated. As for us, we fully support the
Arab cause regarding the illegally occupied territories in
the Middle East.
83. Concerning the measures to be applied against
Israel so as to seek a remedy to the wrong it has committed, my delegation has only late this morning received
instructions from the Government of Mauritius. However, those instructions appear to be somewhat vggue and
couched in language which we find rather ambiguous. We
do not believe that this possible ambiguity is in any way
intentional, We have no doubt as to the position of
Mauritius on this issue. Nevertheless, our Permanent
Representative is at this very moment, despite the time
difference, trying to contact our Government by telephone in order to seek clarification of the instructions,
I am anxiously waiting here for the proper signal, and
I am praying it will reach me in time for the voting. In
any case, although Mauritius does not maintain diplomatic relations with Israel, we appeal to the leaders of
that State created by the United Nations to heed the resolutions of the Organization and, especially, to comply
urgently with Security Council resolution 497 (1981) and
General Assembly resolution 361226 B.
84. Mr, BHATT (Nepal): Nepal is firmly committed to
the principle of the inadmissibility of the acq,uisition of
territory by force. We believe that the violation of this
principle constitutes a grave violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and the norms of international law.
That is why Nepal has joined the international CommunitY
in condemning the latest Israeli action in the Golan
Heights. That Israeli action is tantamount to ~nneXatipn
and thus negates the principles embodied in Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) and the Geneva Conventton
of 12 August 1949, as well as other relevant United
Nations resolutions. Accordingly, we will vote in favour
of draft resolution A.J’EVVI,, 1.

132

General

Assembly-Ninth

Emergency

85. My delegation, however, is not in a position to
support certain provisions and language contained in
the draft resolution before us. The delegation of Nepal
reserves its position on the tenth preambular paragraph
and operative paragraphs 7,8, 11, 12 and 13. The provisions of those paragraphs run counter to the declared
policies and perceptions of my Government. Moreover,
we believe that initiation of measures called for in those
paragraphs is the prerogative of the Security Council,
which alone has the power to adopt measures it deems
necessary under Chapter VII of the Charter.
86. My delegation would have liked reference to be
made to Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), which in our opinion constitute the only realistic
basis for a peaceful settlement of the Middle East dispute.
87. Mr. BOLE (Fiji): The Government of Fiji’s position
in respect to the situation in the Middle East has been
one of deep concern. We have been concerned that, rather
than decreasing, the tension in the area has shown an
ominously marked increase, which only makes the search
for a just and lasting peace in the Middle East more
difficult than ever.
88. The unilateral action of the Government of Israel
to extend its laws, jurisdiction and administration to the
Golan Heights has been condemned by all. My Government adds its voice to that of the international community
in calling upon Israel to rescind the law annexing that
Syrian territory. We associate ourselves fully with Security Council resolution 497 (1981) of 17 December 1981.
89. On 16 December, one day before the adoption of
that resolution, my Prime Minister conveyed the following message to the Government of Israel:
“The Government of Fiji has always taken the view
that conflicts in the Middle East should be resolved
peacefully and through negotiaticn. The Government
of Fiji is therefore distressed that the Government of
Israel has unilaterally taken action to apply the law,
jurisdiction and administration of Israel to the Golan
Heights. Fiji’s Middle East policy is based on Security
Council resolution 242 (1967), which recognizes the
right of all States in the region, including Israel, to live
in peace within secure and recognized boundaries and
calls on Israel to withdraw from territories occupied
in the 1967 war.
“We believe that any adjustment of boundaries
should be part of a negotiated arrangement based on
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) between the
parties concerned. It is the view of the Government of
Fiji that unilateral action for the acquisition of territory is contrary to international law and therefore
unacceptable,”
90. The Government of Fiji is in total agreement with
the draft resolution A/ES-g/L. 1 now before us, in so far
as it nullifies the legality of the Government of Israel’s
decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration on the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, and with all
other various aspects that relate to it, including tsraef’s
withdrawal from the territories occupied since the 1967
war.
91. But our support has unfortunately been undermined
by the introduction into the draft resolution of issues
which are legally or politically controversial. We refer in
particular to the penultimate preambular paragraph and
to operative paragraphs 8, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15. Our
strong reservations on those paragraphs are based on the
following views of my Government, views that we have
espoused not only here but in other forums and the
applicability of which is not, therefore, limited to the
question of the Middle East.

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

92. First, we believe in the sovereign right of any State
to acquire arms for its defence so long as such acquisitions are commensurate with that State’s genuine security
needs. In the same vein, we categorically reject the assertion that annexation of foreign or neighbouring territories
of another State is legitimate on the pretext of those same
security needs.
93. Secondly,, the severance of relations with another
State remains m our view the ultimate concern and prerogative of individual Member States and is a matter that
cannot devolve upon anyone else. The usurpation of that
prerogative is altogether contrary to one of the fundamental principles of the Charter, which recognizes the
sovereign and inalienable right of a State freely to determine and develop its international relations.
94. Thirdly, the duties and obligations of Member
States under the Charter are many and varied, and we
hold the view that the duty of Member States to live up
to those obligations has never been completely fulfilled
in a majority of cases.
95. Fourthly, the over-all consequence of the draft resolution would in our view run counter to the universality
of United Nations membership as defined in the Charter
for an Organization that prides itself on the universality
of its membership and the equality of Member States
before the Organization. We are of the view that such
an act contributes little in a positive sense to the work
of the Organization and, in turn, to the efforts of individual Member States to achieve world peace through
dialogue and negotiations.
96. It is because of those views of my Governmentviews that would not seem to be consonant with the thrust
of draft resolution A/ES-9/L. l-that we sadly have no
alternative but to vote against it. In doing so we shoutd
like to reiterate my Government’s long-held view that a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the MiddIe East
can only come about through the withdrawal of Israel
from all territories occupied since the 1967 war? the restoration of the Golan Heights to Syria, the right to a
homeland of the Palestinian people and the recognition
by others of Israel’s right to live in peace within secure
and internationally recognized boundaries.
97. Miss DEVER (Belgium) (interpretation
from
French): My delegation has taken a clear stand against
the decisions of the Israeli Government on Jerusalem and
the Golan Heights. We have repeatedly and clearly called
upon Israel to comply with the principles of international
law in connection with the Arab territories occupied since
1967 and with the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council.
98. The vote which we will be casting on draft resolution A/ES-g/L. 1 in no way modifies the position that I
set forth in my statement of 2 February last 15th meeting]
and should in no way be interpreted as supporting the
illegal act of Israel with regard to the Golan Heights.
99. Consequently, a number of paragraphs of this draft
resolution meet with our approval, particularly operative
paragraphs 1, 3, 4, 5 and 9. We cannot, however, vote
for the draft resolution as a whole for the following
reasons.
100. The criticism of a permanent member of the Security Council contained in paragraph 7 is groundless and
unacceptable.
101. We are firmly opposed to paragraph 11 of this text
because it is aimed at a Member State which, whether
we like it or not, is a necessary partner in any negotiations
for a comprehensive peace settlement for the Middle East.
In this connection, we would like formally to reaffirm
our attachment to the principle of the universality of the
United Nations.

12th meeting-5

102, Finally, with regard to paragraphs 12, 13, 14 and
15, We wish t0 recall that our commitment to the Charter
and to the distribution of powers between the Security
Council and the General Assembly remains undiminished,
‘I We believe that the appeal contained in those paragraphs
for sanctions against Israel and for the total isolation of
that country can only make the prospects for any negotiations even more remote.
103. We regret that the unanimity displayed by the international community in condemning the Israeli measures
regarding the Golan Heights was not reflected in the draft
resolution before US. We understand the impatience of
the injured party in the face of Israel’s failure to comply
with the bidding of the United Nations, but, in our view,
the Assembly would be better advised to base its action
on a consensus which would call upon all States to refrain
from any acts or statements that would imply recognition
of Israel’s decision or would have the effect of supporting that decision.
104. We hope that the search for true consensus of that
kind can be continued in the Security Council. ln our
view, we have not yet exhausted all the means of bringing
about our common objective, which is to prevail upon
the Israeli Government to rescind its illegal decision.
105. The following countries have asked to be associated with this explanation of vote: Denmark, the Federal Republic of Germany, France, Italy, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands and the United Kingdom.
106. Mr. MOSELEY (Barbados): My country finds
itself in a position of some difficulty in dealing with the
draft resolution before us. We cannot vote against the
draft resolution in its entirety since my country seesthe
actions of Israel as tending dangerously to justify all the
accusations levelled against that country by the sponsors
of the draft resolution and by so many other speakers in
this Assembly. On the other hand, we cannot, by applying any standard of objectivity and integrity, vote m
favour of the draft resolution in its entirety since we cannot recognize certain courses of action recommended in
the draft resolution, for example in its paragraphs 12,
13 and 15, as tending in any real sense towards achieving
peace in the Middle East or even enhancing the reput$on
of the Assembly for even-handed justice and objectrvrty.
107. In these circumstances, my country has no
alternative but to abstain from voting on the draft
resolution A/ES-g/L. 1.
108. Mr. HLAING
(Burma): My delegation has followed very attentively the important deliberations of the
current emergency special session of the General Assembly, It has also examined most carefully draft resolution A/ES-g&l.
AS members of the Assembly are
aware, the deep concern felt by the international community over the situation in the occupied Arab territories
has been amply reflected in the resolution UnanimouslY
adopted by the Security Council, resolution 497 (1981)
of 17 December last. It has echoed through this hall where
we have been assembled these last few days.
109. The fact is that the recent development with regard
to the Golan Heights has greatly compounded the complexity and confusion which have always characterized
the over-all issues involved in the questions of Palestme
and the Middle East. In the view of my delegation, a just,
equitable and lasting solution to the questions of Palestine
and the Middle East lies in the strict adherence by all the
parties concerned to the basic principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, namely, that international disputes
should be settled by peaceful means and that all nations
~ should refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
Political independence of any State.

February

1982

133

110. The corollary that inevitably follows from those
Charter principles is that any acquisition of territory by
war is inadmissible. For that reason, any unilateral effort
to change t.he status of occupied territories and thereby
confront the world with afait accompli is entirely unwarranted. Viewed in this light, as indeed it should be, the
new
development pertaining to the Golan Heights, which
has been the subject of our debate and our deliberations,
is without doubt unjustifiable.
111. Dictated by this principled stand then, my d&gatiOrl will vote in favour of draft resolution A/ES-g/L.1
taken as a wh ;le. However, I hasten to add here that the
present draft resolution contains several paragraphs
which, in our view, embody many far-reaching measures,
generalized and sweeping statements, and some implicit
or explicit censures of Member States of the Organization.
We do not sincerely believe that those elements envisaged
in severa paragraphs of the draft resolution will in any
way contribute to the promotion of peace and security
in the Middle East; they may, on the contrary, complicate
even further the already complicated situation.
112. My delegation would therefore like to register its
serious reservations about the tenth preambular paragraph and about operative paragraphs 2, 7, 8 and
11 to 15.
113. Mr. DOUNTAS (Greece): I should like to take this
opportunity to explain my vote on the draft resolution
submitted to the ninth emergency special session of the
General Assembly.
114. Greece has on no occasion failed to condemn consistently and in no uncertain words the acts of Israel
against the Arab nations. Very recently my delegation had
the opportunity of expressing itself strongly and firmly
against the decision of the Israeli Government to annex
the Golan Heights.
115. Apart from our traditional friendship with the
Arab world, our position in this respect is determined by
my country’s unshakeable attachment to the principles
enshrined in Article 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter and
in the Final Act of Helsinki.@ The sensitivity of my
Government with regard to the implementation of the
principle of the non-use of force against the territorral
integrity or political independence of any State has been
further enhanced because of our strong concern for, and
very special interest in, the well-known case of a sovereign country, a Member of this Organization, which has
been the victim of military invasion and subsequent continuing military occupation of a large part of Its territory.
116. It is for those reasons that my delegation will vote
in favour of the draft resolution A/ES-B/L. 1, wherem
the Assembly condemns aggression against a sovereign
State, However, my delegation is unable to go along with
certain paragraphs of this draft resolution. If a separate
vote were to be taken, my delegation would abstain on
paragraphs 7, 12 (c) and (I?), and would vote against
paragraph 13.
117. Thus, my delegation dissociates itself from those
paragraphs while it will vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
118, Mr. DGRR (Ireland): While Ireland voted in the
Security Council for the resolution requesting the Assembly to meet on this issue [resolution 500 (1982)], we are
unable to vote for the draft resolution now before the
Assembly, I should like to explain why.
119, In statements in the Security Council on 16 December 19813* and 20 January
1982,* I set Out at SOye
length the position of the Irish Government On Israel s
decision to extend its law and jurisdiction to the occupied
Syrian territory of the Golan Heights. I do not need to
repeat that position here in detarl,

134

General

Assembly-Ninth

Emergency

120. I will say, however, that we believe that Israel’s
decision was both wrong and dangerous. It was wrong
because it was tantamount to a claim of annexation., and
we do not accept the right to such annexation of terntory;
and it was dangerous because it was a direct challenge
to the two basic principles of resolution 242 (1967),
namely, that it is inadmissible to acquire territory by war
and that there must be respect for the rights and the territorial integrity of all States. We believe these principles
to be fundamental if there is ever to be a just and comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East, although
in our view they are not in themselves sufficient. They
must be supplemented and completed on a number of
points if full account is to be taken of all aspects of the
problem, including the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people.
121. Because we believed that Israel’s action was wrong,
dangerous and, indeed, gratuitous, Ireland condemned
it, believing that it had greatly aggravated tensions in the
Middle East. As a member of the Security Council, we
voted for resolution 497 (198 1) on 17 December last. That
resolution formally declared the Israeli decision to be null
and void and called on Israel to rescind it.
122. Israel has not complied with the demand by
the Council. Because Israel declined to rescind its decision, the Council met again in mid-January to consider
appropriate measures, as it had undertaken to do in
resolution 497 (198 1). At those renewed meetings of the
Council, Ireland favoured further action to ensure that
the Israeli decision would not come to be accepted as a
fait accompli.
123. As I said in my statement in the Council on 20 January, we believed that the Council should at that stage
have, first, reiterated that the Israeli decision is illegal and
void; secondly, determined that States must give no recognition, direct or indirect, to it; and, thirdly, decided in
a clear-cut way that it would be incumbent on all States
to review all their relations with Israel to ensure that no
such recognition is given or implied. We also wanted to
see the Council keep the matter actively on its agenda.
124. Ireland worked with other like-minded countries
for a resolution on these lines. In any event, to our regret
the Council did not take the approach we advocated and
worked for. Despite our concern about Israeli actions,
we were obliged to abstain on the draft resolution eventually presented’ because we considered it too broad
and sweeping. That draft resolution called for very broad
measures of a general character which were designed to
punish and to deter Israel rather than for specific and
precisely focused measures designed to negate the new
Israeli claim to the Golan Heights.
125. When that draft resolution failed in the Council,
the General Assembly was called into emergency special
session at the Council’s request [resolution 500 (1982)].
As a member of the Security Council, Ireland voted for
that request for an Assembly session. We believed that
further measures of a suitable kind were indeed required
to counter the Israeli decision, and we accept that the
Assembly should exercise its functions when the Council,
which bears the primary responsibility under the Charter,
is unable to take action.
126. After a week of debate, the Assembly now has
before it a draft resolution, This draft takes the same
approach as the draft resolution vetoed in the Council,
but it goes much further than the latter in several respects.
127. I must say frankly that we find this present draft
resolution unacceptable and we cannot support it, notwithstanding our condemnation of the Israeli decision and
our belief that further measures by the international

Spkclal

Session-Plenary

Meetings

community to counter that decision are indeed called for
in accordance with Security Council resolution 497 (1981).
128. We find draft resolution A/ES-g/L.1 unacceptable
for three main reasons. First, instead of calling for precise
measures focused on the Golan decision, the draft resolution seeks to impose broad and sweeping sanctions of a
general character on Israel. The aim, as stated in operative
paragraph 13, is to isolate Israel completely.
129. Secondly, although the draft resolution does not
seek to suspend Israel or to expel it from the United
Nations, the draft contains language which clearly seems
to foreshadow such a decision at a later date.
130. Thirdly, the draft also contains a paragraph criticizing a permanent member of the Security Council for
exercising its right under the Charter to vote against, and
thus to veto, the particular proposals that were before
the Council on 20 January. We ourselves considered those
proposals too broad and sweeping to support. We believe,
therefore, that the criticism contained in operative paragraph 7 1s unwarranted.
13 1. For our part, we consider the Israeli actions wrong
and we have said so clearly. But it is one thing to condemn
Israel and to seek to couple that condemnation with concerted measures to ensure that the annexation is not
accepted internationally. It is quite another matter to call
for sweeping sanctions designed to isolate Israel in all
fields and to prepare the way, through a decision of the
Assembly, for what could be a later attempt to move
towards suspension or expulsion of Israel from the Organization. We favour the former course. We simply do not
accept the latter. We believe that adoption of a draft resolution that takes that latter course would be damaging
to the Organization and to any hopes that may exist of
an eventual negotiation of a comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East.
132. We are well aware that this draft resolution has
been the subject of considerable pressures on delegations
coming, on the one hand, from those intent on severe
action against Israel and, on the other, from those who
oppose any such course. For delegations like mine who
believe that some further measures, as foreshadowed in
Security Council resolution 497 (1981), are indeed called
for but believe also that the draft resolution before us
is out of proportion and wrong, the issue is a particularly
difficult one. We face the dilemma that our position of
principle could easily be misunderstood.
133. Let me therefore conclude by summarizing that
position very clearly. First, Ireland condemns the Israeli
decision and believes that it should he rescinded.
134. Secondly, we understand fully that that decision
has evoked a strong reaction from the international community as a whole, and particularly in the Middle East.
135. Thirdly, Israel has always had in its own hands the
possibility of toning down that reaction and obviating the
need for this emergency special session by rescinding
its original unjustified and gratuitous decision. It has
declined to do so.
136. FourthIy, Israel is therefore seriously at fault and
deserving of censure on this issue. Certain further measures by the international community are called for, in
our view.
137. Fifthly, in the first instance, such measures should
be taken by the Security Council. But failing action by
the Council, the Assembly, having been convoked by
decision of the Council, is in our view entitled to take
appropriate measures.
138. Sixthly, these measures must, however, he proportioned to the event that occasioned them; they should he
calculated to ensure that the purported annexation does

12Lh meefing-5

not become accepted, and they should be helpful-or
at
least not damaging-to
such hope as there may be of
progress towards a comprehensive peace settlement in the
Middle East.
139. Seventhly, the present attempt to impose sweeping
measures designed to isolate Israel totally does not meet
these concerns. In our view it is unwarranted and misguided; it is likely to have wider damaging consequences
in the Middle East region and outside it; and it may affect
the ability of the United Nations to help in keeping the
peace in the region and in promoting efforts towards a
comprehensive peace settlement, to which we are strongly
committed.
140. Eighthly, accordingly we are obliged to vote
against the present proposal, while maintaining our criticism of Israel’s decision in effect to annex the Golan
Heights as both wrong and dangerous.
141. Ninthly and finally, in taking this position, I
should emphasize our wish to associate ourselves with the
position on the draft resolution stated here by the representative of Belgium.
142. Mr. KAMANDA
wa KAMANDA
(Zaire) (interpretation from French): As we have so often stated, most
recently during the last series of meetings of the Security
Council, the organ entrusted with the taking of decisions
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security, as well as in our statement before the General
Assembly at this session (8th meeting], the delegation of
Zaire would like to reaffirm its full support for the ArabPalestinian cause in the Middle East conflict and, in this
case, for the cause of the Syrian Arab Republic as a nonaligned, third-world country which has been the victim
of Israeli annexation.
143. We persist in our belief that Israel should withdraw
from all occupied Arab territories, that it should rescind
its decision to annex the Golan Heights in accordance
with resolution 497 (1981) of the Security Council, and
that it should help to create a favourable atmosphere for
the negotiations called for in Security Council resolution 338 (1973) by respecting the letter and the spirit of
United Nations resolutions, particularly Security Council
resolution 242 (1967), which proclaims the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force,
144. Moreover, we continue to believe that all Member
States should abide by the provisions of Security Council
resolution 497 (1981), refrain from any act which might
imply recognition, support or encouragement of the
Israeli measure of annexation, and that all acts of Israel
to support that decision should be considered null and
void. The status of the occupied Arab territories cannot
be modified unilaterally, as that would only exacerbate
tension and contradictions in the area and prolong the
conflict.
145. It is the duty of the international community to
adopt new measures so as to ensure a comprehensive, just
and lasting settlement of the Middle East conflict, in the
interest of international peace and security.
146. In the light of what I have just said, the delegation
of Zaire would like to dissociate itself from all those who
think they should or may wish, directly or indirectly, to
abet and encourage Israel in its unilateral acts that run
counter to Charter provisions and principles of international law and from the intransigence of any other parties
to the Middle East conflict.
147. There are States represented here which, on principle, speak on these major problems only when it is
time to vote, We say that it is the duty of all Member
States to co-operate in the work of the United Nations
by actively participating in its deliberations, consultations

February

1982

135

and negotiations, in particular, and not to wait, each time
a problem arises, until it is time to vote before taking a
stand, without having made any positive contribution to
the efforts of others to find solutions in the interest of
international peace and security. We consider this as a
new form of disdain for the work being done by the
Organization and that it is far from the spirit of cooperation called for by the principles of the Charter.
148. We think that disputes that are likely to threaten
international peace and security are not a matter of concern to one country or group of States alone, and not
to others. Every one should have a clear idea of the contribution that it can make. This should be stated, as we
must all be ready to make concessions, since reason and
right are not the monopoly of one State or group of
States, or of the great Powers.
149. Draft resolution A/ES-9/L.l,
which is before us,
includes provisions for which we voted in the Security
Council and which cause us no problems. None the less,
we have serious doubts and explicit reservations about
some of the new provisions, which we do not think will
encourage the efforts to find a comprehensive, just and
lasting solution to the Middle East problem. We consider
that these new provisions might even lead to a more
serious deterioration of the situation in the region.
150. For all these reasons,.although we reaffirm our
support for the Arab Palestmlan cause in general and are
ready and willing to co-operate in the search for a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the conflict, we
will abstain in the vote on the draft resolution. Our vote
does not reflect any change in our fundamental position
on the substance of the problem nor in our traditional
support for the Arab-Palestinian cause.
151. Mr. CASTILLO ARRIOLA (Guatemala) (interpretation from Spanish): The delegation of Guatemala
will abstain in the vote on draft resolution A/ES-9/L. 1
on the situation in the occupied Arab territories, sponsored by several Member States. We shall abstain, despite
some of the amendments made to the original text that
was distributed informally, since those amendments do
not suffice to convince my delegation that that text can
make a positive contribution to the solution of a problem
which, whatever its implications may be, is in our view
none the less closely connected with the general and complex problem of peace in the Middle East. Therefore, it
is not feasible to seek partial or political solutions except
within the context of a peaceful settlement and negotiation of the entire problem among the interested parties
which, in our opinion, must seek around the table of
dialogue and negotiation a settlement that would take into
account the concerns, rights and obligations of all.
152. My delegation and my Government have followed
with great attention the debates on the various items that
have been held on this subject in the Security Council and
in the General Assembly. We have also followed with
interest the bilateral and other negotiations that represent
positive efforts towards the whole negotiation on all
aspects of the overall problem.
153, Guatemala is a founding Member of the United
Nations and once again declares its faith in the Organization, in its great capacity to achieve peace and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. We have faith in the fundamental principles of the Charter and other provisions
that have contributed to the development and codification
of internatjonal law, We believe in the principles of international law that establish the right of States to existence
and assured sovereignty and of peoples to self-determination and the-integrity and independence of their territories, and, above all, to those principles established to

136

General

Assembly-Ninth

Emergency

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

support because they are contrary to the Charter of the
maintain peace, justice and friendship among States of
United Nations and involve actions which are within the
the international legal community.
competence of other organs and encroach on areas which
154. That is why we believe that action and negotiation
are
within the exclusive sovereign competence of States.
within the United Nations system, as well as direct nego163,
With these reservations, my delegation will abstain
tiations, are the most suitable way to proceed, because
in the vote on the draft resolution.
in that way the solution may be found to all the problems
connected with peace in the Middle East. We do not con164. Mr. BELTRAMINO
(Argentina) (interpretation
sider that the sanctions that are requested against one of
from Spanish): The Argentine delegation wishes to set
the parties involved in the problem are likely to achieve
forth clearly its position on draft resolution A/ES-g/L. 1,
a complete solution for all the concrete aspects of the
both with respect to its consideration by the Assembly
problem we are considering today, nor of the overall
and with respect to its content.
situation in the Middle East.
165. My delegation believes that the draft resolution on
155. Our abstention implies an honest and serious
which we are about to vote should have been the subject
appeal to all the parties to seek this comprehensive settleof more extensive and thorough consultations and debate
ment of the situation, a settlement which all States Memin the General Assembly. That would have made it
bers of the Organization should energetically promote.
possible to produce a balanced and effective consensus
156. Mrs. DORSET (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad
text.
and Tobago condemns any acquisition of territory by
166. We are keenly aware that we are faced with a situaforce and any annexation of territory pursuant to such
tion in which the essential principles of international law
acquisition. As such, that fundamental principle, as enunare at stake. The inadmissibility
of the acquisition of
ciated in the draft resolution A/ES-g/L. 1, has the support
territory by force and respect for the territorial integrity
^ .
of the Government of Trinidad and Tobago.
of States are essential principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. This was clearly reflected in the opinions
157. Trinidad and Tobago is already on record as havexpressed and the positions taken in the 2329th meeting
ing supported General Assembly resolution 36/226 B of
of the Security Council when resolution 497 (1981) was
17 December 1981, which, inter alia, declared that Israel’s
adopted on 17 December Iast. Nevertheless, we believe
decision to apply Israeli law to the occupied Syrian Arab
it necessary to reaffirm our position, namely, that there
Golan Heights is null and void and has no legal authority.
should be strict respect for the fields of competence of
158. There are, however, some elements in the draft
the principal organs of the Organization and that it should
resolution now under consideration which the Governbe borne in mind that the Security Council alone is
ment of Trinidad and Tobago does not support. In view
authorized to apply broad and binding sanctions against
of those elements, and despite my Government’s support
a Member State.
for the principle to which my delegation has already
referred, Trinidad and Tobago will abstain in the vote
The additional action that may be taken by the
on the draft resolution.
General Assembly when meeting in emergency special
session in accordance with General Assembly resolu159. Mr. GARCIA MORENO (Colombia) (interpret&
tion 377 (V) does not imply that it has discretionary and
tion from Spanish): Colombia, which prides itself above
all on being a law-abiding State, believes that the inter- 1 unlimited power, to the detriment of the clear terms of
reference assigned by the Charter to the Security Council
national community today is based on the acceptance of
with regard to its competence as to imposing comprehencertain basic rules without which it becomes impossible
and binding sanctions.
to maintain international peace and security. Among such
rules we have the following: the sovereign equality of all
168. I believe that there is unanimity in this Assembly,
nations, the self-determination of peoples, the prohibition
as indeed there was in the Security Council, to the effect
on intervention in affairs which are essentially within the
that Israel’s decision is entirely null and void. However,
domestic jurisdiction of States, the obligation to settle
other methods shouId,be used-methods which are well
international disputes by peaceful means, and the prohibiknown in international practice-to prevail upon Israel
tion on undertaking any action harmful to the integrity
to comply with the decisions of the Organization with
or political independence of any State.
regard to the acquisition of territory by force. For that
reason, my delegation rejects and does not consider itself
160. Faithful to and consistent with those principles
bound by the provisions of the relevant paragraphs of
which govern its conduct in international affairs, my
the draft resolution on sanctions, particularly operative
country rejects as an act which violates the basic norms
paragraphs 12 and 13.
of international law and the principles underlying the
United Nations the decision of the Government and Par169. Another question of the greatest importance and
liament of Israel to apply to the Golan Heights the legislaon which the position of the Argentine delegation is welltion, jurisdiction and administration of the State of Israel
known is that raised in operative paragraph 11. There is
by the use of force. The principle that annexation or the
no point in trying to convince us that there are no impliacquisition of territory by force does not create rights is
cations in that paragraph, because it would be naive to
firmly established.
believe that no preparations are in progress for the adoption of measures aimed at the suspension of a Member
161. Draft resolution A/ES-9/L. 1 which is before us,
State or the rejection of the credentials of its representahowever, contains elements which are not relevant or
tives by the General Assembly at a subsequent stage. My
essential. We would have preferred a better balanced
delegation has rejected and continues to reject that type
context, which would have promoted the indispensable
of decision, which in no way contributes to the fulfilment
atmosphere of peace and dialogue and goodwill among
of the objectives for which the Organization was founded.
all the parties concerned, an atmosphere which is necessary for finding a constructive solution to this delicate
170. Had there been separate votes on the paragraphs
problem and, in general, to the crisis in the Middle East.
I have mentioned, my delegation would have voted
against them. But we shall abstain in the vote on the
162. My delegation would therefore like to record its
draft resolution as a whole, and to this we must add our
reservations with respect to the tenth paragraph of the
preamble and particularly to operative paragraphs 11,12
reservations on the operative paragraphs I have just
mentioned.
and 13, which are unacceptable and do not have our

-

12th meeting-5

171. Mr. AUGUSTIS?(Saint Lucia): Any draft resolution that purports to relate to the question of international
peace and security must be viewed with gravity and concern. Draft reso!utron A/ES-g/L. 1, which is before us,
1s one of that kind.
Every State is obligated to deal with its sister
$z2&s in a manaer that respects the norms and standards
enzhrined in international law. The principle of the inviolability
of territory,
which is foremost among these
norms, is none the less reduced as a result of conquest.
when a State which has acquired territory through force
of arms adopts legislative action in order to place the said
territory in the context of its paternal homeland, and in
one action negates any consideration that there is or ever
was any intent to return to the stat~,s quo ante, it is not
surprising that the affected State will not only view this
action as an act of war but also assume that any hope
of peace has disappeared with it.
173. If it wishes to be taken seriously, the international
community cannot stand idly by and permit a total flouting of the principles that it has sworn to defend, To
compromise would be to give the green light to any interpretative action of this nature, which would eventually
Iead to international anarchy. Each member State of the
community is obligated to defend the principle of inviolability of territory and shares the guilt of any State that
abandons that principle should there be no action as a
result on the part of the community.
174. My delegation is concerned at the fact that a just
and lasting settlement will continue to elude the Middle
East. We are of the view that all States in the Middle East,
including Israel, have the right to exist within secure and
internationally recognized boundaries. We are totally
aware of the strategic and political implications of the
Golan Heights. But, while these Heights are tactically
important, particularly Mount Hermon and the row of
extinct volcanoes running from north to south, the continued militarization of the area is not conducive to peace
in the Middle East and constitutes a grave and continuing
threat to the more than 18,000 inhabitants of the area.
175. While the question of Palestine remains at the very
heart of this conflict in the Middle East, the enactment
of Israel’s Golan Heights law 5742 constitutes one more
obstacle to the achievement of a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the region.
176. A draft resolution that seeks to chastise a State for
its misdeeds and provide for redress of the wrong done
must in itself possess the germ-the absolute germ-that
wili decidely produce appropriate remorse and action on
the part of the recalcitrant State. If it does not, then it
is a mere paper tiger and will only serve to underline the
sheer impotence of the organ from which it emanated.
The strictures contained in the draft resolution before us
may well be deserved. They are based, in a sense, on a
deliberate decision to introduce the most punitive sanctions in order to give Israel a lesson and secure compliance, If it fails to be effective, or if its effectiveness
is negated by a non-compliance of a large section of the
community, it will only lead Israel to be more brazen in
its future actions. In short, it will have served little or
no real purpose, apart from a moral condemnation.
177. It is a very real world that we live in, TO ostracize
Israel so completely-and
the draft resolution aims at
achieving exactly this objective-would
mean to cut out
the dialogue, however little, and leave Israel so terribly
stranded and aloof from the very States it must meet and
negotiate with that a greater consideration would be nullified. To that extent this draft resolution fails-and it is
an important failure, one that might leave all of US with
a Sense of belittlement,
anguish and despondency.

February

1982

137

178. In denouncing the Israeli annexation of the Syrian
Golan Heights, and in expressing its regret that the draft
resolution before us does not fully lend itself to a consensus and leaves an important segment of the international community in disagreement with its terms, my
delegation remains convinced that no comprehensive settlement of the situation in the Middle East-whether it
be the annexation of the Golan Heights or Palestinian
autonomy in east Jerusalem-can be achieved without
the participation on an equal footing of all the parties
to the conflict, including the Palestine Liberation Organization as the representative of the Palestinian people.
179. Israel stands condemned by friend and foe for the
effrontery of this act, however much one may wish to
understand and appreciate the argument for the action.
It raises the perennial question that continues to plague
the world: can a State do evil with impunity that good
may come? History continues to respond with a solemn
negative.
180. My delegation understands the nature of the
dilemma that is produced both by Israel’s intransigence
and by the failure of the draft resolution to bring about
the desire of the community for an appropriate remedy
to the situation. In order to address both parties on the
need to keep every possibility for action open for future
consideration, my delegation must, to its regret, abstain
in the vote on the draft resolution as a whole.
181. Mr. MOUSSA (Egypt): The Genera1 Assembly has
been called upon to meet in an emergency special session
to discharge its responsibilities in the area of the maintenance of international peace and security. We therefore
view this session with the seriousness commensurate with
the situation that has been brought before us by Security
Council resolution 500 (1982).
182. It will be recalled that Egypt has on many occasions
and in various forums unequivocally expressed its total
and unconditional rejection and condemnation of the
imposition of Israeli laws, jurisdiction and administration
to the occupied Syrian Golan Heights. The Government
of Egypt-I wish to emphasize-considers itself a full
member of the international consensus against this illegal
decision. Egypt, together with other members of the international community, considers the Israeli action as null
and void and having no legal validity or effect whatsoever. By the same token, we firmly believe that al1 actions
taken by Israel to give effect to this decision relating to
the occupied Syrian Golan Heights are illegal and invalid
and that they will not be recognized, since they violate
the basic norms and principles of international law, in
particular the principle of the inadmissibility of the use
of force or the acquisition of territory by force. The
Syrian territory of the Golan Heights continues to be
occupied territory. It follows, therefore, that the regulations annexed to The Hague Convention of 190715 and
the Geneva Convention of 12 August 194914continue to
apply to the Syrian territory occupied by Israel since 1967.
We join in calling upon Israel to respect its obligations
under those instruments in all circumstances.
183. On 17 December 1981, the Security Council, in discharging its responsibilities? unanimously adopted its
resolution 497 (1981), in which it demanded that Israe!,
the occupying Power, should rescind forthwith its decrsion concerning the Syrian Golan Heights and declared
it considered the Israeli action null and void and without
international legal effect, That resolution, adopted by the
Security Council as a reflection of the collective will of
the international community, has been disregarded by
Israel, to the detriment of the establishment of an atmosphere conducive to the comprehensive peace to which
we all aspire and for which we all long.

138

General Assembly-Nlnlh

Emergency Special Session-Plenary

184. The failure of the Security Council to adopt a further reasonable and effective decision on the subject, as
called for in its unanimously adopted resolution 497
(1981), in the light of the Israeli position as reported by
the Secretary-General,]’ casts doubt on the Organization’s credibility and effectiveness. That is unfortunate
and regrettable.
185. The situation in the Middle East should not be
allowed to deteriorate further through actions such as the
decision taken by Israel on the occupied Golan Heights
or that taken in regard to Jerusalem. We believe that the
ultimate solution of the Middle East problem must be
effected through negotiation. It is through negotiations
conducted in good faith that the parties can mutually
ensure their security, redress their grievances and restore
their rights.
186. The Israeli action imposes a fait accompli and can
hardly be described as an expression of good faith. It
threatens the chances of progress towards a negotiated
comprehensive settlement in accordance with the principles of international law, the provisions of the Charter
and the relevant United Nations resolutions, in particular
Security Council resolution 242 (1967).
187. The principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force should be fully respected. The
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
should be upheld. The sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all countries should be strictly respected, and the right
of all the States of the area to live in peace within secure
and recognized boundaries should be guaranteed. Those
are the fundamental pillars of a just peace in the Middle
East, which the international community, as represented
here in this Assembly, has already resolved and repeatedly
affirmed.
188. Having stated our position, and while we fully sym, pathize with and subscribe to the just Syrian cause, it is
our view that the draft resolution before us includes provisions which would not contribute to resolving the complex
problem in the Middle East. The draft resolution, which
would have certain far-reaching consequences, cannot in
our opinion be an optimally practical or practicable
avenue leading to that end. Therefore, upon instructions
from my Government, the delegation of Egypt will not
be able to cast a positive vote on the draft resolution that
is about to be adopted,
189. Mr. BLUM (Israel): We are celebrating these days
throughout the world the centennial of the birth of an
illustrious son of the Jewish people, Franz Kafka. With
uncanny clairvoyance, Kafka identified the malaise of the
twentieth century, so much so that his name is even used
as an adjective to describe what we now term Kafkaesque
situations. And nowhere have his predictions become
more relevant than in this building, which reeks of a
Kafkaesque atmosphere par excelIence. Indeed, such
works of Kafka as The Casfle and The Trial should be
made compulsory reading for representatives here so as
to enable them better to understand the workings of the
Organization.
190, The United Nations of 1982 has become a workshop for the semanticist and simultaneously his despair,
In this building, words have either lost any meaning or
have been assigned one diametrically opposed to the
regular meaning given them in the real world, In this
building, Southern Yemen, East Germany or Afghanistan
are democracies. In this building, Libya, Viet Nam and
Iraq are peace-loving States. In this building, Cuba is a
non-aligned country. In this building, the Soviet Union
is the leader of an alleged peace camp, and any challenge
in this regard is always readily refuted by the representatives of Budapest, Prague, Kabul and Warsaw, who can

Meetings

well testify to the Soviet Union’s peaceful intentions. In
this building, the Arab aggressors who have been ganging
up on my country since its establishment as an independent State, and who openly profess their desire to see it
disappear from the face of the earth, are proclaimed the
victims of aggression, while Israel, the target of their
sinister designs, is branded as an aggressor. In short, in
this building the warmongers are declared the aggressedupon and the victims become the aggressors.
191. Small wonder that as a result the outside world is
no longer even amused by what is going on here and
watches these proceedings with the contempt and disgust
they justly deserve.
192. In this organization, as so often throughout history, the treatment of my people has become the litmus
test against which to ascertain the moral and intellectual
standards of the time. Throughout its long and tortuous
history, the Jewish people has always been the target of
hatred, harassment and persecution by all those who have
been opposed to the values which my people first proclaimed and then bequeathed to the world and which are
inextricably associated with it! namely the equality and
brotherhood of man, the intrmsic value and dignity of
the human being, social justice, the abolition of war
among nations, and universal peace. It is thus not surprising that my country has in this organization become
the target of all those who, while paying lip-service
to the Charter, are actively at work to destroy those
principles as well as the Organization based on it. Ever
since this organization was taken hostage by the antidemocratic and totalitarian forces of the world, they have
turned their fury against my people, which represents in
their eyes, and rightly so, the ideals of freedom and
equality which they detest and which they seek to destroy.
193. Israel is in no need of certification of its love
for peace by Cuba, Viet Nam, Libya, Iraq, Syria and
their ilk. The shameless document before us-and
I
will not dignify it by calling it a draft resolution-does
not reflect on Israel’s love of peace, which is ingrained
in our very existence. Rather, it does reflect the moral
degeneration and intellectual decay of all those who have
participated in the preparation of this despicable concoction. They are the same countries that in recent years have
been modelling this organization in their own shape
by gradually converting it into an anti-peace and antihuman rights organization, their hypocritical pontifications notwithstanding.
194. The accomplices in the drafting of this shameless document-and
I will not dignify them by calling
them sponsors-seek to isolate my people. Many tyrants
throughout history have tried to do this before them.
They are all gone and forgotten, while my people has
returned to its land and restored its sovereignty there after
19 centuries of exile and dispersion. This organization
cannot and will not isolate the people of Israel. But it
can and does increasingly isolate itself from enlightened
mankind, which will not countenance endlessly the paroxysms of collective frenzy being exhibited here at regular
intervals and with increasing frequency,
195. Stripped’of all bigoted rhetoric and artificial encumbrances, the cause of the Arab-Israel conflict is a
simple one: our Arab enemies begrudge us our very existence, despite the fact that we are one of the smallest
countries on Earth. In fact, Israel’s size is considerably
smaller than that of such small States as Switzerland,
Belgium or Denmark. If the Organization were lesstopsyturvy than it is-if it were truly dedicated to the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter-it
would long
ago have condemned the criminal designs of Israel’s enemies to destroy it-designs which are fuelled by outsiders

-

12th meeting-5

who are feeding on Arab obsessions in order to exploit
them for their own selfish purposes. The shameless document before USdoes not contain any reference to the on.
going aggression of Syria and other Arab States against
my country. It does not enjoin them to refrain from the
use or threat of force against Israel. It does not call on
them to solve their dispute with Israel in a peaceful manner, as is required by the Charter, It ignores the repeated
eXpresSiOns
of Israel’s willingness to negotiate with Syria
without any prior conditions, as well as with other Arab
States, in conformity with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and the persistent rejection of our offers by Syria and other Arab States.
196. In view of the degeneration and perversion of the
Organization by the forces of international lawlessness,
it is an affront to common decency that the words of a
great visionary of peace-Isaiah the prophet of Israelshould be permitted to continue gracing the wall across
the street from this building. In order to avoid further
insult to the memory of this great son of the Jewish
people! we appeal to the City of New York to consider
removing the Isaiah inscription and thus to give expression to the sentiments of abhorrence of civilized mankind
at the systematic debasement of the Organization by the
bigots, hypocrites and liars who manipulate the LJnited
Nations of 1982.
197. As is common after votes of this kind, I may be
approached again by many delegates who wish to express
to me their regrets for their vote, In addition to Government instructions, they usually invoke on such occasions
alleged bloc solidarity, Arab blackmail and similar worthy
considerations. I wish to tell them publicly that I release
them in advance from the need to go through this sickening and dishonest ritual.
198. This shameless document will not contribute to the
advancement of peace in the Middle East. Nor is this its
intention, Similarly, it will not deter Israel from doing
everything necessary to ensure its existence and security.
If the shameless document will be remembered at all, it
will stand as a monument to the moral degeneration and
intellectual corruption of its authors as well as to the
moral bankruptcy to which they and their like have
reduced the Organization.
199. There are moments when there is no room for
equivocation or evasion, or for considerations of expediency. This is such a moment for States to stand UP and
to be counted.
200. The PRESIDENT:
Before proceeding to the We
I wish to inform the Assembly that Guinea-Bissau and
Malaysia have become additional sponsors of draft resolution A/ES-g/L. 1,
201, I have received a request for five separate votes:
on operative paragraph 1, on operative paragraphs 3,
4 and 5, on operative paragraph 7, on Operative Paragraph 9 and on operative paragraphs 11 to 15 inclusive.
This is governed by rule 89 of the rules of procedure,
which reads as follows:
“A representative may move that parts of a Proposal
or of an amendment should be voted on separately.
If objection is made to the request for division, the
m&ion for division shall be voted upon. Permission
to speak on the motion for division shall be given ?nlY
to two speakers in favour and two speakers against.
If the motion for division is carried, those Parts of the
proposal , . .”
202. I have received an objection to the division and
therefore I can allow only two speakers to speak in favour
Of the division and two speakers against the proposal for
division, following which the proposal for division Will
be put to the vote.

February

1982

139

203. Mr. LENNUYEUX-COMNENE
(France) (inferFrench): The explanations of vote which
we have heard have convinced my delegation that delegations will Vote differently on the text before us &pending
on the Provisions in the document. In view of this fact
and because we are in favour of some of the provisions
of draft resolution A/ES-g/L, 1, I should like the Assembly to take a separate vote on the operative paragraphs
which YOU, Mr. President, have just mentioned, under
rule 89 of the rules of procedure,
204. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): The draft resolution
before us, A/ES-91L.1, is coherent, balanced and logical.
Thereis not a word in it that does not come from the
Charter or from General Assembly or Security Council
resolutions.
205. The condemnations of Israeli acts are too numerOUSto recount, but they have all been dismissed by the
aggressor as exercises in futility. If there is a crime, there
must be credible deterrents; otherwise it encourages the
aggressor to persist in his appalling and genocidal record
of aggression.
206. After consultations with all the sponsors of the
draft resolution and with all due respect to my colleague
the representative of France, on behalf of the sponsors
we request a vote on the draft resolution as a whole and
oppose a separate vote being taken on any paragraph.
207. The PRESIDENT: I shall put to the vote, in accordance with rule 89 of the rules of procedure, the proposal
for a separate vote on paragraphs 1, 3-5, 7,9 and 1l-1 5
of the draft resolution.

PretQtionfrom

The proposa/
19 abstentions.

was rejected by 76 votes to 39, wifh

208. The PRESIDENT: I shall now put to the vote draft
resolution A/ES-B/L.1 as a whole. A roll-call vote has
been requested.
A vote was taken by roll call.
Denmark, having been drawn by lol by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In fmrour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola,

Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic,’ Cape Verde, China, Congo, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Ethiopia,
Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Poland, Qatar, Rwanda, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Tunisia, Ugavda, Ukrvlnian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Sovlet Socialist
Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Cameroon, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Fiji,
Finland, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Iceland,
Ireland Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands,
New Zgaland, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America.
Abstaining: Argentina, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados,
Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dommlcan
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Gabon, Guatemala Haiti, Honduras, Liberia, Malawi, Panama, Papua
New’Guinea, Paraguay, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and

140

General Assembly-Ninth

Emergency Special Session-Plenary

the Grenadines, Samoa, Singapore, Spain, Swaziland,
Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zaire.
The draft resolution was adopted b.v 86 votes to 21,
with 34 abstentions (resolution ES-J/l).

209. The PRESIDENT: I now call on those representatives who wish to explain their votes after the vote.
210. Mr, FRANCIS (New Zealand): Although New
Zealand voted against this draft resolution, there are
many of its provisions with which we agree. New Zealand
condemns the step which Israel took on 14 December last
year of extending its laws,,jurisdiction and administration
to the Syrian Golan Heights, a step which amounts to
annexation. We consider that that decision deserves censure, I have already affirmed that we fully subscribe to
the view of the Security Council, expressed in its resolution 497 (1981) of 17 December 198 1, that Israel’s decision
is null and void and without international legal effect.
211. We believe that Israel must cease its pIWOCatiVe
and illegal actions and start to act irt ways that demonstrate its readiness to become an acceptable neighbour
in the region, At the same time, we believe that it is only
if all other parties are prepared to recognize Israel’s right
to exist that the prospects of worthwhile negotiations
towards a comprehensive and durable peace will improve.
The draft resolution that has just been voted on does not
’ our view take us closer to that goal.
212.
One of the difficulties my de!egation has with the
I”- resolution
is that it seeks to have the General Assembly
assume responsibilities that the Charter entrusts to the
Security Council. Another is that it departs from the
balanced principles of Security Council resolution 242
(1967), which we continue to uphold. It calls for measures
against Israel which, for that reason among others, we
are unable to support. The resolution also implies that
future action could be taken to limit Israel’s participation
I in the Organization. That is a step we would not support,
not least because we have always upheld the principle of
universality
of membership in the Organization.
I.,
213. Mr. KUEN (Austria): In our statement on 1 February in the general debate [3rd meeting],I had the opportunity to state Austria’s position on the decision of the
Israeli Government to extend its law, jurisdiction and
administration to the occupied Syrian Golan Heights.
1 Austria condemns that decision, as it constitutes a clear
violation of international law and of the principles contained in Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). It furthermore aggravates tensions in the area
and gravely endangers the prospects for achieving a
peaceful solution of the Middle East conflict.
Mr. Kravets (Ukrainian Soviet SocialistRepublic), Vice
President, tqok the Chair.

214. Austria’s vote on the resolution just adopted
rests on the conviction that the Israeli action cannot be
condoned or left uncontested by the international community, We therefore approve of the paragraphs in the
resolution which condemn that action, declare it null and
void and decide not to grant any recognition to its implementation. On the other hand, eIements have been introduced into the resolution that are highly controversial in
nature and pose very serious problems with regard to their
Iegal and political implications on the instruments governing the Organization and on the distribution of competences between its main organs.
215. At this moment, and especially in light of the vote
just taken, I do not wish to hide our deep concern that
our vote on the resolution has failed to express the unanimous rejection of the defacto annexation of the Golan
Heights which became evident in this debate as well as in

Meetings

-

the debate in the Security Council. We are still convinced
that, in proper consultations with all interested members
of this Assembly, it would have been possible to arrive
at a draft resolution that would have found the broadest
support. As has been proved so often before, the real
strength of this Assembly and of its positions derives from ‘!
consultations, mutual give-and-take and the widest possible participation in drafting. We very much regret that
on an issue of such importance that procedure was not
followed.
216. In addition, Austria would have preferred to see
as the outcome of this debate a resolution that would have
been oriented towards positive action and, through a call
for negotiations between the parties most directly concerned, would have contributed to promoting a process
towards peace, dialogue and the settlement of disputes
by peaceful means.
217. Mr, de1 ROSARIO (Dominican Republic) (interpretation from Spanish): The foreign policy of my Government is based on absolute respect for international law
and its principles of self-determination of peoples, non-intervention, juridical equality of States, non-admissibility
of the threat or use of force, and the peaceful settlement
of disputes.
218. For these reasons, my Government supported resolution 497 (1981), which was unanimously adopted by the
Security Council 17 December last, and General Assembly
resolution 36/226 B of t.he same date.
219. My delegation would have liked the draft resolution to be voted on paragraph by paragraph, which would
have enabled it to reaffirm once again the principles contained in a number of them. But the Dominican delegation did not support the second and tenth preambular
paragraphs, since the first involves a permanent representative of the Security Council whose sovereignty cannot
be questioned, and the second would establish bases for
the possible expulsion of Israel from the Organization,
whose universality is something that we should preserve.
220. Similarly, my delegation is against operative paragraphs 7 aird 8 because once again they involve a Member
State, a friend of ours, and attribute to it direct responsibility for the situation in the Middle East. Likewise, we
are against operative paragraph 11 for reasons previously
stated, as well as paragraphs 12 and 13 on sanctions. We
do not agree with the measures contained therein and
we support the view that they should be left to the sovereignty of each State.
221. For the foregoing reasons, my delegation abstained
in the vote.
222. Before concluding, I should like to repeat the
wish of my Government and people that we may achieve
through dialogue and respect for international law a
definitive peace in the Middle East, a region very dear
to our people because among our most eminent citizens
there are descendants of the various peoples that inhabit
that part of the world.
223. Mr. COUTURIER
(Peru) (interpretation from
Spanish): Peru voted in favour of the resolution that has
just been adopted by the Assembly. In doing so, it voted
in favour of the principle of respect for the norms of
international conduct enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. Similarly, Peru recognizes the value of
constructive dialogue and negotiation as a means which
can lead to a comprehensive, peaceful and lasting solution of that conflict.
224. Likewise, Peru declares that it is morally and politically indispensable that all the foreign Powers to whose
influence and interests the deterioration of peace and
security in the region of the Middle East is largely due

12th meeting-5

should share responsibility with the parties directly
involved in the conflict.
225. Without prejudice to our support for the Palestinran cause and our condemnation of the illegal annexation
of the Syrian territory of the Golan Heights, the Peruvian
Government. has reservations concerning the tenth preambular paragraph and operative paragraphs 11, 12 and
13 of the resolution that has just been adopted. The terms
in which they are couched are not consonant with international practice and the extreme measures for which they
provide do not contribute to a dialogue between all
the parties directly involved, which Peru has always
promoted.
226. Mr. BLOMBERG (Finland): The position of the
Government of Finland with regard to the recent act of
Israel concerning the Syrian Golan Heights was clearly
expressed in our statement of 3 February [ 7th meeting].
Finland fully concurs with the unanimously adopted
Security Council resolution 497 (1981), in which the
Council unequivocally declared the Israeli decision to be
null and void and without international legal effect and
demanded that Israel forthwith rescind it. It is most
deplorable that Israel has chosen to ignore that resolution
in defiance of the whole international community. It is
our strong conviction that the Israeli decision is not only
illegal but constitutes a serious new obstacle to efforts
towards peace in the Middle East.
227. We would have wished this emergency special
session of the General Assembly to produce a resolution adequately reflecting the international community’s
unanimous rejection of the Israeli decision. We regret that
this was not the case. Several paragraphs in the draft
resolution just adopted created serious difficulties for
us. I refer in particular to operative paragraph 11, which
runs counter to the principle of universality, a principle
which Finland considers to be basic to the Organization.
Furthermore, under the Charter only the Security Council
has the authority to impose sanctions on Member States.
Operative paragraphs 12, 13, 14 and 15 therefore go
beyond the competence of the General Assembly.
228. It is for these reasons that Finland felt compelled
to vote against the draft resolution as a whole.
229. Mr. ORTIZ SANZ (Bolivia) (interpretation from
Spanish): The delegation of Bolivia wishes to reaffirm
here in the Assembly the traditional and steadfast international position of our country, namely, that the occupation of the territory of other countries by force of arms
or annexation of that territory by that or other means
is entirely unacceptable. We know that the peaceful
coexistence of States is rooted in total respect for the basic
attributes of a State, and one of the most important Of
them is the inviolability of its territorial integrity.
230. In the light of this,, and bearing in mind our historical experiences, Bohvra was ready to vote in favour
of any resolution which would uphold the unquestionable
rights of the Syrian Arab Republic over the territory of
the Golan Heights.
231. What has happened, however, is that the draft
resolution on which we have voted specifies, as its central
point, sanctions which, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, are within the exclusive purview
of the Security Council, and the resolution has therefore
been distorted. It is a document which neither in terms
of its language nor of its objectives is likely to contribute
to bringing us any closer to a peaceful and just solution
of the problem.
232. Operative paragraphs 7, 8 and 11 to I5 are Particularly unacceptable because of the element of interference in the sovereign decisions of States which they

February

1982

141

imply. To seek the total international isolation of a Member State is also not a procedure which the General
Assembly can adopt without prejudicing its very essence,
which is based on the principle of universality.
233. Bolivia considers that the United Nations, if it is
to PerfOrm its primary role of maintaining peaceand promoting harmony among peoples, must act fairly and with
discretion-both
of which qualities are lacking in this
resolution. That is the background against which Bolivia
abstained in the vote.
234. Mr. NISIBORI (Japan): Japan has repeatedly
made known its steadfast position that it strongly condemns and will never condone the recent measures taken
by Israel in the occupied territory of the Golan Heights,
It is extremely regrettable, therefore, that Japan was
obliged to vote against the draft resolution, as it contains
several paragraphs which are incompatible with some of
the fundamental beliefs of my Government, in particular
that the United Nations must be a universal organization,
that any and all conflicts must be resolved peacefully
through talks, and that the isolation of a particular country does not necessarily contribute to the solution of a
question.
235. None the less, my country cautions Israel, in the
strongest terms, not to make the mistake of interpreting
this vote as in any way condoning its actions.
236. Mr. MARINESCU
(Romania) (interpretation
from French): Romania, from the very beginning and
with total clarity, in terms authorized by its Government
as well as in statements by the Romanian delegation in
the General Assembly., the Security Council and this
emergency special sessron [6th meeting], has set out its
firm position on the decision of the Israeli Parliament
to annex the Syrian Golan Heights. We have declared that
the Romanian Government considers that act illegal and
invalid, a flagrant violation of the principle of the inadmissibility of the annexation of occupied territories by
force, national sovereignty and the territorial integrity of
an independent State. At the same time, as we have made
clear, this act is in direct contradiction to the relevant
Security Council resolutions accepted by Israel, among
others, which specify Israel’s obligation to withdraw from
the Arab territories occupied in 1967.
237. As the Romanian Government expressed it on
17 December last,‘* the decision of the Israeli Parliament to annex the Golan Heights has led to a complication of the situation in the region and has created further
obstacles to a comprehensive settlement of the Middle
East conflict and helped to increase tension in the areaall of which has been amply demonstrated in the debates
jn the Security Council and at this emergency Special
session.
238. We repeat our profound conviction, based on our
experience of international life, that recourse to force and
exoansion. the violation of the independence, sovereignty
a~&territ&ial
integrity of other States-as was the case
with the annexation of the Golan Heights-constitutes
a constant source of insecurity and further complicates
the situation, with the gravest consequences for the peoples in question and indeed all peoples of the world.
239. At the same time, we should like to stress once
again the overriding necessity of continuing efforts to
bring about without further delay a comprehensive, just
and equitable solution to the present conflict in the Middle East one that would lead to Israel’s withdrawal from
the terr&ories occupied by it since the 1967 war, including the Golan Heights, and a solution to the problem of
the Palestinian people, ensuring respect for their legitimate national rights, including their right to self-determination and the creation of their own independent State.

142

General Assembly--Ninth

Emergency Special Session-Plenary

240. The Romanian Government is convinced that that
is the only basis for ensuring the necessary conditions for
the peaceful coexistence of all the States in that greatly
troubled part of the world.
241. Romania has adopted a consistent position, One
often reaffirmed: it has declared itself in favour of intensifying efforts to resolve by peaceful means, by negotiations and with the participation of all the parties directly
concerned, the whole seriesof problems raised by the conflict in the Middle East. In this context, as we have stated
in this debate and elsewhere, the Romanian Government
believes that it is particularly important to convene an
international conference within the framework of the
United Nations, with the participation of all interested
parties, including the Palestine Liberation Organizatlon
as the sole representative of the Palestinian people, the
Soviet Union, the United States of America and other
States which could make a positive contribution to solving
the Middle East conflict. We wish to express our conviction that within such a negotiating framework all the
complicated problems that have existed for so long in this
area, including that of Israel’s withdrawal from the Golan
Heights, can be solved.
242. We believe that the Assembly would have been well
advised to set up a committ,ee composed of representatives of States Members to try to bring about eventually
a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East conflict,
in the interest of the peoples concerned and of the cause
of peace and security in the area and throughout the
world,
243. It is precisely in this spirit that the Romanian delegation acted at this emergency special session of the General Assembly, in its desire to bring about the adoption
of a resolution that could enlist the support of the vast
majority of Member States and thus constitute an effective instrument for opening up new avenues for solving
the Middle East conflict.
244. Since it was not possible to achieve a resolution
acceptable to the great majority of Member States, the
Romanian delegation found itself unable to participate
in the vote. At the same time, my delegation wishes
strongly to stress that the position of principle of the
Romanian Government on the unacceptability of the
annexation of the Golan Heights by Israel and the fact
that we consider that measure illegal, null and void, remains unchanged.
245. Mr. KOLBY (Norway): The Norwegian delegation
voted against the resolution just adopted.
246. The Norwegian Government’s position on the
Israeli decision of 14 December 1981 to impose its laws,
jurisdiction and administration in the occupied Syrian
Golan Heights has been stated on two earlier occasions
before the General Assembly. Norway deplores that
action. In our opinion, that act amounts to an annexation
which will create additional problems for the peace efforts
in the Middle East. Norway does not accept any acquisition of territory by force.
247. The Norwegian Government therefore supports
those paragraphs of the present resolution which declare
the Israeli decision to be null and void.
248. The Norwegian delegation was, however, compelled to vote against the draft resolution because of our
strong reservations concerning a number of paragraphs,
in PartiCUlaroperative paragraphs 2, 7, 8, 11, 12 and 13.
Those paragraphs are totally unacceptable to my delegation and constitute, in our view, an obstacle to a peaceful
and negotiated solution of the Middle East conflict rather
than a contribution towards that goal. Norway strongly
objects to any language that serves to cast doubt on the

Meetings

rights of any Member State to continue as a Member of
the United Nations, We also believe that the call for international or unilateral sanctions against Israel is wrong
and counter-productive. In our opinion, such measures
will only serve to heighten tension and bitterness in the
Middle East.
249. Mr. LUNDVIK
(Sweden): The position of my
Government with regard to the item before us was spelt
out in the statement made by the Permanent Representative of Sweden last Monday [3rd meeting]. In particular,
it was stated that Sweden condemns Israel’s decision to
apply Israeli law, jurisdiction and administration to the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights. That decision is a clear
violation of international law and of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967). It is also prejudicial to the search
for a peaceful solution to the conflict in the Middle East.
My Government fully endorses Security Council resolution 497 (198 1) of 17 December 198 1, in considering the
Israeli action null and void and in demanding that Israel
should rescind it forthwith. Israel’s refusal to comply with
that decision is an unacceptable defiance of the authority
of the Council.
250. It is therefore with deep regret that my Government
has found itself unable to associate itself with the adoption of the resolution, although it contains paragraphs
that are in accord with the view that I have summarized.
If there had been a separate vote on those paragraphs,
Sweden would have supported operative paragraphs 1,
3, 4, 5 and 9.
251. Unfortunately, however, the resolution contains
a whole series of provisions which cause serious concern
to my delegation, as they are unacceptable either from
the point of view of the Charter of the United Nations,
or from that of substantive content. Faced with the present text, my delegation had no choice but to vote against
the draft resolution as a whole.
252. Mr. HEPBURN (Bahamas): The Bahamas delegation has consistently supported measures calling for peace
in the Middle East and, indeed, in all regions of the world.
My delegation’s support of General Assembly resolutions 36/226A and B attests to its conviction that Israel’s
annexation of the Golan Heights is illegal and invalid.
253. Thus, it follows naturally that my delegation fully
supports the relevant condemnations contained in the preambular and operative paragraphs of the resolution just
adopted.
254. However, at the same time, my delegation attaches
great importance to the Organization as an unparalleled
institution for the promotion of international peace and
co-operation, and to the requirement that the Organization be seen to act with honesty and fairness, for it is only
by so doing that it will create confidence in the peoples
it represents that its decisions and follow-up actions will
really foster peace and stability.
255. My delegation has serious doubts about this requirement being met by the resolution the Assembly has
just adopted, given the implications of and the requests
in its operative paragraphs 11, 12, 13 and 14, in particular. Those implications and requests are: the explusion
of Israel from the Organization or suspension of its membership, which disregards Articles 5 and 6 of the Charter;
the severing of all ties with Israel-diplomatic,
military,
economic, financial, technical, trade and cultural-and
finally, its total isolation in the world community.
256. My Government cannot go along with such extreme measures, which experience in other similar situations has shown to be unrealistic and non-productive of
a solution. Rather, they have encouraged intransigence
and polarization.

12th

meeting-5

257. It was for those reasons that my delegation was
constrained to abstain in the vote on the resolution which
has just been adopted.
258. Mr, VELLOSO (Brazil): The Brazilian Governmenf believes that a comprehensive settlement of the situation in the Middle East necessarily includes recognition
of the right of all countries in the region to exist within
their own borders. While we have always insisted upon
the withdrawal of the occupying forces from the Arab
territories and upon the right of the Palestinian people
to an autonomous and independent state of their own,
we believe, on the other hand, that the prospects of attaining those objectives should not be curtailed as a result
of the diplomatic isolation of one of the parties to the
conflict, even if that party is behaving in a manner incompatible with international law and with countless General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions. We emphatically condemn such behaviour. We do not wish, however, that, out of a feeling of total isolation from the
international community, the Israeli Government be given
any pretext to act with still greater contempt for the rule
of law and for the principles of a mutually respectful
relationship among the peoples of the world. Israel must
understand once and for all that the path it is pursuing
leads neither to peace nor to its own security. As long
as Israel fails to respect the security and the territorial
integrity of its neighbours, no action, let alone an illegal
action, will bring Israel what it proclaims to be its goal:
the right to live in peace.
259. Mr, ROSALES RIVERA (El Salvador) (interpretation from Spanish): El Salvador, faithful to its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations, condemns
the acquisition of territory by force, whatever the excuse
or reason put forward for it. Hence we censure Israel’s
annexation of the Golan Heights, which is under Syrian
sovereignty. It would therefore be logical to vote in favour
of a draft resolution containing such a condemnation.
However, the resolution which has just been adopted contains a series of elements and concepts going beyond a
resolution of this kind, and for that reason my delegation
abstained in the vote. Had it been voted on paragraph
by paragraph, El Salvador would have been in favour,
among others, of those paragraphs referring directly to
the annexation, In this connection, we fully support Security Council resolution 497 (1981), which declared that
act of annexation null and void. We would also have
voted against other paragraphs because we find them to
be excessiveand because they certainly do not contribute
to the cause of peace,
260. There is no doubt that this act of annexation
increases the difficulties of finding a just and lasting
solution of the problem of Palestine, a key element in
the problem of the Middle East, and we wish here to
reiterate our support for Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), which continue to be the basis for
the desired solution,
261. It is also relevant to reaffirm that full respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, the
peaceful settlement of disputes between States and the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force
continue to be the bases for peoples to live together in
rectitude and harmony.
262. Mr. ANDRESEN GUIMARAES
(Portugal): The
Portuguese Government has clearly stated its condemnation of the decision of the Government of Israel to extend
its laws, jurisdiction and administration to the occupied
territory of the Golan Heights.
263. My delegation had the opportunity to speak on this
issue on 1.2January last in the Security Council,32 where
it defined its position, I wish to reiterate, however, that

1.

February

1982

143

in our opinion the Israeli decision of 14 December 1981
is without international legal effect. Moreover, we consider it unwarranted on any pretext and a serious obstacle
on the road to peace, to which we are firmly attached.
264, We deeply regret that the draft resolution that was
voted upon did not reflect a consensus of the whole international community condemning Israel’s action but that,
by the introduction of elements that were clearly unacceptable to many members of the Assembly, it became a
controversial draft resolution, This point was underlined
by the procedural vote which did not allow my delegation
and others to clarify their position in respect to some of
the paragraphs of the draft resolution.
265. Unfortunately, the resolution just adopted was
deprived of the undisputed authority it would have had
if it had reflected a unanimous condemnation of Israel’s
decision by the international community.
266. Mr. KIRCA (Turkey): Turkey has always called
for the peaceful settlement of the Middle East question
through the achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive solution, In our view, the essential requisites for
such a solution are the withdrawa of Israel from all Arab
and Palestinian territories occupied in 1967, including
Jerusalem, and the exercise of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian Arab people, including the right to establish their own independent State. We also believe that any
search for a peaceful settlement should involve all the
parties to the problem, including the Palestine Liberation
Organization. If the States of the region are to live in
peace, all parties must demonstrate their will and readiness for negotiation,
267. That is basically how we view the situation in the
Middle East; and that is why we are deeply disturbed
by Israel’s intransigence, arrogance and imperviousness.
Israel’s latest act of practically annexing the Syrian territory of the Golan Heights has introduced a new and
serious variable of regression into the Middle East situation. Israel’s policy of annexation, aggrandizement, illegal
settlements and usurpation of the rights of others does
not at all attest to the sincerity of Israel’s appeals for
peace and negotiation with its neighbours.
268. The just cause of the Arab nation will ultimately
prevail; the sooner Israel accommodates itseif peacefully
to this elementary truth, the better, There is still time for
Israel to take the path of reason. For Israel to rescind
its decision on the Golan Heights would be a step in the
right direction, particularly in the light of the universal
condemnation of its act by the international community.
269. Turkey abstained in the vote on the resolution just
adopted. We abstained not because we disagree in any
way with the condemnation of Israel for this act and with
the call to take appropriate measures against it. On the
contrary, we are in agreement with the overall thrust of
the resolution, Even in the absence of any resolution,
Turkey would not fail to do what is necessary and appropriate in accordance with its established foreign policy.
Israel knows this and our Arab friends know it as well.
270. Turkey abstained because we feel that the resolution just adopted contains certain elements which do not
enhance its fundamental political force. Moreover, some
of them are not useful in the search for a just, lasting
and comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.
271. More specifically, the delegation of Turkey believes
that the presence of the second preambular paragraph and
operative paragraph 7 is neither useful nor functional.
Moreover, Turkey has consistently objected to the singling out of third Governments, either by name or by
designation, For condemnation in United Nations resolutions, Our objection remains even in cases such as this

144

General

Assembly-Ninth

Emergency

one, where Turkey follows policies different from the
third Government to which reference is made.
272. In regard to the tenth preambular paragraph and
operative paragraphs 11 and 15, the delegation of Turkey
is of the view that, as the intent, eventual purpose and
nature of these paragraphs are not precise Or Clear
enough, Turkey cannot give them its approval. Had they
been put to separate votes, Turkey would have abstained.
Furthermore, we believe in this context that the United
Nations has an important role to play in the search for
a settlement in the Middle East and, consequently, that
the United Nations should not deprive itself of the means
to play such a role in future.
273. Turkey’s abstention in the vote must not be n+interpreted as a change in its position on Israel’s declslon
regarding the Golan Heights. Turkey has categorically
condemned that decision, regarding it as null and void
and without any legal effect. We have on three occasions
already explained our position on this issue in detail, first
at the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly, then
in the Security Council and, finally, only yesterday, here
at the ninth emergency special session [9th meeting]. Our
abstention is not aimed in any way at the elements of the
resolution which are specifically related to Israel’s decision on the Golan Heights. We would certainly have voted
in favour of this draft resolution had those elements to
which we have made particular reference been excluded
from the text.
274. Even though it abstained in the vote, Turkey will
not fail to do its best to be guided by the overall thrust
of the resolution by constantly evaluating its other provisions in the context of the objectives and framework of
its general foreign policy and in particular its well-known
policies in the Middle East.
275. Mr. LENNUYEUX-COMNENE
(France) (interpretation from French): As we indicated in the Security
Council on 28 January last,6 France was in favour of a
broad debate in the General Assembly on the question
of the Golan Heights. We believed that such a debate
could be constructive if, with due respect for the respective competence of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, it succeeded in underlining the fact that the
Israeli measures concerning the Golan Heights were null
and void and in defining the implications of that fact for
the relationships between Member States and Israel as far
as the occupied Syrian Golan Heights were concerned.
276. We also felt that this debate might help towards
establishing a lasting peace in the area which would put
an end once and for all to this constantly deteriorating
situation.
277. That is, however, not true of the draft resolution
that was submitted to the General Assembly and cm which
we have just voted, On the contrary, in its general philosophy and in some of its tanguage, the text is aimed
at ostracizing and isolating a Member State in the international community, in particular in the specialized
agencies, which is recommended in its operative paragraphs 12, 13 and 15.
278. In terms of scope, this provision is unprecedented,
and it is particularly unacceptable to France inasmuch
as it is inconsistent with the necessary negotiations that
we have always advocated for settlement of the conflict
between the Israelis and the Arabs.
279. For those fundamental reasons, the French delegation had no choice, much to our regret, but to vote against
the draft resolution.
280. Mr. AMEGA (Togo) (interpretation from French):
MY delegation voted in favour of the resolution in order
to Protest the blatant violation of the principles of the

Special Session-Plenary

Meetings

Charter of the United Nations atid Israel’s refusal to
remedy the violation.
281. As regards operative paragraph 11, we should like
to say that it should be interpreted in the strictest possible
manner. It is limited to making an observation without
for the time being going beyond that. My delegation
hopes that Israel will disprove the allegation contained
in operative paragraph 11 by creating a climate favourable
to the implementation of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), which in my delegation’s view provide the best basis for a just and lasting solution of the
Isreali-Arab conflict.
282. Mr. CARiAS ZAPATA (Honduras) (interpretationfrom Spanish): Honduras has always and will always
support the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force. We stated our position on the
specific question of the recent Israeli legislation regarding
the Golan Heights by voting in favour of the General
Assembly resolution 361226 B.
283. The text of the resolution that has just been
adopted goes beyond the objectives and recommendations
that Honduras could have supported. That is why we
abstained in the vote. Had there been a separate vote,
Honduras would have voted against the second and tenth
preambular paragraphs and operative paragraphs 7, 11,
12 and 13, the contents of which we are unable to accept.
284. Mrs. CASTRO de BARISH (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): Costa Rica, like the overwhelming
majority of Member States, has always upheld the principle that territorial integrity is an essential right of a
sovereign State. As Latin Americans we are particularly
proud of the emergence in the past century of the Sucre
doctrine, which was quite rightly referred to this morning
by the representative of Ecuador. Victories by force of
arms do not confer rights. That is reflected in Security
Council resolution 242 (1967), one of the most important
paragraphs of which sets forth the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force.
285. My delegation therefore deplores the decisions
adopted by Israel on 14 December 1981 which led to the
imposition of its laws, jurisdiction and administration in
the occupied Syrian Golan Heights. Our position was
made clear when we voted in favour of General Assembly
resolution 36/226 B of 17 December 1981. However,, we
share the concerns expressed by many of the delegations
that have already spoken. We feel that the resolution on
the situation in the occupied Arab territories-the
item
before this emergency special session of the General
Assembly, which was introduced by a group of delegations, contains certain substantive provisions and elements involving questions of competence and legality
which are incompatible with the treatment of this subject
by the General Assembly.
286. For that reason, my delegation abstained in the
vote on the draft resolution. We would reiterate our belief
that a settlement of the conflict in the Middle East must
be based on a comprehensive negotiated settlement based
on accepted principles such as those set forth in Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), which
should be applied by all the parties involved.
287. Costa Rica believes that all the States of the area,
in particular, and the Member States of the United
Nations, in general, have the duty to promote the peaceful
settlement of disputes, thereby strengthening the role of
the Organization in the maintenance of international
peace and security in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
The President resumed the Chair.

1201meeting-5 Febrwy 1982

288. Mt. THIOUNN
PRASITH
(Democratic Kampuchea) (interpretation from French]: The position of
Democratic Kampuchea in the Arab-Israeli problem is
Well known. It is one of constant and total support for
the just Palestinian Arab cause. The delegation of Democratic Kampuchea has proclaimed it at all international
gatherings and has supported all resolutions on the subje$ particularly those condemning and declaring null and
void the annexation of the occupied Syrian territory of
the Golan Heights by Israel.
289. However, the presence among the sponsors of the
draft resolution of Viet Nam, which is exterminating
the
Kampuchean people and nation in order to annex the
whole of Kampuchea to an Indo-Chinese federation
under Vietnamese domination, has not enabled my delegation to participate in the vote. This position on the part
of my delegation does not at all change its constant and
unswerving support for the just Palestinian Arab cause
until a Palestinian State is established on Palestinian territory, with the Palestine Liberation Organization as the
sole authentic representative of the Palestinian people,
and until the total withdrawal of Israel from all the Arab
territories it has been occupying since 1967, including
the occupied Syrian territory of the Golan Heights, is
achieved.
290, The struggle of the people of Kampuchea for the
total liberation of its own country is identified with the
struggle of the Palestinian and Arab peoples.
291. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
the Soviet Union on a point of order.
292, Mr. FILEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(inter-refution from R~/ir~):
In connection with the fact
that the names of the delegations of some countries were
not called out in the roll-call voting on the resolution
which we have just adopted, the Soviet delegation would
like to state the following.
293, The Under-Secretary-General
for Political and
General Assembly Affairs, Mr. Buffum, had no reason
to act in such an arbitrary manner. In accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, only the General
Assembly is competent to decide on matters connected
with the right of States Members to take part in a vote
of the General Assembly.
294, The PRESIDENT: I think that was a statement on
procedure rather than on a point of order.
295, The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic,
the Foreign Minister, has asked to make a statement at
this juncture and 1 call on him to do SO.
2%. Mr. KHADDAM
(Syrian Arab Republic) (interpret&on from Arabic): I wish with all my heart to thaqk
the representatives of Governments who participated In
ensuring the adoption of this historic resolution and who
have therefore contributed to a great event in the life of
the Organization.
297, We have accomplished the following today: first,
it has been confirmed that the overwhelming majority of
States support peace and freedom; secondly, it has En
confirmed that the majority of States reject all Practlcess
policies and acts that violate the rights of peoples, their
sovereignty and dignity, and the majority of States have
confirmed that such acts cannot take place without deterrence by the Organization; thirdly, hegemony, domination and racism have failed, the will of the people has
triumphed and their right to freedom and sovereignty has
been confirmed.
298, I also wish to extend my thanks to those who
abstained in the vote. They have refused to be on the side
of oppression and aggression; we understand the reason
for their abstention and we appreciate it.

299* I wish to express my gratitude and thanks for the
great suPpOrt provided by the United Nations to my country,@ its struggle to liberate and recover its sovereignty
over Its occupied land. I also want to expressmy thanks
for Its defence of Arab rights, and to wish the Organiation further successin strengthening its Charter and its
principles.
AGENDA ITEM 3
Cf’edentia!sOf npresentotives to the ninth emwgemy
SpeCial
sessionof thi! GeneralAssembly(co~&&d)*
(6) Report of the CredentialsCommittee

300. Mr. MAHMOOD (Pakistan): Consistent with our
Principled position in respect of the situation in Afghanistan, my delegation wishes to ptace on record its reserVatiOns concerning the credentials of the Kabul representatives participating in the ninth emergency special
session. In that regard, we share the viewscontained in
paragraphs 12 and 13 of the report of the Credentials
Committee [A/E&9/@ Furthermore, the fact that my
delegation has not objected fo the participation of the
Kabul representatives does not imply acceptance of the
regime in Kabul or acquiescencein the continuing foreign
intervention in that country.
301. The PRESDIENT: The General Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Credentials Committee in paragraph 18 of its report
(A/ES-9/6]. May 1 take it that the General Assembly
wishes to adopt that draft resolution?
The drqff resolution wasadopted(resolurion A/ES9/Z).
302. Mr, SANGSOMSAK (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic) (interpretationjiom French): While wejoin in

the consensus on the adoption of the report of the Credentials Committee on the representatives to the ninth
emergency special session of the General Assembly on the
situation in the occupied Arab territories, the delegation
of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, together with
the delegations of the non-aligned countries which recog
nize the People’s Republic of Kampuchea as the sole
authentic and legitimate Government of Kampuchea,
would like to express its firm and formal objection to the
presence of individuals claiming to represent @r?u’Jcratic
Kampuchea, which is not to be found on the pohtti InaP
of the world,
303. We expressly request our position to be duly
entered in the record of the General Assembly.
304. Mr. FILEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(interpretation from Russian):On behalf ?f the $e!egations
of Bulgaria, the BYelorussian SoVlet Soclah?
Republic, Czechoslovakia, the German DemFr!tlc
Republic, Hungary, Mongolia, Poland, the*Ukral,mfn
Soviet $&list Republic and the Union of SoVlet tiahst
Republics, my delegation would like to make the fOllowing statement on the report of the Credentials
Committee.
305. The States named, as well as many other COu?tries,
hold the view that the only legitimate representative of
the people of Kampuchea is the People’sRepublrcof
Kampuchea, and only delegates appointed !Y the constitutional bodies of that country are aufho<lzed to and
should represent it in the United Nations, Just as they
should in other international forums. No one $se Is
authorized to speak on behalf of Kampuchea*n the
international arena.
*Resumed

from

the fast rneCri4.

146

General Assembly-Ninlh Emergency Special Session-Plenary

306. The people who come to the United Nations as
representatives of so-called Democratic Kampuchea have
been deprived of any right to represent the Kampuchean
people, which long since ended the criminal Pal Pot
regime responsible for the policy of genocide agamst the
population of Kampuchea.
307. Mr. THIOUNN PRASITH (Democratic Kampuchea) (interpretation from French): Following the adoption of the report of the Credentials Committee, mY
delegation would like to make the following Statement.
308. The delegation of Democratic Kampuchea wishes
to express’its most formal objection to the participation of the delegation of the Socialist Republic Of Viet
Nam at this ninth emergency special session of the General Assembly for the following reasons, First, since
25 December 1978, Viet Nam has been waging a War of
invasion and aggression against Democratic Kampuchea.
At the present time, 250,000 Vietnamese soldiers and
50,000 Vietnamese administrative personnel are in the
process of devastating my country. That Vietnamese
aggression against Kampuchea is indeed known to everyone, It is in flagrant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, the principles of international law and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
309. Secondly, since their invasion began, the Vietnamese hordes have massacred more than 2,500,OOO Kampucheans using conventional weapons of all kinds, chemical weapons and, in particular, the weapon of starvation;
they are currently pursuing the most heinous crimes in
order to exterminate the people, the nation and the civilization of Kampuchea so as to satisfy the expansionist
ambitions of one State at the expense of its neighbours.
Never in history have such crimes of genocide been committed, At the same time! they have driven the Kampuchean peasants from then lands and have already sent
close to one million Vietnamese to establish settlements
in Kampuchea in the place of the Kampuchean peasants.
310. Thirdly, this war of aggression and genocide,
which has been pursued for more than three years by the
regional expansionists of Hanoi, cannot continue without
the assistance of the major expansionist Power which is
now known to everyone. The Hanoi authorities cannot
continue to defy with scorn the resolutions of the United
Nations and the Declaration on Kampuchea, adopted by
the International Conference on Kampuchea of 17 July
1981,4’ to ride roughshod over the Charter of the United
Nations and arrogantly to pursue their policy of aggression and expansion in South-East Asia without the military, political, economic, financial and technological
assistance of the Soviet Union-aid amounting to up to
six million dollars a day.
311. It may also be recalled that the two vetoes cast by‘
the Soviet Union in January and March 1979 made it
impossible for the Security Council to adopt resolutions
demanding the complete withdrawal of Vietnamese forces
from Kampuchea in order to allow the people of Kampuchea to exercise their right to decide their own affairs.
Those improper vetoes paralysed the Security Council,
the supreme body of the Organization, responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
312. All those facts show that Viet Nam is the main
direct threat to peace, security and stability in South-East
Asia and is, under the terms of General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX), responsible for a crime against international peace. Viet Nam’s deeds and activities clearly
confirm that that country is not fulfilling its obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations,

Meetings

313. For all those reasons, my delegation believes that
Viet Nam has no place here until it has halted its war of
aggression and genocide against Democratic Kampuchea
and withdraws all its forces from Kampuchea in accordance with the resolutions of the United Nations and the
Declaration on Kampuchea.
Statement by the President

,,

3 14. The PRESIDENT:
Before closing the ninth emergency special session, I should like to take this opportunity to inform the membership of the present situation
regarding the resumption of the thirty-sixth session of the
General Assembly, I do so in order to assist delegations
in planning their future schedule of work.
3 15. After consultation with the Chairman of the Working Group on the Financing of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East [UNRWA] and the President of the Security Council, it appears that the most appropriate time to reconvene
the thirty-sixth session, in accordance with decision 36/
461, would be Tuesday afternoon, 16 March 1982.
316. On Friday, 19 March, the General Assembly and
the Security Council will meet concurrently to fill the
vacancy in the International Court of Justice caused by
the death of Judge Abdullah El-Erian of Egypt.
317. In addition, the Fifth Committee will meet at the
resumed session to consider further the question of the
formulation, presentation, review and approval of programme budgets in connection with agenda item 100 and
in conformity with section XX of General Assembly
resolution 36/235, of 18 December 1981.
318, I should like to take this opportunity to express
my sincere gratitude to the Vice-Presidents for their
valuable assistance to the President in the conduct of the
proceedings of this ninth emergency special session.
319. I should like also to express my satisfaction at
seeing our new Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar,
participating in the work of the General Assembly for
the first time.
320. I should like once again to thank the entire
staff, beginning with its most visible representative,
Mr. Buffum. Special thanks are due to the Office he
heads, the Office of the Under-Secretary-General
for
Political and General Assembly Affairs, as well as to all
the conference officers, interpreters, translators and other
staff members who have made the completion of our
work possible.
AGENDA

ITEM

2

Minute of silent prayer or meditation

321. The PRESIDENT:
I now invite representatives to
stand and observe one minute of silence, dedicated to
prayer or meditation.
The representatives, standing, observed a minute’s
silent prayer OF meditation,
Closure of the session

The PRESIDENT: I declare closed the ninth emergency
special session of the General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.

1 O#kJol
e?tfof

Rcconlr of the Security Council,
JanUatY, Februaty
and March

Thirtyaevenrh
Year, Sup1982, document S/14832/

ajb;d., Thirty+eventb
Year, 2329th meeting.
s&e hurity
Council resolution
500 (1982), of 28 January 1982.
4.4 Frmnework
for Peace in the Middle East agreed at Camp David,
urd Framework
for the Conchtsion
of a Treaty between Egypt and
Ime!, dgned in Washington
on 17 September
1978.
%ee Official
Records of the Security Council, Thirty-sixth
Year,
2316th lo 23 19th meetings; and ibid., Thirty-seventh
Year, 2322nd to
2329th meetings.
&Ibid,
Thirty-seventh
Year, 2330th meeting.
‘lbld.,
Thirty-seventh
Year, Supplement for January, February and
Ma&t
1982, document
S/14852.
~OfJTcial Records
of the Security Council, Fourth Year, Special
Supplement
No. 2.
9OZfial
Records
of the Security
Council,
Twenty-ninth
Year,
Suppkmenf
for April, May and June 1974, document S/l 1302IAdd. 1,
annex 1.
k%e Official
RecordF of the General Assembly, Second Session,
&&ement
No. II, vol. 11, annex 19.
[iSee Official
Recoro!s of the Security Council, Thirty-sixth
Year,
Sum?lement
for October,
November
and December
1981, docu-

tit

w482i,

para. 3.

~~Ibld,, Thirty~eventh
Year, Supplement for January, February and
March 1982, document
S/14829, annex.
s~lbid., Twenty-fourth Year, Supplement
for October, November
rusd December
IWP, document
S/9460.
tQnited
Nations,
Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 913, P. 287.
tsRe@stions
annexed tb the Hague Convention
IV of 1907 (Carneck Endowment
for International
Peace, The Hasue Conventions and
&la~tlonr
of 1849 and 1907 (New York, Oxford University
Press,
L915), p. H)o,;
trSu Official
Records of the Security Council, Thirty-seventh
Year,
&a&nWnt
for Januaty, February and Mamh lH2, document S/14849,
l’see note 15.
18%~ Official
Records
2318th meeting.
I~Ibld., Thirty-seventh

of the Security

Council,

Year, 2324th

meeting.

Thirty-sMh

YeOr,

*Olbid., Thirty-sixth
Year, 23 16th meeting.
I’ Ibid., Thirty-seventh
Year, 2322nd meeting.
zzIbid., 2323rd meeting.
23fbid., ThirtyfWt
Year, Supplement for April, May and June
1980, document S/14009.
“See Offial
Records of the General Assembly, Thirtyfirst Session,
Supplement No. 35, part two.
*‘See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-seventh
Year,
2328th meeting.
s6Ibid., Thirty-sixth
Year, Supplement for October, November and
December 1981, document S/147%, annex.
27Ibiid., Thirty-sixth
Yeur, 2319th meeting,
*sIbid,
Thirty-first
Year, 1969th meeting, para. 41.
*9M, M. Whiteman,
Digesl of lnternutional
Law (Washington,
DC., U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1964), vol. 3, p. 179.
Jolbld., pp. 184-185.
31OJficial Records of the Security Council, Thirty-sMh
Year,
Supplement for October, November
and December 1981, document S/14797.
3*lbid., Thirty-seventh
Year, 2326th meeting.
“Ibid.,
2327th meeting.
UIbid., Thirty-s&h
Year, Supplement for Oclober, November and
December 1981, document S/14791.
,JIbid., Thirty-seventh
Year, 2325th meeting.
36 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourth Session, SpeCal
political Committee, Annex, vol. If, document A/927, annexes A and B.
37Bight-point
plan proposed by Prince Fahd lbn Abdul-Axix
Of
Saudia Arabia in a radio interview broadcast by Riyadh Domestic Service
on 7 August 1981. For a transcript of the interview, see Foreign Broadcasting Information
Service, Duily Report, FBlS-MEA-81-163,
of
10 August 1981, vol. V, No. lS3, p. C.3.
Wee Ofjkial Records of the Securhy Council, Thirty-sixth
Year,
2317th meeting.
‘sIbid., Thirty-si%lh Year, Supplement for October, November and
December 1981, document S/14815.
@Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation
in
Europe, signed at Helsinki on 1 August 1975.
4~~eport
of the International
Conference on Kampuchea, New
York, l3-17Juiy Ia1 (United Nations publication, Sales No. B.81.1.29),
annex I.
