A /69/PV.96

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

96th plenary meeting

Friday, 19 June 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the First Committee (A/69/946)
The President: If there is no proposal under rule 66
of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General
Assembly decides not to discuss the report of the First
Committee which is before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendation of the First Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records. May I remind members, that
under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General
Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.

Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the First
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the First Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance.
The Assembly has before it a draft decision
recommended by the First Committee in paragraph
5 of its report. We will now take action on the draft
decision. The First Committee recommended that the
Assembly adopt the draft decision entitled “Provisional
programme of work and timetable of the First
Committee for 2015”. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt the draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 69/520 B).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
118.
Agenda item 160
Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/934)
The President: If there is no proposal under rule 66
of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General
Assembly decides not to discuss the report of the Fifth
Committee which is before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-18386 (E)

*1518386*

A/69/PV.96

The President: Statements shall therefore be
limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records. May I remind members, that
under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General
Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance.
The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph
6 of its report. We will now take action on the draft
resolution. The First Committee recommended that the
Assembly adopt the draft resolution without a vote.
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/289).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
160.
Agenda item 62 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international
support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international
support (A/69/L.64/Rev.1)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly considered, in a joint debate, agenda

2/12

19/06/2015

item 62 and its sub-items (a) and (b) and agenda item
12 at its 26th and 27th plenary meetings, on 26 October
2014.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Africa to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.64/Rev.1.
Mr. Muenda (South Africa): I have the honour, on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, to introduce draft
resolution A/69/L.64/Rev.1, entitled “New Partnership
for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation
and international support”. The draft resolution
continues to be an important text that advances
recent developments and initiatives pertaining to
Africa’s development and growth. The draft resolution
highlights the challenges that the continent continues to
contend with, including, among others, the fight against
poverty, high youth unemployment and continually
rising inequality.
Allow me to highlight the following paragraphs,
which are key in the draft resolution.
The draft resolution notes the importance of
foreign direct investment as a major source of financing
for development and its critical role in achieving
development objectives and inclusive economic growth,
including through the promotion of job creation and the
eradication of poverty and hunger, and that it contributes
to the active participation of African economies in
the global economy and facilitates regional economic
cooperation and integration. The draft resolution
further emphasizes that economic development,
including inclusive industrial development and policies
that seek to enhance productive capacities in Africa,
can generate employment and income for the poor and
therefore be an engine for poverty eradication, as well
as achieving internationally agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals.
The draft resolution welcomes the adoption of
the African Union Agenda 2063 as a comprehensive,
overarching strategy for socioeconomic transformation
for the next decades. In that regard, the Group of 77 and
China is encouraged by the importance that Member
States attach in the draft resolution to supporting
Agenda 2063. Furthermore, the draft resolution
recognizes the important role that African regional
economic communities can play in the implementation
of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development and
the African Union Agenda 2063 and its first 10-year
action plan, in close cooperation with the African
Union. In that regard, it encourages African countries

15-18386

19/06/2015

and the international community to give regional
economic communities the necessary support to
strengthen capacity.
The draft resolution also recognizes the efforts of
African countries to enhance food security and nutrition
on the continent, including through implementation of
the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development
Programme. In addition, the draft resolution welcomes
the first biennial report of the Secretary-General
(A/69/163) on the review of the implementation of
the commitments made to Africa’s development,
recognizing the importance of the second biennial
report to be submitted to the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session.
Lastly, the draft resolution highlights the
socioeconomic impacts of the Ebola outbreak on the
most affected countries in West Africa; recognizes all
national, regional and international efforts, including
those of the United Nations, to stem the spread of the
outbreak; and calls for effective measures to overcome
its profound negative effects.
I want to take this opportunity to thank the
facilitator of the resolution for bringing the informals
to a conclusion. I further express my appreciation to the
coordinators for their commitment and to the Office of
the Special Adviser on Africa for its assistance.
I commend the draft resolution A/69/L.64/Rev.1 to
the General Assembly for adoption by consensus.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/69/L.64/Rev.1, entitled
“New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of the
draft resolution, in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of A/69/L.64/Rev.1: Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, the Netherlands,
Portugal, Senegal, Slovenia and Turkey.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.64/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/69/L.64/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 69/290).

A/69/PV.96

The President: May I take that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 62?
It was so decided.
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
Draft resolution (A/69/L.63/Rev. 1)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly considered in a joint debate agenda
item 62 and its sub-items (a) and (b), as well as agenda
item 12, during the 26th and 27th plenary meetings, on
26 October 2014.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Africa to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.63/Rev.1.
Mr. Muenda (South Africa): On behalf of
the Group of 77 and China, I have the honour to
introduce draft resolution A/69/L.63/Rev.1, entitled
“Implementation of the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa”. The Group of 77
and China would like to express its appreciation to all
the delegations for their constructive contributions,
which have led to the finalization of the text before the
Assembly. This is a continued affirmation of the support
of the United Nations membership for the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.
The text continues to be an important platform in
stressing Africa’s responsibility for peace and security
on the continent, and the need for Africa to strengthen
its capacity to address the root causes of conflict and
resolve conflicts in a peaceful manner.
Allow me to highlight some paragraphs which are
key in the draft resolution.
The draft resolution notes the positive trends and
advances in obtaining durable peace in Africa and
the conditions required for sustainable development,
as well as the urgent need to continue developing
African human and institutional capacity, particularly
in countries emerging from conflict. Furthermore, the
draft resolution embraces the importance of the African
Union (AU) Agenda 2063 as a strategic vision and
an action plan for ensuring a positive socioeconomic
transformation in Africa within the next 50 years, and
recognizes that peace and security are critical enablers
for sustainable development. It is important to highlight

15-183863/12

A/69/PV.96

that the draft resolution also welcomes the progress
made by African countries, the AU and subregional
organizations in conflict prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development.
Also, besides traditional peace and security
in Africa, the draft resolution addresses emerging
challenges, particularly terrorism, and encourages the
United Nations system to support African regional
and subregional organizations in the implementation
of counter-terrorism action plans. By the same token,
the draft resolution demonstrates the commitment of
Member States to supporting the efforts of African
countries to achieve the goal of a conflict-free Africa
and to end all wars in Africa by 2020, including by
considering defining a concrete five-year action plan to
support the attainment of this goal.
In the light of the importance of enhancing the
capacity of the African Union to meet the challenges
of peace, security and development, the draft resolution
underscores the importance of the full implementation
of a 10-year capacity-building programme for the AU.
The draft resolution welcomes the ongoing efforts,
through the Regional Coordination Mechanism, to
formulate a successor programme, given that the 10year capacity-building programme will expire in 2016.
Lastly, I want to take this opportunity to thank
the facilitator of the draft resolution for bringing
the informals to a speedy conclusion. I also express
my appreciation to the two coordinators for their
commitment and the Office of the Special Adviser on
Africa for its assistance throughout the negotiation
process. I commend draft resolution A/69/L.63/Rev.1
to the General Assembly for its adoption by consensus.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/69/L.63/Rev.1, entitled
“Implementation of the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of a durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of A/69/L.63/Rev.1: Australia, Austria,

4/12

19/06/2015

Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Georgia,
Hungary, Ireland, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, Sweden and Turkey.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.63/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/69/L.63/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 69/291).
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Rwanda to make a statement.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this meeting. I am honoured to speak on
behalf of the Group of African States on the important
occasion of the adoption of resolution 69/291, on the
causes of conflicts and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa.
The resolution is timely and relevant. Although the
United Nations was established in response to threats
to peace and security as a collective effort to save
future generations from the scourge of war, today we
still witness conflicts of varying lengths with varying
death tolls. It is also timely and relevant because many
countries in Africa have consistently become theatres
of conflict since the United Nations was established 70
years ago. Nearly a third of sub-Saharan countries were
involved in active civil wars during the mid-1990s.
While the strength of those wars may have decreased,
violence and deadly conflicts still exist in Africa,
which currently account for two thirds of the Security
Council’s agenda.
Why must we continue to talk about conflicts and
not peace when we should be celebrating the milestones
of the seventieth anniversary of the Organization? We
agree that existing normative theories on the causes
of conflicts have been covered in millions of pages of
literature, including those within the United Nations,
but in actual conflict there remains little consensus or
will to implement even the most effective policies to
avert them. For example, in Africa, despite the various
mechanisms in place, both preventive and reactive,
conflict has been commonplace during the past halfcentury. Today, entrenched conflicts are not just
extremely common; they persist and lead to relapses.
Although in the 1960s, there was some degree
of justification at a time when Africa was trying to
redefine itself in the wake of decolonization, current
conflict tactics have called into question our collective
efforts towards a prosperous and conflict-free Africa.

15-18386

19/06/2015

We believe that most of those efforts had been directed
towards proximate and immediate causes and that little
had been done to address the real root causes.
While the United Nations now shifts its attention
towards identifying the underlying causes of conflict,
the African Group believes that it is important to invest
in the development of strong national institutions,
including legislative and judicial bodies, that can
establish the foundations of good governance, based on
the rule of law, democratic principles and values, and
accountability. That investment will ensure ownership
of the processes, strengthen existing mechanisms and
lead to the particular society’s resilience to conflicts.
The African Group advises that cooperation
be streamlined and long-term structural measures
implemented. Increased cooperation within the African
Union and its regional economic communities will aid
both the Union and the African Group in their conflictprevention efforts and in their ability to recognize and
share signs of impending or potential conflict. In that
light, support for the implementation of the African
Union Agenda 2063, the continent’s strategic vision
and an action plan for ensuring the positive economic
transformation in Africa within the next 50 years, is of
the utmost importance. If we genuinely wish to make
Africa a conflict-free continent, pursuant to the African
Union Agenda 2063, actions taken parallel to long-term
goals to silence guns and end all wars by 2020 are a
prerequisite to achieving a conflict-free continent. In
his report (A/69/162), the Secretary-General recognizes
that more needs to be done to support that goal, and
the African Union welcomes his recommendation
that the General Assembly define a five-year concrete
actionable plan to that purpose.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that the successful
promotion of durable peace in Africa would require
our redoubled efforts in strengthening structures and
policies to create an environment conducive to the
promotion of inclusive economic development. Indeed,
as recognized in the newly adopted resolution 69/291,
development, peace, security and human rights are
closely interlinked and mutually reinforcing. We upon
all United Nations entities directly working in those
areas in collaboration and cooperation with national
Governments to continue developing African human
and institutional capacities, particularly in countries
emerging from conflict in order to prevent their relapse
into conflict. In that regard, it is our hope that this
year will mark a turning point with the adoption of

A/69/PV.96

the post-2015 sustainable development agenda and the
ongoing review of peace operations and peacebuilding
architecture, which we hope will provide concrete
recommendations to promote sustainable peace and
development in Africa.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 62 and agenda item 62 as
a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 74 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft resolution (A/69/L.65)
Programme budget implications of draft
resolution A/69/L.65 (A/69/922)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held a debate on agenda item 74 and its
sub-items (a) and (b) and adopted resolution 69/109 at
its 67th plenary meeting, on 9 December 2014. Members
will also recall that under sub-item (a) of agenda item
74, the General Assembly adopted resolution 69/245
at its 76th plenary meeting, on 29 December 2014.
Members will further recall that at its 92nd plenary
meeting, on 3 June 2015, the representative of Trinidad
and Tobago introduced resolution A/69/L.65 on behalf
of its sponsors.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/69/L.65, entitled “Development of an
international legally-binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction”.
In that connection, I would like to draw the
Assembly’s attention to the statement regarding
programme budget implications, contained in document
A/69/922. The Fifth Committee will examine during the
main part of the seventieth session of the Assembly the
revised estimates arising from the draft resolution and
report to the Advisory Committee on the administrative
and budgetary questions thereon. Consequently, the
financial provisions, as appropriate, will be considered
as an additional budget appropriation to be approved by
the Assembly for the biennium 2016-2017.

15-183865/12

A/69/PV.96

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of the
draft resolution, in addition to those delegations
listed in the document, the following countries
have
also
become
sponsors
of
A/69/L.65:
Algeria, Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Cameroon,
Chile, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Latvia,
Lithuania, Monaco, Norway, the Netherlands, Palau,
the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Thailand
and Tunisia.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.65?
Draft resolution A/69/L.65 was adopted (resolution
69/292).
The President: Before giving the floor to
the speakers in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Özaydın (Turkey): Regarding resolution
69/292, which was adopted under agenda item 74 (a),
I would like to point out that Turkey supports efforts
aimed at the efficient, environmentally conscious and
sustainable use of maritime spaces, in accordance with
international law. Accordingly, Turkey supported the
resolution. That having been said, the participation of
our delegation in the deliberations and negotiations
envisaged in the framework of resolution 69/292, which
may result in a possible legally binding instrument,
cannot be construed as a change in the established
position of Turkey with regard to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Mr. Medina Mita (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela wishes to refer
to resolution 69/292, entitled “Development of an
international legally-binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction”, which
has just been adopted by the General Assembly. We
take this opportunity to express our sincere gratitude

6/12

19/06/2015

to the facilitator of the resolution, Ambassador Eden
Charles of Trinidad and Tobago. We would also like to
extend our gratitude to the Division for Ocean Affairs
and the Law of the Sea.
At this time, I recall that Venezuela is not a party to
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
For that reason, the norms contained in that instrument,
particularly those that might be considered international
customary law, do not apply to us unless we recognize
them in conformity with the exercise of our full
sovereignty. Given the importance of the sustainable
exploitation of biologically diverse resources in areas
beyond national jurisdiction, we emphatically maintain
and reiterate that this issue must be regulated by a
specific international instrument that is distinct from
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
which is imbued with a sense of caution with respect to
safeguarding the rights of humankind as a whole.
Venezuela believes that the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea cannot be the only
legal framework regulating activities related to the
oceans and the seas, and cannot be qualified as a
universal instrument. We have also indicated that we
do not reject the criteria and principles set out in such
instruments, and we note that they can be approved and
adapted to our needs, taking into account the principles
of responsibility, cooperation, equity and sustainability.
It was for those reasons that the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela expressed a reservation on the
matter at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development — a position that we reiterate today. We
would also point out that our non-objection to the text
adopted at this meeting must not be interpreted as a
change in our position with regard to the Convention
or its role in a future legal regime applicable to marine
resources in areas beyond national jurisdiction.
Mr. Orozco Barrera (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to begin by emphasizing the
spirit of flexibility that characterized the discussions
throughout the consultations that resulted in the text
of resolution 69/292, entitled “Development of an
international legally-binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction”, which
has been adopted by consensus. Colombia reaffirms
its commitment to addressing matters related to the
conservation and sustainable use of marine resources

15-18386

19/06/2015

in areas beyond national jurisdiction, the protection of
the oceans and the need to ensure that they are fully
preserved.
In my delegation’s view, the resolution is intended
to address the technical and procedural aspects of
the meetings of the preparatory committee for the
intergovernmental conference on the development of
an international legally binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction, in
accordance with the recommendations of the Ad Hoc
Open-ended Informal Working Group established
to study the matter (A/69/780, annex, sect. I). I also
recognize the tireless work of the facilitator on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China, Mr. Thembela Ngculu of
the South African delegation, for his endless patience
and hard work.
Colombia, a megadiverse country with Pacific
and Atlantic coastlines, understands the importance
of the process under way, in which a further step
forward has been taken today. Colombia has two of
the world’s largest areas for the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity, and we
believe that development cannot be achieved at the
cost of our national resources. Colombia joined the
consensus adoption of the resolution on the meetings
of the preparatory committee for the development of
an international legally binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction, in
accordance with the aforementioned recommendations,
on the understanding — stated many times in this and
other forums — that our support does not imply that we
accept the provisions of or obligations emanating from
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of
10 December 1982, to which the Republic of Colombia
is not a party.
In that regard, we emphasize that neither our
participation in the negotiations, consultations and
discussions, nor their outcome, can affect the legal
status of Colombia with regard to the Convention or
any related instrument, as established in paragraph
4 of the draft resolution. I respectfully request that
this statement be included in the official report of the
session.

A/69/PV.96

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote for this meeting.
I now give the floor to the observer of the European
Union.
Mr. Marhic (European Union): The European
Union (EU) and its member States are pleased to join the
consensus on the adoption of the important resolution
69/292, entitled “Development of an international
legally-binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction”, which establishes
and provides the modalities for a preparatory
committee to make substantive recommendations to
the General Assembly on the elements of a draft text of
an international legally binding instrument, taking into
account the work of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal
Working Group.
We have taken note of the programme budget
implications statement presented by the Secretariat. We
wish to stress that the estimates presented, which relate
to the proposed programme budget for 2016-2017, do
not prejudge the Secretary-General’s submission to the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions (ACABQ) and the Fifth Committee of his
proposed budget for the 2016-2017 biennium, nor those
bodies’ consideration of those proposals in the course
of the current year. These estimates should therefore
not be perceived as having been endorsed by Member
States today.
Furthermore, we do not regard the adoption today
of a resolution, accompanied solely by a statement of
estimated requirements for a future budget period, as
implying that Member States have agreed not to comply
with rule 153. The Secretary-General’s proposed
budget for 2016-2017 and subsequent revised estimates
that arise will be subject to scrutiny by the ACABQ and
then the Fifth Committee in the usual way.
Indeed, in that regard, we note from paragraph
10 of document A/69/922 that a revised estimate
will be issued and considered in the main part of the
seventieth session in accordance with the normal
budged procedures. Nothing we have done today should
therefore be seen as pre-empting the negotiation of the
proposed programme budget for 2016-2017 or of any
revised estimates for 2016-2017, which will take place
in the fall of 2015.

15-183867/12

A/69/PV.96

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 74?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 32 (continued)
Prevention of armed conflicts
Draft resolution (A/69/L.75)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly adopted resolution 69/285 under this
agenda item at its 92nd plenary meeting, on 3 June. I
would like to inform members that the debate on this
agenda item will be held at a later date, to be announced.
I welcome the imminent adoption of the draft
resolution on the International Day for the Elimination
of Sexual Violence in Conflict (A/69/L.75), which
demonstrates the continuing resolve and commitment
of Member States to eliminating such violence. By
calling for such an international day for the elimination
of sexual violence in conflict, the General Assembly
is positioning itself to address concerns that require
its multilateral deliberative authority for effective
implementation and follow-through.
Rape and other forms of sexual violence in conflict
and post-conflict situations constitute grave violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law,
but such depraved acts continue to occur and are
used to terrorize and control civilian populations in
conflict zones. Together, we must prioritize prevention
and response efforts, empower victims, provide
comprehensive assistance and shift the stigma of shame
from the victims of such crimes to those who commit
and condone them.
Sexual violence is not a new phenomenon. In my
country, Uganda, there was an era when horrendous
atrocities were committed, including the abduction of
children, the killing of men and the rape of women.
Such atrocities fuelled outrage among our people. We
did more than merely speak out against them; the people
rose against the Government that had perpetuated the
atrocities. The use of rape as a weapon of war must be
stopped. We should ensure that the perpetrators of such
crimes and the superiors who condone their actions are
held accountable, and that the victims receive justice.
The full and equal participation of women must
be ensured for the establishment of enduring peace.

8/12

19/06/2015

Women must be included in efforts to resolve conflicts
and in the post-conflict transition, reconstruction
and peacebuilding processes, as well as in initiatives
targeting the elimination of sexual violence in conflict.
I commend the delegation of Argentina and the
sponsors of this initiative. I also thank the numerous
other countries and civil society groups, particularly
women’s organizations, that have championed past
initiatives related to women and peace and security,
and children in armed conflict.
I note with appreciation the important work under
way within the United Nations system, including
the initiatives of the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and for Children and Armed Conflict. I also thank the
members of the High-level Advisory Group for Global
Study on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) for
their preparatory efforts on the forthcoming global
study on women and peace and security. Today, we are
reaffirming our collective resolve to work together to
prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Argentina to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.75.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
It is an honour to have this opportunity to introduce
draft resolution A/69/L.75, on the establishment of
an International Day for the Elimination of Sexual
Violence in Conflict.
As you know and have said, Mr. President,
Argentina is a country where fundamental freedoms
and human rights are part of State policy and a lifestyle.
Latin America and the Caribbean is a region where
peace is synonymous with our very future. We are the
South, diverse and vibrant, in which, with effort and
courage, we are striving to establish a more united, just
and equal world.
We are here today in the General Assembly Hall,
a place where multilateral democracy is alive as in no
other place, forging the bases of global agreements that
embody and realize the ideals of our time to eradicate
poverty and hunger, establish sustainable development
in the economic, social and environmental spheres,
and progress towards a more balanced and equitable
international order that includes everybody with equal
opportunities, conditions and treatment. That is not only
a challenge that brings us together; it is a responsibility
that we are called to assume together.

15-18386

19/06/2015

Nevertheless, if we are to achieve these objectives
we urgently need — as Pope Francis wrote this week in
his encyclical Laudato Si — a new ethic in international
relations and a new universal solidarity — a
conversation that includes us all, without discrimination
or exclusion, because the challenges we face interest us
all, involve us all, inspire us all and affect us all. For
that reason, I believe that through this draft resolution
today we are entrenching a culture of peace and
striving to find specific solutions for thousands and
thousands of humans beings, mostly women, girls and
boys who are the victims of hatred and intolerance, of
cruelty and violence in multiple forms — in this case,
sexual violence used in conflicts as a weapon of war to
humiliate, dominate, subjugate and degrade our human
dignity.
This initiative derives not from individual effort
or an individual country, but from the joint work that
we have been undertaking for some time now with
our Organization and the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, and on Children and
Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, with the aim
of preventing and eradicating sexual violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations, and ensuring
that the perpetrators are brought to justice and the
victims protected. The initiative therefore seeks to
raise the international community’s awareness of the
need to end sexual violence in conflict, to provide
sufficient multidimensional assistance to the victims
of such crimes, and to resolutely combat impunity for
the perpetrators of such violations through effective
accountability under the relevant judicial systems.
In that context, we seek to pursue joint efforts to
do away with attitudes and behaviour that hinder the
path towards a solution, which range from denial of the
problem to indifference and comfortable resignation
to ineffective interventions that seek to deal only with
the symptoms and not to address the more underlying
causes that generate and perpetuate sexual violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations. This war crime,
this crime against humanity, this form of extreme
violence is exercised in particular — and I repeat
this — against women, boys and girls, the poor, ethnic
and religious minorities and other vulnerable groups.
To that end, Argentina has drafted the draft
resolution before us today, which was endorsed by
Member States following four rounds of informal
consultations. We express our thanks for and

A/69/PV.96

appreciation of the great willingness, unequivocal
commitment and constructive spirit demonstrated by
delegations that participated in the negotiation process.
The draft resolution being introduced to the Assembly
today follows the guidelines and recent precedents,
as well as the guidelines of the Economic and Social
Council for the proclamation of international days.
I shall digress from my prepared speech for a
moment. While we have too many international days
on our calendar, this is a moment to reconsider but not
overlook a clear violation of human dignity. I believe
that these international days have a meaning because
they express the commitment that led to the adoption
the Charter of the United Nations — a commitment to
peace, human rights, development, dignity and freedom
for all men and women.
On the basis of that consensus, we have come up with
language previously agreed in the General Assembly or
in the Security Council. We respect the agreements that
have been reached because they demonstrate, in the
framework of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, that it is not a path that we are starting upon
today. It is a path that we have been moving along
together. We have not included divisive elements or
references to specific cases. This is not a political game,
but an ethical rallying cry for humankind. We have had
enough of sexual violence in conflicts.
We have sought to make the draft resolution
universal in nature. It is based on two key documents
on the subject of sexual violence in conflict: Security
Council resolution 1820 (2008) and General Assembly
resolution 69/147, of 18 December 2014.
We have chosen 19 June to celebrate the new
International Day will because it reflects the date of the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1820 (2008). I
reiterate that we are trying to associate the International
Day not with any specific conflict situation, but with
a tragedy that is suffered by humankind as a whole.
We want the draft resolution to be an expression of
a strategic institutional vision because the various
bodies of the United Nations must not compete among
themselves. They must neither cancel one another out nor
dominate one another. It is the General Assembly that is
making this appeal, in support of the achievements of
the Security Council. It is seeking not to replace but to
complement and cooperate with the Council. Therefore
if the Security Council, in the face of this tragic reality,
wishes to work upon and fine-tune its mechanisms and

15-183869/12

A/69/PV.96

decisions, we also understand that here in the General
Assembly we do not have the right to be indifferent. We
have the duty to act.
We greatly value the massive support that we have
received from Member States for the draft resolution,
which can be inferred from the large number of States
that have sponsored this initiative. We have well over
100 sponsors. We know that preventing and eradicating
sexual violence in armed conflicts, punishing the
perpetrators and providing protection to the victims is
not and will not be easy nor will it be immediate, but we
also know that we have no excuses for not trying.
We must dare to put an end to this violence once and
for all. We must commit ourselves to fully defending
the integrity of human lives and to working sincerely
and tirelessly to prevent, combat and eradicate this
scourge to achieve genuine and lasting peace for the
victims — the women, boys, girls, poor people, ethnic
minorities, religious minorities and other vulnerable
groups. Some people believe that the lives of these
people are worth nothing, but we are here to tell them
that their lives are important.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.75, entitled
“International Day for the Elimination of Sexual
Violence in Conflict”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department of General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed on the
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/69/L.75: Afghanistan,
Andorra, Belarus, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, China, Cuba, Haiti,
Honduras, Iceland, Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Kyrgyzstan,
Malaysia, Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, the Republic
of Moldova, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Suriname, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, the United
Republic of Tanzania and Vanuatu.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.75?

10/12

19/06/2015

Draft resolution A/69/L.75 was adopted (resolution
69/293).
The President: I now call on those delegations
wishing to make statements following the adoption of
the resolution.
Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): First of
all, the Republic of Korea welcomes the establishment
of the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual
Violence in Conflict. I would like to thank Argentina
and the Offices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict for leading us in the
establishment of this important day for the elimination
of sexual violence in conflict.
As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action along with
the fifteenth anniversary of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, we have
taken another meaningful step forward by establishing
such an important day for the protection of the rights of
women and girls. It is well known that sexual violence
has a long history of being committed during war, not
only in the form of rape, but also in other forms of
comparable gravity, such as sexual slavery, enforced
prostitution, forced pregnancy and forced sterilization.
In all its forms, sexual violence constitutes a
violation of the human rights of women and girls, posing
a further threat to the peace and security of the local,
regional and international communities to which their
victims belong. Moreover, sexual violence ultimately
perpetuates and exacerbates the vicious cycle of
conflicts and human rights violations. The international
community has exerted great effort in an attempt to
address that heinous crime. Most recently, the Global
Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict, held in
London a year ago, tackled the issue in a more strategic
and comprehensive way. The June 2014 Guidance Note
of the Secretary-General on reparations for conflictrelated sexual violence also provides detailed guiding
principles on how to provide tranformative reparations
for victims of conflict-related sexual violence. Needless
to say, the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict has made a significant
impact on dealing with this serious issue.

15-18386

19/06/2015

In spite of such efforts, however, sexual violence
in conflicts persists, as evident in the current cases
surrounding the international community. Therefore,
the international community must further strengthen
and redouble its ongoing efforts to end such heinous
crimes. In particular, we must end a culture of impunity
by holding the perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict
accountable. Providing relevant education for the next
generation is indispensable for effectively preventing
this sort of tragedy from recurring in the future.
In the light of all the work that remains to be done,
the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual
Violence in Conflict cannot simply be regarded or
dismissed as one of the more than 120 already existing
international days. Rather, the international day must
be observed annually in a solemn, meaningful and
active way. That is precisely why the Republic of
Korea proposed that the International Day be observed
as a historically significant and highly relevant date,
19 June. On that day seven years ago, the Security
Council adopted resolution 1820 (2008), one of the seven
Council resolutions on women and peace and security,
which underscores that sexual violence in conflict
constitutes a war crime. Moreover, it demands that
parties to armed conflict immediately take appropriate
measures to protect civilians from sexual violence.
While we agree that it is important that all Council
resolutions on women and peace and security, including
resolution 1820 (2008), be promptly and effectively put
into practice, we also recognize that the elimination
of sexual violence in conflict depends on much more
than the implementation of the relevant resolutions. It
cannot be achieved without the concerted efforts of all
stakeholders, including Member States, United Nations
agencies, civil society and parties to conflict worldwide.
I believe that the newly established International Day
for the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict can
provide valuable opportunities for the engagement of
all such stakeholders.
As resolution 60/293 emphasizes, the day should
serve to inspire all Member States, all organizations and
bodies in the United Nations system, other international
and regional organizations, and civil society to reaffirm
and ensure their commitment to putting an end to sexual
violence in conflict, promoting public awareness about
the issue and honouring the victims and survivors
of sexual violence around the world. If leveraged
properly and observed actively, the International Day
has the potential to help develop and advance critical

A/69/PV.96

international norms on ensuring accountability and
on providing assistance and reparations for victims of
sexual violence in conflict.
It is our sincere hope that the annual observance
of the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual
Violence in Conflict will soon mark a milestone in
our noble endeavours to eliminate sexual violence in
conflict once and for all, and to ensure dignity and
justice for all in the post-2015 development agenda.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): First of all, I would like
to congratulate the Assembly on its adoption of
resolution 69/293, on the International Day for the
Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict. Let me
also commend and thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and Mrs. María Cristina Perceval, Permanent
Representative of Argentina to the United Nations, for
spearheading today’s resolution.
It is my great pleasure to be here. I fully concur
with the Permanent Representative of Argentina, who
stressed that today’s meeting is an occasion to adopt
the International Day with a view to eliminating sexual
violence in conflict from the world and to build up
the preparatory process of the resolution. I would like
to commend the efforts of everyone who engaged in
the preparation for the adoption of the International
Day, particularly Argentina, which has shown great
leadership and chairmanship in the preparatory
process. Let me stress that Japan, as a strong supporter
of the International Day, continues to make efforts to
eliminate conflict-related sexual violence.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank and
congratulate Argentina for introducing the important
resolution 69/293 to the General Assembly. Thanks to
this initiative, each year on this date the international
community will remember the immense price that
civilians, particularly women and children, pay in
armed conflict by falling victim to sexual violence. We
renew our commitment to combating that crime.
I take this opportunity to thank once again the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence and Armed Conflict, Ms. Bangura, for
her exceptional work and commitment, and to recall the
importance of having the entire United Nations system
improve and enhance its coordination with her Office in
order to maintain consistency in fight against this form
of violence. The work of the Special Representative
is key to maintaining the focus on a form of violence

15-1838611/12

A/69/PV.96

that, in many cases, is used as a weapon of terror and
deployed systematically and with a high degree of
sophistication by parties to conflict.
Spain is fully committed to combating this crime.
In recent years, we have observed with satisfaction how
the international community has come to grasp the
overarching importance of this combat in the debates
that we have held on international peace and security.
Nevertheless, we are still far from including sexual
violence among the main threats to peace and security.
That continues to be a major challenge, as we have said
in many of our statements to this and other forums of
the Organization. We believe that the serious nature of
this crime calls for a speedy and systematic response
with an immediate, practical impact that goes beyond
the mere condemnation of the use of sexual violence
against civilians as a weapon of war and terror. We
believe that there are four particularly important
elements in combating this crime.
First is the key importance of civil society as the
engine and catalyst of the process of achieving national
ownership in combating this serious violation of human
rights, and the need for women’s organizations to play
an increasingly proactive role in peace processes.
Secondly, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes should pay particular attention
to the circumstances and specific needs of the victims
of sexual violence in the course of reintegration and
reinsertion so as to avoid the rejection, stigmatization
and exclusion of victims, which contribute greatly to
the impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators, as well as to
the perpetuation of this crime. The fight against this
crime in post-conflict situations is vital.
Thirdly, we need to put an end to impunity for
these crimes. There are serious shortcomings in the
way justice systems deal with conflict-related sexual
violence, in some cases because of the lack of targeted
training, and in others because of the patriarchal or
discriminatory mindset that perpetuates this crime.
We stress the need to guarantee that sexual violence
is included in all transitional and post-conflict justice
processes. The International Criminal Court must also
be allowed to play the role that it deserves.
Fourthly and finally, we should ensure the proper
training and commitment of the political leadership,

12/12

19/06/2015

high-ranking officers of national armies and security
forces, and the contingents of peacekeeping operations.
The United Nations must set an example in its zerotolerance policy.
I wish to close by recalling that the high-level
review of Security Council 1325 (2000) to take place
in October will give us a historical opportunity to
address this problem, especially in giving victims and
survivors the attention they deserve, not only in terms
of reparations, but also in terms of their reintegration
and participation.
The President: I give the floor to the observer of
the Holy See.
Reverend Monsignor Grech (Holy See): My
delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution 69/293,
entitled “International Day for the Elimination of
Sexual Violence in Conflict”. We wish to thank the
Permanent Mission of Argentina, the main sponsor of
the resolution, for its hard work, and for having created
an environment of cooperation throughout the entire
process.
My delegation condemns in the strongest possible
terms all forms of violence against civilians, while
reiterating Pope Francis’ numerous calls to put an end to
the use of violence, especially against children, women
and girls in situations of armed conflict, post-conflict
and conflict-related situations. They constitute grave
violations of fundamental human rights and freedoms.
Throughout the negotiation process my delegation
worked closely with the facilitator and with other
delegations to produce a text that my delegation could
fully support. However, the final resolution contains
language that remains undefined and unclear for a
number of delegations, including my own, as well
as language and references to resolutions on which
my delegation has strong reservations. With this in
mind, my delegation would like to put on record its
reservations on paragraphs 1, 2 and 5.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
32.
The meeting rose at 11.30 p.m.

15-18386
