General Aseembly-Thirtieth Seuion

94

Expresses its deep appreciation to the Government
and people of Mexico for acting as host to the World
Conference of the International Women's Year.
·
2441 st P1enary meeting
15 December 1975
3519 (XXX). Women's participation in the
strengthening of international peace and security and in the struggle against colonialism,
racism, racial discrimination, foreign aggression and occupation and all forms of foreign
domination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3276 (XX·IX) of 10 December 1974,
Considering the report of the World Conference of
the International Women's Year, 47 held at Mexico City
from 19 June to 2 July 1975, in particular the Declaration of Mexico on the Equality of Women and
Their Contribution to Development and Peace, 1975,48
the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of
the Objectives of the International Women's Year49 and
the resolutions contained in the report of the Conference,50
· Appreciating that the Conference emphasized the
important role women must play in the strengthening
of international peace and security and in the expansion of co-operation among States, irrespective of their
social and economic systems, based on the principles
of peaceful coexistence in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations,
Endorsing the statement of the Conference that international co-operation and peace require the achievement of national liberation and independence, the preservation of sovereignty and territorial integrity, the
elimination of colonialism and neo-co1onialism, foreign
aggression and occupation, apartheid and racial discrim'ination in all its forms, as well as the recognition of
the dignity of peoples and their right to self-determination,
Noting with satisfaction the opinion expressed by
the Conference that peace requires that women as well
as men should reject any type of intervention in the
domestic affairs of States, openly or covertly carried
out by other States or by transnational corporations,
and that women as well as men should also promote
respect for the sovereign right of a State to establish its
own economic, social and political system without political and economic pressures or coercion of any type,
Taking into account the view of the Conference that
the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of Stares111
confirms, inter alia, the obligation of all States to promote the implementation of general and complete disarmament, to use the funds thus saved for economic and
social development and to provide part of these funds
for the needs of the developing countries,
Noting with satisfaction the positive changes which
have taken place during the last few years in international relations, such as the elimination of the dangerous sources of war in Viet-Nam and the results of the
''United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.1.
"Ibid., chap. I.
" Ibid., chap. TI. sect. A.
Gil Ibid., chap. IIT.
i1 Rei,o)ution 12111

fXXJX).

Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe,
and noting also the importance of deepening the process
of international detente and strengthening an international just peace based on full respect for the Charter
of the United Nations and the interests of all States,
large and small,
Emphasizing the grave concern that in some regions of the world colonialism, apartheid, racial discrimination and foreign aggression continue to exist
and territories are still occupied, which represents a
most serious infringement of the princii-es of the Charter of the United Nations and of human rights of both
.men and women, and of the peoples' right to selfdetermination,
1. Reaffirms the principles promulgated in the Declaration of Mexico on the Equality of Women and Their
Contribution to Development and Peace, 197 5;
2. Reaffirms that the strengthening of international
peace and security, co-operation among all States irrespective of their social and economic systems, based
on the principle of peacepil coexistence, and the elimination of the remaining vestiges of colonialism, neocolonialism, apartheid, all forms of racism and racial
discriminaition, alien domination and foreign aggression
and occupation are indispensable for the safeguarding
of the fundamental human rights of both men and
women;
3. Calls upon all Governments, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations, particularly women's organizations and women's groups, to intensify their
efforts to strengthen peace, to expand and deepen the
process of international detente and make it irreversible, to eliminate completely and definitely all forms of
colonialism and to put an end to the policy and practice of apartheid, all forms of racism, racial discrimination, aggression, occupation and foreign domination;
4. Urges all Governments to take effective measures towards bringing about general and complete disarmament and convening the World Disarmament Conference as soon as possible;
5. Expresses its solidarity with and its assistance
for women who contribute towards the struggle of the
peoples for their national liberation;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session a comprehensive report on the implementation of the present
resolution.
2441st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3520 (XXX). World Conference of the
lntemational Wom&i's Year

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3010 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 in which it proclaimed the year 1975 International Women's Year,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions 1849 (LVI) and 1851 (LVI) of 16 May 1974 on
the convening of an international conference during the
International Women's Year as a focal point of the international observance of the Year,
Recallinf,f further its resolution~ 3276 (XXJX) nnd
3277 (XXIX) of 10 J>cn~mhcr 11'74 ll'i wrll 11s l(rn.

Resolution• adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

nomic and Social Council resolution 1959 (LIX) of
28 July 1975 concerning the World Conference of the
International Women's Year,
Recalling the importance of the participation of
women in the implementation of the decisions of the
General Assembly at its sixthG 2 and seventh113 special
sessions as well as in the implementation of. the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order,11'
Having considered the report of the World
Confer11
ence of the International Women's Year.'' held at
Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July l97 5 ,
Having considered also ,the note by the SecretaryGeneral on the establishment of an international research and training institute for the advancement of
116
women,
Convinced that the Conference, through the adoption
of the Declaration of Mexico on the Equality of Women
and Their Contribution to Development and Peace,
1975 11 7 the World Plan of Action for the Implementation ~f the Objectives of the International Women's
Year58 and related resolutions,119 has made a valuable and constructive contribution towards the achievement of the threefold objectives of the Year, namely,
to promote equality between men and women, to ensure
the full integration of women in the total development
effort and to promote women's contribution to the devclopment of friendly relations and co-operation among
States and to the strengthening of world peace,
Considering the valuable and constructive contributions towards the implementation of the threefold objectives of the International Women's Year made by
conterences and seminars }:leld during the Year,
Convinced also that the promotion of development
objectives and the solution of crucial world economic
and social problems should contribute significantly to
the improvement of the situation of women, in particular that of women in rural areas and in low-income
groups,
Convinced further that women must play an important role in the promotion, achievement and maintenance of int<trnational peace,
Considering that the decisions and recommendations
of the Conference should be translated into concrete
action without delay by States, organizations of the
United Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations,

Recalling that the Conference stressed the important
role of regional commissions in the implementation of
the World Plan of Action and related resolutions of the
Conference,
Convinced that periodic and comprehensive reviews
and appraisals of the progress made in meeting the
goals of the World Plan of Action and related resolu112 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Special Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/9559).
113 Jbid., Seventh Special Session, Supplement No. 1 (Al
10301).
H Resolution 3202 (S-VI).
1111 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.1.

IIIIA/10340.
IIT Report of the World Conference of the International

Women's Ytar

(United Nations
E.7ti.TV.1). chap, 1.
n& fbid., chnp. H. ~et. A.
llll fl,id., chap. Ill.

publication, Sales No.

95

tions endorsed by the Conference are of crucial importance for their effective implementation and should be
undertaken at regular intervals by G~vemments ~ ~y
the organizations of the United Nations system withm
reed .
f
an ag
time rame,
Noting that the Conference recommended the continuing operation of the Commission on the Status of
Women or some other representative body, wi~ the
structure of the United Nations, designed specifically
to deal with matters relating to the status of women,
so as to ensure the implementation of ongoing projects
designed to carry out the programmes set forth in the
World Plan of Action, 60
1. Takes note of the report of the World Conference of the International Womeri's Year, including the
Declaration of Mexico on the Equality of Women and
Their Contribution to Development and Peace, 1975,
the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of
the Objeotives of the International Women's Year, the
regional plans of action and the resolutions and other
recommendations adopted by the Conference, and endorses the action proposals contained in these documents;
2. Proclaims the period from 1976 to 19,85 United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development
and Peace, to be devoted to effective and sustained
national, r~gional and international action to implement the World Plan of Action and related resolutions
of the Conference;
3. Calls upon Governments, as a matter of urgency,
to examine the recommendations contained in the World
Plan of Action and related resolutions of the Conference including action to be taken at the national level,
such as:
(a) The establishment of short-term, medium-term
and long-term targets, and priorities to this ~nd, taking
into account the guidelines set forth in sectidns I and II
of the World Plan of Action, including the minimum
objectives recommended for achievement by 1980;81
( b) The adoption of nttional strategies, plans and
programmes for the implementation of the recommendations within· the framework of over-all development
plans, policies and programmes;
( c) The undertaking of regular reviews and appra.
als of progress made at the"Dational and local levels in
achieving the goals and objectives of the World Plan
of Action within the framework of over-all development plans, policies and programmes;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
relevan•t organs of the United Nations and to the organizations of the United Nations system the decisions
and recommendations of the Conference;
5. Invites all relevant organizations of the United
Nations system concerned:
(a) To submit, within the framework of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to the Economic and Social Council at. its sixty-second session
their proposals and suggestions for implementing the
World Plan of Action and related resolutions of the
Conference during the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace;
( b) To develop and. implement, during the first half
of the Decade, under the auspices of the Admieis60 Ibid., chap. TII. resolution 4.

61 Jbid., chap. II, sect. A, para. 46.

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

96

trative Committee on Co-ordination, a joint interagency medinm-1erm programme for the integration
of women in development, which should co-ordin~te
and integrate activities undert_aken in. accordanc~ with
subparagraph (a) above, with special emph"!-s1s on
technical co-operation in programmes relatmg to
women and development;
( c) To render, in accordance with requests ?f Governments sustained assistance in the formulation, design, implementation and evaluation of projects . and
programmes which would ena~le women to be mtegrated in national and international development;
6. Calls upon the regional commissions to develop
and implement as a matter of priority, effective strategies to furthe! the objectives of _the World Plan. of
Action at the regional and subregional level~, beanng
in mind their respective regional plans of action;
7. Urges all financial institutions and all international, regional and subregional deve~opme!lt ?a~s an_d
bilateral funding agencies to accord high pnonty m their
development assistance, in accordance with requests of
Governments, to projects that would promote ~e integration of women in the development proces-s, m _particular women in the rural areas, as well as the achievement of the equaHty of women and men, priority being
given to countries with limited financial means;
8. Urges non-governmental organizations, _at the national and international levels, to take all possible measures to assist in the implementation of the World Plan
of Action and related resolutions of the Conference
within their particular areas of interest and competence~'
9. Decides in principle, in accordance with resolution 26 59 adopted by the Conference, to establish, under the auspices of the United Nations, an International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement
of Women which would be financed through voluntary
contributio'ns and would collaborate with appropriate
national, regional and international economic and social research institutes;
10. Invites the Secretary-General therefore to appoint, with due consideration to the principle of equitable geographical distribution, a Group of Experts on
the Establishment of an International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women,
consis,ting of five to ten experts, to draw up, in consultation with the representatives of existing regional centres and/-0r institutes for research and training whi~h
have similar objectives and goals, the terms of reference and structural organization of the Ins,titute, giving
special consideration to the needs of women of developing countries, and requests the Secretary-General to
report to the Economic ahd Social Council at its sixtieth session on the basis of the recommendations of the
Group of Experts;
11. Affirms that a system-wide review and appraisal
of the World Plan of Action should be undertaken biennially, and that such reviews and appraisals should
constitute an input to the process of review and appraisal of progress made under the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade, 62 taking into account the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order and the decisions resulting from the sixth and seventh special sessions of the
General Assembly;
12 Resoluti9n 2626 (XXV).

12. Affirms that the General Assembly and other
relevant bodies should also consider biennially the
progress achieved in the promotion of the full equality
of women with men in all spheres of life in accordance
with international standards and, in particular, the
participation of women in political life and in international co-operation and the strengthening of international peace;
13. Expresses the hope that the Ad Hoe Committee
on the Restructuring of the Economic and Social Sectors of the United Nations System, which will consider
the report of the Group of Experts on the Structure of
the United Nations System entitled A New United
Nations Structure for Global Economic Co-operation, 63
will tab full account of the need to implement the
World Plan of Action and related resolutions of the
Conference, as well as the requirements of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development
and Peace, and appeals to the Ad Hoe Committee to
ensure that the machinery designed to deal with questions !ela!ing to women should be strengthened, taking
into account, in particular, the role of the Commission
on the Status of Women and the procedures established for the system-wide review and appraisal of the
World Plan of Action;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session an item entit1ed "United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace";
15. Invites the Secretary-General to submit a progress report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first
session on the measures taken to implement the World
Plan of Action and related resolutions of the Conference, and on the progress achieved in initiating the
procedures for the Plan's review and appraisal by
Member States, the United Nations organs, the regional
cO'mmissions, the specialized agencies and other intergovernmental organizations concerned;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure, if
possible within existing resources, that the Secretariat
unit responsible for women's questions possesses adequate personnel and budgetary resources in order to
discharge its functions under the World Plan of Action
in co-operation with all organizations of the United
Nations sy&tem;
17. Further requests the Secretary-General, in the
light of paragraph 16 above, to take into ·account the
requirements of the World Plan of Action and related
resolutions of the Conference in preparing revised estimates for 1977 and the medium-term plan for 19781981 and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its thirty..fust session, in accordance with established
procedures;
18. Urges all States, the organizations of the United
Nations system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned, as well as the mass
communications media, to give widespread publicity to
the achievements and significance of the Conference at
the national, regional and international levels;
19. Requests the Secretary-General, as a matter of
high priority, to issue within existing resources, in the
official languages of the United Nations, a simplified
version of the World Plan of Action as a booklet, which
would highlight the targets, goals and main recom63 E/ AC.62/9
E.75.11.A.7).

(United

Nations

publication,

Sales No.

Resolutions adopted on the reportl of the Third Committee

mendations for action by Governments, the . Un_ited
Nations sys,tem and non-governmental organizations
and which would explain the relevance of the implementation of the Plan to the daily lives of men and
women throughout the world;
20. Decides to convene in 19 80, at the mid-term of
the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, a world conference of _all _States
to review and evaluate the progress made m implementing the objectives of the International Women's
Year as recommended by the World Conference of the
International Women's Year and, where necessary, to
readjust existing programmes in the light of new data
and research available.
.
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
1

3521 (XXX). Equality between men and women
and elimination of discrimination against
women

The General Assembly,
Welcoming the results of the World Conference of
the International Women's Year, 64 held at Mexico City
from 19 June to 2 July 1975,
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations which, inter alia, emphasize the importance of
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion and for the equality of men and women,
Firmly convinced that discrimination against women
is incompatible with human dignity and prevents social
progress and the achievement of the goals of development,
Mindful that the continuation of armed conflicts,
the arms race, colonialism, foreign occupation, racism,
racial discrimination and apartheid hinders the effective
realization of equal rights for women and prevents the
improvement of the situation of women and their wider
participation in all spheres of life,
Noting conventions and recommendations concerning the rights of women adopted under the aegis and
within the framework of the United Nations and its specialized agencies and the progress achieved in their
implementation,
Noting that all States are not yet parties to relevant
conventions and other instruments elaborated by the
United Nations, the International Labour Organisation,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other United Nations hex.lies,
Expressing concern' in connexion with continuing
discrimination in many countries against women in
many fields, in particular in labour relations and general and professional education and training,
Aware that women, enjoying fully the rights provided for in the relevant international instruments,
should play an equal role with men in all spheres of
life, including the ensuring of peace and the strengthening of international security, and should fully participate in political life,
Confident that the relaxation of international tension
contributes to the development and implementation of
standards in all fields of concern to. women,
84 See Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year
E.76.IV.1).

(United Nations publication, Sales No.

97

I. Calls upon all States that have not done so to
ratify the international conventions and other instruments concerning the protection of women's rights and
the elimination of discrimination against women and
to implement effectively the provisions of these conventions and other instruments, including declarations
of •the United Nations and recommendations of the International Labour Organisation and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
2. Requests the Commission on the Status of Women
to complete, in 1976, the elaboration of the draft Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination again&t
Women;
3. Calls upon all States to promote vigorously
wider participation of women in the strengthening of
international peace and in extending the relaxation of
international tension, on the basis of full respect for
the Charter of the United Nations as well as for United
Nations resolutions, in settling the problems of disarmament, in the elimination of colonialism, foreign occupation, racism, racial discrimination and apartheid and
in all other forms of political life, contributing in this
way to the creation of the most favourable conditions
for the complete elimination of discrimination against
women.
2441st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3522 (XXX). Improvement of the economic
status of women for their effective and
speedy participation in the development of
their countries

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that many women in low-income countries are engaged in various economic activities on a
self-reliant basis not normally taken into account when
considering the gross national product,
Convinced that the contribution of such economic
activi-ties by women to the over-all national economic
develo~nt is substantial,
Further convinced that credit facilities are a necessary prerequisite for the improvement of economic
activities of women engaged in self-reliance projects,
Recognizing the continued benefits that can accrue
from access to even moderate financial resources, when
such become available,
Concerned that· many lending and financial institutions continue to practise discrimination against women,
considering them poor credit risks, and that local and
national practices and customs in Dlany parts of the
world bar women from engaging in ~ponsible financial transactions,
Reaffirming resolution 10, entitled "Access of women
to financial assistance", 6~ adopted by the World Conference of the International Women's Year, held at
Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July 1975,
1. Urges Governments and governmental and nongovernmental organizations to support more vigorously
official and private efforts to extend to women the facilities now being offered only to men by financial and
lending institutions;
2. Requests Governments to encourage all efforts
by women's organizations, co-operativ~ and lending
611 Ibid., chap. ill.
