General Assembly-Seventh Session

24
ARTICLE XIU

The Secretary-General c ~ the United Nat ions shall. notif Y
the States referred to in article VI ( l) of the following:
(a) Signatures, ratifications and accessions received in accordance with articles VI and VII ;
(b) The date upon which the present. Convention comes
into force in accordance with article XIII;
(c) Denunciations received in accordance with article X
(1);

(d)
(e)

Abrogation in accordance with article XI;
Notifications received in accordance with article XII.
ARTICLE XIV

1. The present Convention, of which the Chinese, Englis~,
French Russian and Spanish texts shall be equally authentic,
shall b~ deposited in the archives of the United Nations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
transmit a certified copy to each State referred to in article
VI (1).
3. The present Convention shall be registered with the Secretariat of the United Nations on the date of its coming into
force.

631 (VII). Future work of the United Nations in
the field of freedom of information
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that freedom of information is a fundamental human right and is the touchstone of all the
freedoms to which the lJnited Nations is consecrated,
the promotion of which is one of the fundamefltal
tasks of the United Nations,
Considering that in 1946 the General Assembly initiated' the study in the United Nations of the problems of freedom of information and continues to take
great interest in the said problems and to concern
itself with them directly,
Considering the continuing need for study, inquiry
and investigation with a view to positive action for the
removal of obstacles to the free flow of information,
Considering that the Third Committee has not studied the draft Convention 5 on Freedom of Information
during the sixth and seventh sessions of the General
Assembly,
Noting the decision of the Economic and Social
Council in its resolution 442 C (XIV) of 13 June 1952
to appoint, for an experimental period of one year,
and in a personal capacity, a rapporteur on matters
relating to freedom of information,
N otitig that the rapporteur designated by the Council
has already undertaken, in co-operation with the Secretary-General, ~he speciali~ed age~cie~, in particular
the United Nations Educational, Sc1ent1fic and Cultural
Organization, and the professional organizations concerned, both national and international, the preparation,• for submission to the Council in 1953, of a sub-

stantive report covering major contemporary problems
and developments in the field of freedom of information, together with recommendations regarding pra~tical action which might be taken by the Council: m
order to surmount those obstacles to the fuller enJoyment of freedom of information which can be surmounted at the present time,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to communicate
the records of the Third Committee on the subject of
freedom of information to the Economic and Social
Council, in order that they may be taken into consideration by the Council during its studies and discussions;
2. Decides to consider further at its eighth session
the problem of promoting and safeguarding f~eedom
of information, including the draft Convention on
Freedom of Information, on the basis of the rapporteur's report to the Economic and Social Council in
1953 and after the Economic and Social Council has
had an opportunity to examine the rapporteur's report;
and accordingly,
3. Invites the Economic and Social Council to submit to the General Assembly at its eighth session a
statement of its views and plans regarding future work
in connexion with freedom of information.
403rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1952.
632 (VII). Sub-Commission on Freedom of In•
formation and of the Press
The General Assembly,
Considering the constructive work done by the SubCommission on Freedom of Information and of the
Press during its five sessions,
Considering that it has not hitherto had an opportunity to express an opinion on the work of the SubCommission,
I. Decides to express its appreciation for the work
which the Sub-Commission on Freedom of Information and of the Press has accomplished;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to convey its
thanks for the service which the Sub-Commission has
honourably rendered in discharging its duties.
403rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1952.

633 (VII). Information facilities in underdeveloped regions of the world
The General Assembly,
C onsidenng that it is essential for the proper development of public opinion ii:t ~nder-deyeloped co~ntries that independent domestic mfonnat1on enterpnses
should be given facilities and assistance in order that
they may be enabled to contribute to the spread of information, to the development of national culture and
to international understanding,
Convinced that the development of infdrmation
media contributes greatly to the economic and social
progress of peoples,
1

• See resolution SP (I).
1 See document A/AC.42/7. anaa A.

• See doclllMDt E/2MS,
