TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 6 AUGUST1969

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

Page
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1494)

.,............................

1

Statement by the President . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . , . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 24 July 1969 from the representatives of Chile, Colombia, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan, the United Arab Republic, Turkey,
Yugoslavia and Zambia addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9359) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

spv.1494

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND NINETY-FOURTH

Held in New York on Wednesday,
President: Mr. Jaime DE PINIES (Spain).

MEETING

6 August 1969, at 3 p.m.

invite the representatives of Chile and India to take places
at the Council table.

present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

At the invitation o,f the President, Mr. J. Piiiera (Chile)
and Mr. S. Sen (India) took places at the Council table.
5. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The Council will now continue its consideration of the question of
Namibia.

Provisional agenda (SIAgendall494)

6. Before calling on the first speaker on my list, I wish to
inform the Council that I have received a Ietter from the
representative of Equatorial Guinea, requesting that his
country’s name be added to the list of signatories of the
letter contained in document S/9372.

1, Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 24 July 1969 from the representatives of
Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria,
Pakistan, the United Arab Republic, Turkey, Yugoslavia
and Zambia addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9359).

7. The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Finland, on whom I now call.
8. Mr. PASTINEN (Finland): Permit me, Mr. President, to
extend to you the congratulations of the Finnish delegation, and the pledge of its full co-operation, on your
assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council for
the month of August.

Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT (translated porn Spanish): Before we
begin our work, I should like, personally-and I think I am
also interpreting the feeling of all the members of the
Council-to welcome the Secretary-General, who is now
completely restored to health. With his presence at the
Council’s meetings, we should all benefit by his proven
competence and recognized experience.

9. I should also like to ask the representative of Senegal to
be good enough to convey the expressions of our gratitude
and esteem to Axis Excellency Ambassador Boye for his
skilful leadership of the Council during the month of July.

2. I welcome the Secretary-General. ’

10. Before beginning my statement, Mr. President, allow
me to associate my delegation with the sentiments of
satisfaction you were good enough to express on behalf of
the Council in welcoming the Secretary-General back to our
midst.

3. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Mr. President, I thank
YOU and the members of the Security Council for those
very kind words. I am very gIad’ indeed to be able to
participate in the deliberations of this Council under your
distinguished leadership. Again, thank you, Mr. President.

11. Once again the situation in Namibia has caused the
representatives of eleven States, members of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, to call for an urgent meeting
of the Security Council. The gravity with which the
Afro-Asian Member States of this Organization view the
situation is underlined in the letter [S/9372/ which fifty
representatives of those States have addressed to the
President of the Security Council in support of the request
for a meeting.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia
Letter dated 24 July 1669 from the representatives of
Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan, the United Arab Reppblic, Turkey, Yugoslavia and
Zambia addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/6359)

“12. Since the adoption by the Security Council of the
resolution 264(1969)
of 20 March, the situation in
Namibia has continued to deteriorate. The Government of
South Africa has paid no attention to the resolution. It not
only has ignored the requests of the Council but has chosen
to challenge the very right of the Council to make them.

4. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): In accordance with the previous decision of the Council, I shall now
1

Far from heeding the call to withdraw from the Territory,
the South African Government has on the contrary
tightened its hold over Namibia and its inhabitants.
Disregarding the demands of the Council, it has now
promulgated the so-called South West Africa Affairs Act,
By submitting eight Namibians to trial under the so-called
suppression of Terrorism Act the South African authorities
have committed yet another act in defiance of the
authority of the United Nations. It is right, therefore, that
the Security Council should consider the situation in the
light of its earlier decision.

undivided authority of the Council. Failure to achieve this
would not advance the cause of the people of Namibia, to
which the Security Council has committed itself by its
decision of 20 March.
18. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I wish to
thank the representative of Finland for the kind words he
has addressed to me.
19. Mr. M’BENGUE (Senegal) (translated from French):
Mr. President, before I turn tp the subject before us, allow
me very simply but very sincerely to thank the previous
speakers for their extremely kind words about Ambassador
Boye. I shall not fail, on his return, to convey to him the
tribute they have so kindly paid him.

13. In the opinion of my delegation the main significance
of the decision taken on 20 March 1969 by the Security
Council was its recognition of the earlier decision of the
General Assembly to terminate the Mandate. By doing that,
the Security Council reaffirmed the assumption by the
United Nations of direct responsibility over Namibia and its
inhabitants until the Territory’s independence. In the words
used by the Finnish representative on that occasion, the
decision meant that for the first time the authority and the
power of the Security Council were fully engage’d in the
task of translating that decision into reality.

20. Mr. President, my delegation is happy to offer you its
congratulations on your assumption of the office of
President of the Security Council for this month. Knowing
your unfailing cdurtesy, your affability and your sense of
responsibility, we know in advance that you will preside
over our debates in a fair and impartial manner.

lt. The wide agreement reached on the decision to
terminate the Mandate did not extend to the means by
which that goal was to be reached. The resolution of the
Security Council did not spell out the measures by which it
would be carried out. It did not commit the Council to any
particular course of action. In fact, the long and delicate
negotiations which preceded the adoption of the resolution
showed the limits within which the Council had to act if it
wished to preserve the wide measure of agreement then
achieved.

21. I would also be failing in my duty if I did not add that
my delegation shares the satisfaction which you have
expressed so well, Mr. President, and which all the members
of the Council feel at seeing the Secretary-General among
us once again. We warmly wish him a complete recovery.
22. As certain delegations have pointed out, in the space
of less than four months the Council is again called upon to
consider the question Namibia, at the request of the
delegations of the eleven States constituting the United
Nations Council for Namibia, because of the gravity of the
situation prevailing in that country.

1.5. Disagreement on the question of how the United
Nations could best discharge its responsibility towards
Namibia has led the General Assembly to a situation where
it seems to have exhausted the means at its disposal to
influence the course of events in the Territory. The
Security Council now faces the same problem. It is obvious
that agreement cannot be reached on a proposal to resort to
enforcement action under Chapter VII of the Charter.
Significantly, proposals to that effect would not be likely
to command the support of the great Powers permanent
members of the Security Council, which is vital in view of
their special responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. Much less could we hope to
implement effectively that kind of decision without the
active support of the great Powers, for they alone have the
means for carrying it to a successful conclusion.

23. It will be recalled that, last March, the Council
adopted resolution 264 (1969), which in clear terms called
on the Government of South Africa immediately to
withdraw its administration from the Territory of Namibia,
because the Council judged that the occupation of Namibia
by the Pretoria authorities was illegal and detrimental to
the interests of the population of the Territory and those of
the international community. For our part, we had hoped
that the Pretoria authorities would have complied with the
provisions of the Security Council resolution. Unfortunately, as in the past and with the same arrogance, they
have continued to defy the resolutions of the Council, as
can be seen from the statements made by the Prime
Minister of South Africa and his Minister for Foreign
Affairs immediately after the adoption of resolution
264 (1969).

16. It is the opinion of my delegation that in this situation
the Security Council can best discharge its responsibilities
by proceeding on the basis of the wide agreement which has
existed in the Council on this issue. Should it appear that
this basic agreement cannot, at this time, be translated into
a formal resolution, it might well be worth exploring
whether other procedures would better serve our common
purpose. This would accord with the established practice of
the Security Council of seeking agreement through consultation and compromise.

24. After all, the debates held for many years on the
subject of Namibia, we would be inclined to think that
everything has been said about this problem and to note
with regret the helplessness of the international community
and, of course, the arrogance of the Pretoria authorities.
25. Despite all the resolutions adopted by both the
General Assembly and the Security Council, as everybody
knows, South Africa has, purely and simply, annexed the
Territory of Namibia.

17. Whatever course is chosen by the Security Council, to
be effective it must have behind it the full weight of the
2

26, As we have already stated here, we should have liked
to see the great Powers exert pressure on the Government
of South Africa to make it respect the most elementary
rules of international morality. It seems, however, that,
South Africa is unwilling to listen to reason and rejects all
the advlce offered t0 it.
27, Thus, as you see, every alley seemsto have been
explored.It only remainsfor us to askthe Security Council
and particularly its permanent members to assumethe
responsibilities
conferred upon them by the Charter, by
respondingfirmly to Pretoria’s refusal to comply with the
decisions
of the COUnCil.

28. In fact, we find that, sincethe adoption of resolution
264(1969), the situation in Namibia has grown steadily
worse.As everybody knows, the South African Govemmerit has refused to comply with the provisions of that
resolution.It is pursuingits atrocious policy of apart/zeidin
Namibiaand strictly enforcing there inhuman lawssuch as
the Terrorism Act and Suppressionof CommunismAct.
The mostseriousendemicdiseases
are still ripe amongthe
indigenouspopulation. Immoral practicesare still imposed
in the prisonsand family units are split up, with headsof
familiesseparatedfrom their wivesand‘children.
29. The Council for Namibia hasjust recently noted with
profound concern the arbitrary trial currently being conducted againsteight Namibiansunder the Terrorism Act.
SouthAfrica, whoseweal&h-it shouldbe remembered-was
acquiredby the sweat of the indigenouspopulation, really
wants,if not to exterminate, at least to eliminatea large
part of a whole race after reducingit to the statusof beasts
of burden.
30. My delegationfelt it necessaryto mention thesefew
facts, so that the international community may at last
realize the seriousnessof the situation in that part of
Africa.
31. Wesay all this without hatred. Weshouldhaveliked to
seea multiracial society living there in perfect harmony,
basedon respect for human dignity, since we feel that a
race-orientedsociety should not exist becauseit iscontrary
to our universalistoutlook.
32. Unfortunately, the attitude of the Government of
Pretoriais one of defiance of the United Nations, which it
regardswith the greatestcontempt. South Africa is deliberately and systematically violating the principies of the
United NationsCharter. The international community must
clearly state whether this so-calledrepublic still meetsthe
iequirementsfor belongingto the United Nationsfamily.
33. The fearsunequivocally expressedin the reportsof the
Council for Namibia, pointing out the great danger that
violenceand racial warfare may be unleashedif the South
African Government persistsin its refusal to comply with
the decisionsof the United Nations, should make all those
who are not sufficiently aware of the gravity of the
situationreflect, while there is still time.
34. After all, what is involved? Simply the full and
faithful application of the United Nations Charter and
respectfor the will of Member States.

35. My delegationis convinced that the only way ok
dealing with this problem is to apply the provisions of
ChapterVII of the United NationsCharter.That is the only
courseleft to the international community wherebyit can
at last make South Africa comply with the decisionstaken
on Namibia by the General Assemblyand the Security
Council. By following this course, we shallsaveinternational peaceand security in that troubledpart of the world
and at the sametime, enablemillionsof humanbeingsto
regaintheir freedomasmen,
36. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Spanish):I thank
the representativeof Senegalfor the kind words he has
addressed
to me.
37. Mr. ZAKHAROV (Union of Soviet Socialist Rehublies) (translatedfrom Russian):Mr, President,first of all I
shouldlike to join previousspeakers
in expressingappreciation to AmbassadorBoye, whosegreatexperience,energy
and tact were sonotably displayedwhile heheld the office
of Presidentof the Security Council.
38. Allow me, Mr. President,to welcomeyou to that
office andwishyou success
in your duties.
39. I shouldalsolike to say that we are very glad to see
our distinguished
Secretary-General,
U Thant, fully restored
to health andwith usagain,
40. Mr, President,the Security Council hason its agenda
the questionof the freedomof the peopleof Namibia.The
peopleof Namibia,like someother African peoples,are still
under the yoke of colonialslavery and are waginga heroic
strugglefor their liberation. The Soviet Union fully and
completely supports.this just struggle. Its position is
motivated by the very nature of the Leninistforeign policy
of the Soviet State, one of whosebasicaimsis to give all
possiblesupport and assistance
to the national liberation
movement.
41. Speakingat the International Congress
of Communist
Workers’Partiesin Moscow on 7 June 1969,the SecretaryGeneralof the CentralCommitteeof the CommunistParty
of the Soviet Union, Mr, Brezhnev,stated:
“The Soviet Union and the other socialistcountries
take active positions on the broad and constantly
troubled front of the national liberation movementand
give firm political support and moral and material
assistance
to the peoplesfighting for their liberation”.
42. In accordancewith this position, the Soviet Union
strongly advocatesthe immediategrantingof independence
to the people of Namibia, as requestedin the United
Nations Declaration on the Granting of Independenceto
CplonialCountriesandPeoples.
43. As everybody knows, the Security Council in its
resolution 264 (1969) of 20 March confirmed the resolution of the General Assembly[2145(Xx1)] terminating
South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia and called on the
Government of South Africa immediatelyto withdraw its
administration from that Territory, That resolution described’the actions of the Government of South Africa

“officializc” the transformation of the Territory of N+
mibia, which ~OCSnot belong to it, into a fifth province
of
the Republic.

designed to destroy the national unity and territorial
integrity of Namibia through the establishment of so-called
Bantustans as contrary to the provisions of the United
Nations Charter, The Security Council drew attention to
the fact that the Government of South Africa had no right
to enact the “South West Africa Affairs Bill”.

50. The Namibiansare naturally unwilling to acceptthe
usurpation of their rights to independence,andareprotest.
ing againstthe dismcmbcrmentof the country, the abcli.
tion of its territorial integrity and the banishmentof the
indigenous African population from the fertile landsto
areasso barren as to be PrNtiCdly
uninhabitable,The
people of Namibiaarc raising their voicesin protestagainst

44. The Security Council also decided that, in the event of
failure on the part of the Government of South Africa to
comply with the provisions of the resolution, the Security
Council would meet immediately to determine upon
necessary steps or measures, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.

all these manifestali0IlS

of thC sllaInCfU1 policy of ap&Ie$,

51. The South African racistsare undertakingnewrepres.
sions in an attempt to break the will of the Namibiaa

45. Over four months have passed since the adoption of
that resolution by the Security Council. Yet it must be
noted that the Government of South Africa is ignoring that
decision of the Council. It continues to occupy Namibia
and is taking measures for its complete annexation and
virtual transformation of Namibia into one of the provinces
of South Africa.

people, to stop their struggle for freedom mcl independence
and to prevent them from exercising their inalienable ri&t

to self-determination.
52. In Namibia, X+ CM be seen from United Nations
documents,arrests,detentions and trials of the indigenous
population are constantly taking place. The Pretoria author.
ities are trying the Namibianpatriots for refusingto bowto
the inhuman system of apartheid and opposingcolonial
oppression. The Inost recent of such prosecutions was the
so-called“trial” of eight Namibiansby the Supreme
Court
at Windhoek.

46. In considering the question of Namibia, no one can
claim that the situation is unclear or that further investigation is necessary. Everything is absolutely clear: South
Africa does not wish’ to leave Namibia and is disregarding
the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council.

53. The rcprcssivemeasuresof the South African author.
ities againstthe Namibiansare closely connectedwiththe
punitive operations cilrricd
out
by the racist-colonialist
bloc-the “unholy alliance”. South Africa is playingthe
leading role in this bloc, used by imperialismto stemthe
tide of the national liberation movement which is reaching
South Africa and to crush the national liberationand
democraticmovementin order to consolidateits positionin
the remaining colonies, regarding them as bridge-heads
againstthe indepcndcnt African States.The bloc of militant
racistsin South Africa thus constitutes a direct threatto
the independentdevelopmentof the Statesof Africa which
havestarted on the path to self-sufficiency and freedom.

47. A serious situation has arisen in Namibia as a result of
the unlawful occupation of that country by South Africa,
the continued pursuance by South African authorities of an
inhuman racist policy and the intensification of the
repressive measures against the population of Namibia,
aimed at crushing the national liberation movement there.
In a letter dated 1 August 1969 addressed to the President
of the Security Council [S/9372], a large group of African
and Asian States expressed serious concern about the
situation in Namibia and supported the appeal from the
eleven States which are members of the United Nations
Council for Namibia to the effect that the Security Council
should take urgent measures to examine the dangerous
situation in Namibia. The representatives of a number of
countries also referred to this in their statements.
48. The fact that the Government of South Africa is
continuing to consolidate its annexation of Namibia and to
strengthen its control over that Territory can be seen from
its enactment of the so-called Development of Self-Government for Native Nations in South West Africa Act, which
provides for the division of Namibia according to the
principles of apartheid and the establishment of Separate
“Bantustans” for the non-white population. Under this
racist law, the Government of South Africa is busy
establishingsuch “Bantustans” andis intensifying measures
to introduce racial segregation
in urban areasandelsewhere.
49. The promulgation on 1 April 1969 of the colonialist
and racist South WestAfrica Affairs Act, 1969, transferring
all administrative, legislativeand financial powersto South
Africa, is likewisea violation of Security Councilresolution
264 (1969). The Government of the Republic of South
Africa, disregardingthe resolutionsof the GeneralAssem.
bly and the Security Council, is trying by this meansto

54. The recent discussions
in the Security Councilonthe
question
of Southern Rhodesiaand of Portugal’sactsof
aggressionagainst Zambia have shown that the rt5gimesof
Portugal, South Africa and Southern Rhodesia,with the
support of a number of Powersand internationalmonop
olies, arc constantly committing
new crimes against the
AFricanpeoples.
55.

In the course

of the present

examination

of the

question of Namibia in the Security Council, Certain
representativesfrom Africa and Asia have pointedcutthat
the

settlement

of this question

will depend to a large e&It

on the position of the great Powers, the permanent
members of the Security Council. This is true. Tllc
aggressive expansionist
policy of the Republic of South
Africa towardsthe peoples of southern Africa andparticp

larly Namibia and South Africa’s stubborn oppositiea
to
the decisionsof the United Nations are the directresults
Of
the position taken on this question by certain greatWestern
Powers,including the permanent members of the Sec&’
Council.
4

56, The flow of hundreds of millions of pounds sterling,
dollars and marks as direct or other forms of investment in
South Africa is the material basis of the militant policy
pursued by the racist colonialist rCgime. It is sufficient to
recall that these investments in pounds sterling, dollars and
marks have reached the figure of $6,000 millions and are
still growing.

give the people of that country the opportunity to decide
their future as they see fit. The recent turn of events in
Namibia has confirmed the correctness and validity of the
Soviet Union’s position of principle on this matter.
61. The Soviet Union considers that the Security Council
must adopt effective measures to ensure that the people of
Namibia are granted independence; this would be th?
logical legal and political conclusion of the termination of
South Africa’s Mandate to administer Namibia.

57, The members of NATO are taking an active part in the
programme to expand the armed forces of South Africa.
They are providing it with warships, aircraft and armoured
vehicles and granting it licences for the production of
various types of military equipment. With their help, South
Africa has been able to construct new munitions factories.
The strengthening of co-operation between South Africa
and Western Germany, including co-operation in the production of the latest weapons, calls for particular vigilance.
This co-operation is all the more dangerous for the African
peoples because of the ideological similarity between West
German neo-nazism and the racist fascist policy of the
‘ruling circles in South Africa.

62. The USSR delegation will proceed on this assumption
in determining its attitude towards the proposals to be
submitted for the Council’s consideration.
63. The liberation of South Africa-one of the last areas of
colonial domination-is of great importance for the future
of Africa and the cause of peace. The struggle being waged
by the peoples of that area is dealing heavy blows at the
alliance of fascist and racist ragimes and foreshadows new
large-scale victories for the African revolution.

58. Who can believe that the Western Powers, with their
close ties with the Republic of South Africa, cannot exert
influence on it and in particular persuade it to settle the
question of Namibia.7 The self-evident conclusion is that
they are not even trying and that the policy and actions of
the Pretoria rdgime and its invariable disregard of the
decisions of the United Nations are the direct result of their
close co-operation with the regime of the Republic of
South Africa.

64. All men of goodwill, all. advocates of democracy are
in favour of the liquidation of the vestiges of colonialism
and the adoption of decisive international measures to
support the patriots in the last remaining colonies and all
oppressed peoples.
65. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I particularly wish to thank the representative of the Soviet Union
for the kind words he has addressed to me.

59. So far as the Soviet Union is concerned, today the
Soviet delegation would like once again to confirm its full
support for the struggle of the people of Namibia for their
liberation.

66. I have no more speakers on my list. Does any member
of the Security Council wish to speak?
67. As no other representative has asked to speak, I wish
to inform the members of the Council that, following
informal consultations, it appears that all members agree
that the Council should meet to continue the debate on
Friday, 8 August, at 10.30 a.m.

60. During the discussions of the question of Namibia,
both in the Security Council and at the sessions of the
United Nations Gene& Assembly, the Soviet delegation set
forth in detail a programme of measures to accelerate the
attainment of the final objectives-to liberate Namibia and

The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

5
