63

.Ret!iolutione adopted without reference to a Commlttee

Question considered hy the second emergency special session of the General Assembly :from
4 to 10 Novemher 1956 (item 67)
Resolution 1127 (XI)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1004 (ES-II) of 4 Novetnber 1956 and 1005 (ES-II), 1006 (ES-II) and 1007
(ES-II) of 9 Nove1nber 1956, adopted at the second
emergency special session,
Noting that the Secretary-General has been requested to report to the General Assembly on compliance with resolutions 1004 (ES-II) and 1005 (ES·II),
Having r'eceived information that the Soviet army
of occupation in Hungary is forcibly deporting Hungarian men, women and children from their homes ta
places outside Hungary,
Recalling the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular the principle embodied in Article
2, paragraph 4, the obligations assumed by ail Member
States under Articles 55 and 56 of the Charter, the
principles of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, in particular
article II ( c) and ( e), to which Hungary and the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics are parties, and
the Treaty of peace with Hungary, in particular the
provisions of article 2,
1. Considers that the information received adds
urgency to the necessity of prompt compliance with
resolutions 1004 (ES-II) and 1005 (ES-II) of 4 and
9 November 1956 calling for the prompt withdrawal
of Soviet forces from Hungary and for the dispatch
of observers to Hungary by the Secretary-General;
2. Urges the Government of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the Hungarian authorities to
take immediafo steps to cease the deportation of Hungarian citizens and to return promptly to their homes
those who have been deported from Hungarian territory;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly informed as to compliance with this as
well as the above-mentioned resolutions, so that the
Assembly may be in a position to consider such further
action as it may deem necessary.
581th plenary meeting,
21 November 1956.

Resolution 1128 (XI)
The General Assembly,
N oting that certain Member States ~ave affirmed
that Hungarian nationals have been forc1bly deported
from their country,
N oting further that certain other Member St:3-tes
have categorically affirmed that no such deportahons
have taken place,
Recalling paragraph S of its resolution 1004 (ES-II)
of 4 November 19561 in which the Government of
Hungary is asked to permit observers designated by
the Secretary-General to enter the territory of Hungary, to travel :fteely therein, and to report their
findings to the Secretary-General,
N oting that the Secretary-General, is pursuing his
efforts in this regard with the Hunganan Government,

N oting further that the Secretary-General bas urged
Hungary as a Member of the United Nations to cooperate with the great majority in the clarification of
the situation,
1. Urges Hungary to accede to the request made
by the Secretary-General witho.it prejudice to its
sovereignty;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly without delay.

587th ptenary meeting,
21 November 1956.

Resolution 1129 (XI)
The General Assembly,
Noting the grave situation described in the report
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to the Secretary-General in the interim
report of the Secretary-General21 on refugees from
Hungary,
Considering that the flow of refugees from Hµngary
continues at a high rate,
Recognizing the urgent need of these tens of thousands of refugees for care and resettlement,
1. Takes note wi-th appreciation of the action taken
by the Secretary-General to determine and help to meet
the need of the Hungarian refugees, and by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner: for Refagees
to assist these refugees and to bring about co-ordinated
action on their behalf by Governments, intergovernmental agencies and non-governmental organizations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to continue
their efforts ;
3. Urges Governments and non-governmental organizations to make contributions to the SecretaryGeneral to the United Nations High Commissioner
for Ref~gees or to other appropriate agencies for thF.
care and resettlement of Hungarian tefugees, and to
co-ordinate their aid programmes in consultation with
the Office of the High Commissioner;
4. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to make an
immediate appeal to both Governments and non-governmental organizations to meet the minimum present
needs as estimated in the report of the Office of the
United Nations High · Commissioner for Refugees to
the Secretary-General and authorizes them to make
subsequent appeals on the basis of plans and estimates
made by the High Commissioner with the concurrence
of his Executive Committee.
587th plenary meeting,
21 November 1956.

Resolution 1130 (XI)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1004 (ES-II) of 4 November 1956, 1005 (ES~II), 1006 (ES-II) and 1007 (ES01 Ibid., Anne~es, agenda item 67, documents A/3371 and
Add.1.

64,

General Allsem.bly-Eleventh Session

II) of 9 November 1956, and 1127 (XI) and 1128
(XI) of 21 November 1956 relating to the tragic events
in Hungary,

sions of the General Assernbly which refer to a withdrawal of troops or related f:olitical matters, and the
note of the Secretary-General 8 of 7 December 1956,

H a.ving received and noted the report of the Secretary-General22 that United Nations observers have not
been permitted to enter Hungary,

a reply to the latest appeal of the General Assembly for

Noting with deep concern that the Government of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has failed to comply with the provisions of the United Nations resolutions calling upon it to desist from its intervention in
the internai affairs of Hungary, to cease its deportations
of Hungarian citizens and to return promptly to their
homes those it has already deported, to withdraw its
armed forces from Hungary and to cease its repressîon
of the Hungarian people,
1. Reiterates its call upon the Government of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Hungarian
authorities to comply with the above resolutîons and
to permit United Nations observers to enter the territory of Hungary, to travel freely therein and to report
their findings to the Secretary-General ;

2. Requests the Government of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the Hungarian authorities to
communicate to the Secretary-General, not latei: than
7 December 1956, their consent to receive United
Nations observers;
3. Recommends that in the meantime the SecretaryGeneral arrange for the immediate dispatch to Hungary, and other countries as appropriate, of observers
named by him pursuant to paragraph 4 of General
Assembly resolution 1004 (ES-II) of 4 November
1956;
4. Requests the Governments of all Member States
to co-operate with the representatives named by the
Secretary-General by extending such assistance and
providing such facilities as may be necessary for the
effective discharge of their responsihilities.

N oting with grave concern that there has not been
the admission of United Nations .observers to Hungary,
as contained in its resolution 1130 (XI),

Considering that recent events have clearly demonstrated the will of the Hungarian people to recover
their liberty and independence,

N oting the overwhelming demand of the Hungarian
people for the cessation of intervention of foreign
armed forces and the withdrawal of foreign troops,
1. Declares that, by using its armed force against
the. Hungarian people, the Government of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics is violating the political
independence of Hungary;

2. Condemns the violation of the Charter of the
United Nations by the Government of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics in depriving Hungary of
its liberty and independence and the Hungarian people
of the exercise of their fundamental rights ;

3. Reiterates its call upon the Governnrent of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to desist forthwith
from any form of intervention in the internal affaîrs of
Hungary;
4; Calls upon the Government of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics to make immediate arrangements
for the withdrawal, under United Nations observation,
of its armed forces from Hungary and to permit the
re7establishment of the political independence of Hungary;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take any initiative that he deems helpful in relation to the Hungarian
problem, in conformity with the principles of the
Charter and the resolutions of the General Assembly.

608th plenary meeting,
4 December 1956.

Resolution 1131 (XI)
The General Assembly,

Deeply concerned over the tragic events in Hungary,
Recaliing those provisions of its resolutions 1004
(ES-II) of 4 November 1956, 1005 (ES-II) of 9
November 1956, 1127 (XI) of 21 November 1956 and
1130 (XI) of 4 December 1956, calling upon the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to
desist from its intervention in the interna! affairs of
Hungary, to withdraw its forces from Hungary and to
cease its repression of the Hungarîan people,

Recalling also those provisions of its resolutions 1904
(ES-II) and 1127 (XI), calling for permission for
United Nations observers to enter the territory of
Hungary, to travel freely therein and to report their
findings to the Secretary-General,
Having received the report of the Secretary-General22 of 30 November 1956, stating that no information
is available to the Secretary-Ge.neral concerning steps
taken in order to establish compliance with the deci-

618th plenary meeting,
12 December 1956.
Resolution 1132 (XI)

The General .Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the Hungarian
problem,

Reaffirming the objectives contained therein and the
continuing concern of the United Nations in ~his matter,
Having received the report of the Secretary-General of S January 1957,24

Desiring to ensure that the General Assembly and
all Member States shall be in possession of the fullest
and best available information regarding the situation
created by the intervention of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, through its use of armed force and
other means, in the internai affairs of Hungary, as
well as regarding developrnents relating to the recommendations of the General Assembly on this subject,
1. Estciblishes, for the above-mentioned purposes, a
Spedal Committee, composed of representatives of
Australia, Ceylon, Denmark, Tunisia and Uruguay, to
111

11

Ibid., document A/3403.

14

Ibid., document A/3435.
lbid., document A/3485.
