S/2021/953

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 November 2021
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
during the period from 19 June 2021 to 25 October 2021
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides a comprehensive assessment of the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) since my previous report, dated 13 July
2021 (S/2021/650), including on the provisions of resolution 2591 (2021).
Outstanding obligations remain for both parties under resolution 1701 (2006). There
was no progress towards a permanent ceasefire between Lebanon and Israel.

II. Implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
A.

Situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon
2.
Heightened tensions persisted in the area of operations of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), in particular along the Blue Line.
3.
On 20 July, UNIFIL detected two rockets launched from north-west of Qulay‘ah
(Sector West) towards Israel, followed by seven 155 millimetre (mm) artillery rounds
fired from south of the Blue Line towards an area north-east of Naqurah (Sector West).
Shortly thereafter, the Israel Defense Forces confirmed to UNIFIL that two rockets
had been launched from Lebanon, one of which had been intercepted by the Iron
Dome air defence system, while the second fell in an open area inside Israel, and that
the Israel Defense Forces responded with artillery fire towards Lebanon. Later the
same day, UNIFIL, with the Lebanese Armed Forces, visited the suspected launch site
north-west of Qulay‘ah, where the Lebanese Armed Forces showed UNIFIL one intact
rocket.
4.
On 4 August, UNIFIL detected two rockets launched from Jarmaq (north of the
UNIFIL area of operations) towards Israel. Shortly thereafter, the Israel Defense
Forces confirmed to UNIFIL that three rockets had been fired from Lebanon, with
two of them impacting close to the Qiryat Shemona shopping centre in Israel, and that
the Israel Defense Forces responded with artillery fire towards several areas in
Lebanon. UNIFIL observed approximately 80 artillery shells impa cting close to
Sarda, Khiyam, Shab‘a (all Sector East) and Naqurah, including the Wadi Hamul area.

21-16822 (E)

261121

*2116822*

S/2021/953

5.
Early on 5 August, UNIFIL personnel in Marjayoun (Sector East) heard two
explosions. Shortly thereafter, the Israel Defense Forces confirmed to UNIFIL tha t it
had conducted air strikes targeting three areas in South Lebanon in the vicinity of the
Palestine refugee camp of Rashidiye, south of Tyre (Sector West), Ibil al -Saqi (Sector
East) and Mahmudiyah (outside the UNIFIL area of operations). The following day,
the Lebanese Armed Forces escorted UNIFIL to the impact sites close to Rashidiye
and Ibil al-Saqi, where UNIFIL observed the impact craters.
6.
On 6 August, UNIFIL detected rockets fired from Hasbaya (north of the UNIFIL
area of operations) towards the Israeli-occupied Golan. Shortly thereafter, the Israel
Defense Forces informed UNIFIL that 19 rockets had been fired from Lebanon
towards Israel, of which 10 were intercepted by the Iron Dome, 6 fell in open areas
in Israel and 3 fell in Lebanon, and that the Israel Defense Forces had responded with
artillery fire towards several areas in Lebanon. UNIFIL detected approximately 55
artillery shells fired from south of the Blue Line, impacting close to Kfar Shuba and
Bastrah (Sector East), causing a bushfire. UNIFIL detected Israeli fighter aircraft in
Lebanese airspace around that time. As the shelling was ongoing, Hizbullah issued a
statement claiming responsibility for the rocket fire, stating, “in response to the Israeli
airstrikes against open Lebanese lands in Jarmaq and Shawakir on 5 August,” “the
Islamic Resistance bombed open areas in Israeli-occupied territories surrounding the
Israeli occupied military sites in the Shab‘a Farms area, using dozens of 122 mm
missiles”. Subsequently, the Lebanese Armed Forces informed UNIFIL that four
individuals, who they alleged were members of Hizbullah, had been arrested in
Hasbaya and that the Lebanese Armed Forces had found a multi-barrel rocket
launcher used during the incident. Later the same day, Hizbullah issu ed a second
statement affirming that “the resistance fighters had been intercepted by a number of
citizens”. The Commander of the Lebanese Armed Forces subsequently informed the
United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon that the four suspects had been
released pending trial, following a decision by the Lebanese State General Prosecutor.
7.
In identical letters dated 6 August addressed to the President of the Security
Council and to me (S/2021/710), the Permanent Representative of Israel asserted that
“Israel holds the Government of Lebanon responsible for any action originating from
within its territory, regardless of the affiliation of the individuals or the terrorist group
that carried out the attacks”. The letter further stated that “it is clear that Hezbollah
and other terrorist organizations are trying to distract from their active role in bringing
Lebanon to its current state of crisis by attacking Israeli civilians” . In identical letters
dated 6 August addressed to the President of the Security Council and to me
(A/75/988-S/2021/711) regarding the Israel Defense Forces’ artillery fire on 4 August
and airstrikes on 5 August, the Permanent Representative of Lebanon conveyed her
Government’s condemnation of “hostile acts and clear violations of Lebanese
sovereignty and of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)”. In a letter dated
12 August addressed to the President of the Security Council and to me ( S/2021/725),
the Permanent Representative of Israel expressed “extreme concern regarding the
manner in which Lebanese authorities handled the attacks”, “particularly the
immediate release by the Government of Lebanon of the four Hezbollah terrorists
who perpetrated the rocket attacks”.
8.
Throughout these incidents, UNIFIL was in continuous contact with the
Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense Forces to clarify the situation,
facilitate a coordinated operational response and prevent further escalation. The
parties worked closely with UNIFIL to contain the situation. UNIFIL has launched
technical investigations into the incidents of 20 July and those of 4, 5 and 6 August.
In a statement on 8 August, I expressed “deep concern about the recent escalation
between Lebanon and Israel across the Blue Line, including rocket fire into Israel and
return air strikes and artillery fire into Lebanon”.
2/19

21-16822

S/2021/953

9.
During the reporting period, UNIFIL continued to observe illumination rounds
fired by the Israel Defense Forces in response to what the latter asserted were
suspicious activities. On seven occasions, illumination rounds impacted north of the
Blue Line close to Yarun, Marun al-Ra’s and Majidiye (all Sector West) and Sarda,
and, on three occasions, close to Ghajar (Sector East). On 10 July, the Israel Defense
Forces reported on social media that it had thwarted the “largest smuggling attempt
in the last few years” in the area of Ghajar, during which it had seized 43 handguns.
Weapon pointing across the Blue Line also continued, requiring UNIFIL to interpose
between the parties on 21 July in Mays al-Jabal and on 21 June and 13 August in
Udaysah (Sector East). On 13 September and 24 October, UNIFIL observed an Israel
Defense Forces soldier throwing a flash grenade towards civilians approaching the
Blue Line in the vicinity of Hula (Sector East). UNIFIL also observed the Israel
Defense Forces firing in the air close to Hula, Blida and Mays al-Jabal (all Sector
East), seemingly to deter civilians from approaching the Blue Line.
10. The Israel Defense Forces continued to enter Lebanese airspace in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006) and of Lebanese sovereignty. From 19 June to 25 October,
UNIFIL recorded 286 airspace violations, totalling 377 hours and 39 minutes in
overflight time. Unmanned aerial vehicles accounted for approximately 75 per cent
of the violations. The remaining airspace violations involved fighter aircraft or
unidentified aircraft. In two separate instances, on 16 July and 30 September, the
Israel Defense Forces informed UNIFIL that one of its unmanned aerial vehicles had
crashed in Lebanon. The Lebanese Armed Forces repeatedly denied UNIFIL requests
to access the suspected crash site from 30 September. The 16 July crash site remains
undetermined. On 12 August, the Israel Defence Forces informed UNIFIL that it had
shot down a drone, which it claimed belonged to Hizbullah, close to Shetula, in Israel,
on 11 August. UNIFIL is following up with the parties regarding the three incidents.
11. From 19 June to 25 October, UNIFIL recorded 318 ground violations by
Lebanese civilians crossing south of the Blue Line, including 2 37 violations by
shepherds and farmers, mainly in the Shab‘a Farms area, and 45 violations by
civilians on their way to the Shu‘ayb well near Blida. On 23 July, UNIFIL observed
five individuals equipped with night vision equipment crossing south of the Blu e Line
near Marun al-Ra’s, climbing over the Israeli technical fence, then returning north of
the Blue Line minutes later. UNIFIL also recorded Israel Defense Forces soldiers
crossing north of the Blue Line close to Kfar Shuba (Sector East) on 16 September
while chasing livestock that had crossed south of the Blue Line. From 9 October,
following a request by the Lebanese Armed Forces and in coordination with the Israel
Defense Forces, UNIFIL deployed to Blida and, for the first time, to Mays al -Jabal
and Aytarun (Sector West) to facilitate the temporary crossing of the Blue Line of
Lebanese farmers for harvest purposes. On 11 October, UNIFIL observed seven
unarmed Lebanese Armed Forces soldiers crossing the Blue Line in connection with
the olive harvest in Blida.
12. On 22 July, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNIFIL that it had apprehended
two Turkish citizens who had crossed south of the Blue Line in the vicinity of Yarun.
On 17 September, the International Committee of the Red Cross, in coordination wit h
UNIFIL, facilitated the return of a Lebanese individual who had crossed into Israel
the previous day. On 23 September, the Lebanese Armed Forces informed UNIFIL
that it had prevented two Sudanese citizens from crossing south of the Blue Line close
to Marun al-Ra’s. On 1 October, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNIFIL that it
had apprehended a Lebanese shepherd who had crossed south of the Blue Line close
to Kfar Shuba. The shepherd was returned to Lebanon later that day in coordination
with UNIFIL.
13. The occupation of northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line
by the Israel Defense Forces continued. While the Government of Lebanon has
21-16822

3/19

S/2021/953

welcomed the UNIFIL proposal of 2011 for the facilitation of the withdrawal of the
Israel Defense Forces from the occupied area, the Government of Israel has yet to
respond.
14. To assist keeping the area between the Blue Line and the Litani River free of
unauthorized armed personnel, assets and weapons, UNIFIL, in close coordination
with the Lebanese Armed Forces, maintained 8 permanent and an average of 122
temporary checkpoints and conducted 325 counter-rocket-launching operations on
average each month. UNIFIL observed unauthorized weapons in the area of
operations on 264 occasions. All but the followin g four incidents involved hunting
weapons. On 24 June, a UNIFIL patrol in close coordination with the Lebanese Armed
Forces observed two individuals on a road in Siddiqin (Sector West), one of whom
carried an assault rifle. On 14 July, UNIFIL observed two individuals on a scooter in
the vicinity of Kafr Kila (Sector East), one of whom fired two shots from a pistol
towards the Blue Line. On 22 July, UNIFIL observed three individuals armed with
assault rifles near the Blue Line in the vicinity of Marun al-Ra’s. The individuals fired
54 shots in a southerly direction. In response, UNIFIL deployed a quick reaction team
to the location; no further armed activity was observed. On 24 August, UNIFIL
observed three individuals, each carrying an automatic rifle, in th e vicinity of Burj
Qallawiyah (Sector West). As one of the individuals left the area, the remaining two
fired long bursts into the ground. UNIFIL informed the Lebanese Armed Forces of
each of the incidents.
15. Pursuant to resolution 2591 (2021), UNIFIL maintained its high operational
tempo and visible presence throughout the area of operations, conducting on average
14,345 monthly military operational activities, including 6,273 patrols. UNIFIL
vehicular, foot and air patrols maintained an operational footprint in municipalities
and villages in the area of operations. Air reconnaissance patrols continued over areas
to which ground patrols have limited access, including private property and land
contaminated by explosive remnants of war or anti-personnel mines, and wadis.
Community engagement walks remain suspended owing to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19). UNIFIL conducted a monthly average of 160 trainings for land forces
with the Lebanese Armed Forces. Due to Lebanese Armed Forces resource
constraints, the number of UNIFIL operations conducted in close coordination with
the Lebanese Armed Forces declined to an average of 14.7 per cent, compared with a
16 per cent average during the previous reporting period. UNIFIL consequently
increased the number of its independent operational activities.
16. UNIFIL has yet to gain full access to several locations of interest, including
some Green without Borders sites. On 5 October, UNIFIL sent a letter to the Leba nese
Armed Forces requesting access to a number of these sites. Meanwhile, UNIFIL has
continued to monitor the perimeter of the locations of interest, including through air
and foot patrols. UNIFIL observed works for the reconstruction of towers in the Gre en
without Borders sites in Ramiyah and Ayta al-Sha‘b (both Sector West) that had been
destroyed by the Israel Defense Forces on 25 August 2020, as detailed in paragraph 3
of my report dated 12 November 2020 (S/2020/1110). While the freedom of
movement of UNIFIL was respected in most cases, the mission did encounter some
restrictions to its movements (see annex I). The most serious such incidents occurred
on 30 July in Bint Jubayl (Sector West), when several individuals seized weapons and
ammunition from a UNIFIL patrol, and on 24 October, when a group of individuals
damaged two UNIFIL vehicles in the vicinity of Kunin (Sector West) and took several
items, while a peacekeeper sustained minor injuries. UNIFIL has requested the
Lebanese Armed Forces to recover the items and bring the perpetrators to justice.
17. The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force continued to carry out maritime interdiction
operations throughout the maritime area of operations, hailing 2,502 vessels .

4/19

21-16822

S/2021/953

Lebanese Armed Forces inspected and cleared all 335 such vessels that UNIFIL
referred to them for inspection.
18. UNIFIL and the Lebanese Navy continued preparatory steps for a partial transfer
of Maritime Task Force responsibilities, with UNIFIL conduct ing 537 training
sessions and exercises. UNIFIL and the Lebanese Navy jointly practiced common
operational standards for commanding, monitoring and hailing activities, including
21 advanced maritime interdiction operation integration trainings for a durati on of at
least 72 hours. The participation of Lebanese Navy ships fluctuated owing to resource
constraints. UNIFIL and the Lebanese Navy also conducted 21 search and rescue
exercises, in addition to nine exercises with Lebanese helicopter crews in deck landing and winching procedures. In-person training at the Jounieh Naval School
resumed fully at the beginning of July, respecting COVID-19 precautionary measures.
19. The Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL continued their engagement within the
framework of the strategic dialogue process. Construction works for the model
regiment headquarters at Sribbin (Sector West), initiated in March (see S/2021/650,
para. 22), continued, with the Lebanese Armed Forces contrib uting 4,000 litres of
diesel fuel to the construction company.
20. Pursuant to paragraph 11 of resolution 2591 (2021), UNIFIL established a
committee to discuss with the Lebanese Armed Forces its requ irements in terms of
fuel, food, medicine and logistical support for the Lebanese Armed Forces to maintain
critical operational capacity in the framework of joint activities with UNIFIL.
UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces are preparing an agreement provi ding for
the modalities and scope of the support, and a monitoring mechanism to ensure strict
compliance with the human rights due diligence policy. UNIFIL will draw on the
expertise of the United Nations country team to provide information sessions and
training to the Lebanese Armed Forces. A centralized delivery system is in place,
reflecting actual coordinated activities on a monthly basis, to ensure oversight and
scrutiny of the end-use of the assistance. As of the drafting of the present report,
UNIFIL had made a first delivery of medicines to the Lebanese Armed Forces.

B.

Security and liaison arrangements
21. UNIFIL convened tripartite meetings on 5 August and 7 October. Through this
forum and regular contact with both parties during moments of heightened tensions,
as mentioned above, the UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander urged
maximum restraint on both sides and explored preventative measures, including steps
to enhance coordinated responses to contain incidents and preserve or restore the
cessation of hostilities.
22. Following the progress in the Blue Line marking process made in December
2020 and June 2021 (see S/2021/650, para. 24), UNIFIL launched on 16 August the
second campaign of the Blue Line barrels maintenance project. As at 25 October, 64
barrels had been refurbished.
23. Despite the agreement of Israel to the proposal in 2008 for a UNIFIL liaison
office in Tel Aviv, the establishment of the office remains pending.
24. UNIFIL, through quick-impact projects, donations and outreach initiatives,
continued to assist local authorities, including through capacity -building for Civil
Defense personnel. UNIFIL also launched five quick-impact projects promoting food
production and access to clean water. Through civil-military cooperation initiatives,
the mission distributed protective and medical equipment to prevent the spread of
COVID-19 and enhanced capacities in alternative energy production and waste
treatment.

21-16822

5/19

S/2021/953

25. UNIFIL continued to support the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security, including through the training on gender
mainstreaming of 2,336 UNIFIL military and civilian personnel, including 129
women, during the reporting period.

C.

Disarming armed groups
26. No progress was achieved with respect to the disarmament of armed groups.
Hizbullah continued to acknowledge publicly that it maintains military capabilities.
The maintenance of arms outside the control of the State by Hizbullah and other
groups in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) continues to restrict the State’s ability
to exercise full sovereignty and authority over its territory.
27. On 7 August, Hizbullah Secretary-General Hassan Nasrallah stated, “since
2006, the resistance in Lebanon has grown in numbers, experience, quality, level of
trainings, its armament capabilities, its missile capabilities to the poin t of owning
large numbers of precision missiles that the enemy says transforms the threat into an
existential threat”. On 18 October, in the aftermath of the deadly clashes of
14 October in Beirut, he stated, “when I only talk about Hizbullah’s military
organization, only about trained, organized, armed and experienced Lebanese men, I
am talking about 100,000 fighters”.
28. The Lebanese Armed Forces and Internal Security Forces made at least five
terrorism-related arrests from 19 June to 25 October, including of suspected affiliates of
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Jabhat Fatah al-Sham (Jabhat al-Nusra).
29. In eastern and northern Lebanon, multiple personal disputes escalated into
shootings, resulting in 25 fatalities and 193 injuries. At least seven such disputes
involved the use of rocket-propelled grenades.
30. Violent incidents were reported in Palestine refugee camps across Lebanon. In
Beddawi camp, near Tripoli, north Lebanon, a Syrian woman and a 13 -year-old
Palestinian girl were killed on 3 and 17 July, respectively, following personal disputes
which escalated into shootings. In Ein el Hilweh, near Sidon, south Lebanon, one
person died on 27 August following armed clashes. On 19 September, seven people
were injured, including two civilians outside the camp in Sidon, and the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
schools were damaged following fighting between Fatah and Jund al-Sham armed
factions.
31. There was no progress in dismantling the military bases maintained by the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada.

D.

Arms embargo and border control
32. Allegations of arms transfers to non-State armed actors continued and remain
of serious concern. If confirmed, such transfers would constitute a violation of
resolution 1701 (2006) (see annex II). While taking allegations of arms transfers
seriously, the United Nations is not in a position to substantiate them independently.
33. In a letter to the President of the Security Council dated 22 July ( S/2021/712),
the Permanent Representative of Lebanon conveyed her Government’s condemnation
of “recent attacks and violations against Lebanon committed by Israel, as Syrian
military sites were targeted from Lebanese territories and airspace, affecting
Lebanese areas in Lehfed and Majdal and almost leading to loss of life” . In identical
letters to the President of the Security Council and to myself, dated 19 August

6/19

21-16822

S/2021/953

(A/75/1001-S/2021/743), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon conveyed that,
on 19 August, “Israeli warplanes began carrying out low-altitude flights over
Lebanon, in the course of which they blatantly fired missiles from within Lebanese
airspace at positions in Syria. That violation caused panic among Lebanese civilians,
and it posed a direct and serious threat to Lebanese civil traffic and the safety of civil
aviation, because the Israeli aircraft violated airspace adjacent to Beirut airport and
operated immediately next to the civil airway.”
34. Reports of Hizbullah’s military engagement in the Syrian Arab Republic
continued.
35. Hizbullah Secretary-General Hassan Nasrallah announced, on 19 August, that
the Islamic Republic of Iran would send at least four ships carrying diesel and
gasoline to alleviate fuel and power shortages in Lebanon. On 13 September, he
announced that “the fuel would be transferred from Baniyas”, in the Syrian Arab
Republic, “to Lebanon through land borders”. On 16 September, media reported the
arrival of the first convoy of trucks from the Syrian Arab Republic to Baalbek -Hirmil,
Lebanon, through an unofficial border crossing. In a media interview on
17 September, Prime Minister Mikati stated in response to a question on the arrival
of trucks carrying Iranian fuel into Lebanon facilitated by Hizbullah that he was “sad
because that [demonstrated] a lack of sovereignty of Lebanon”.
36. During anti-smuggling operations along the Lebanese border with the Syrian
Arab Republic, Lebanese security forces arrested 75 Lebanese, 35 Syrians and five
Palestinians. On 13 July, in Shadrah, north Lebanon, the Leb anese Armed Forces
arrested three individuals for smuggling 10 Syrian nationals into Lebanon. On
15 July, near Tabarja, Mount Lebanon, the Lebanese Armed Forces prevented the
attempted outbound movement by sea of 40 Lebanese, 32 Syrians and one Turkish
national.

E.

Landmines and cluster bombs
37. UNIFIL cleared 12,190 square metres of land in the UNIFIL area of operations,
finding and disposing of 1,612 anti-personnel mines. The United Nations Mine Action
Service conducted 70 quality assurance and quality control monitoring visits, three
accreditation events for UNIFIL demining contingents and four risk awareness
briefings to 19 UNIFIL military personnel.

F.

Delineation of borders
38. No progress was made towards the delineation or demarcation of the border
between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic. There was no progress in relation to
the issue of the Shabʻa Farms area. The Syrian Arab Republic and Israel have yet to
respond to the provisional definition of the Shabʻa Farms area proposed in my report
of 30 October 2007 on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2007/641,
annex).
39. No further rounds of negotiations were convened betw een Lebanon and Israel
to delineate their maritime boundary since the fifth meeting, held on 4 May (see
S/2021/650, para. 41).
40. In identical letters to the President of the Security Council and to myself dated
18 September (S/2021/812), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon stated that
“Israel has awarded contracts to Halliburton corporation to provide appraisal services
for the drilling of offshore gas and oil wells in the so-called Karish field, which is
located in the area of the disputed maritime boundary”, noting that her Government

21-16822

7/19

S/2021/953

“calls upon the Security Council to ensure that the drilling appraisal work does not
occur in the disputed area between Lebanon and Israel, in order to avoid any
encroachment on the rights and sovereignty of Lebanon”. In identical letters to the
President of the Security Council and to myself, dated 22 September ( S/2021/820),
the Permanent Representative of Lebanon conveyed that, “it is cause for concern that
Israel may depart from the negotiation track by drilling in disputed areas without
waiting for the outcome of negotiations, in clear violation of international norms” .

G.

Political and institutional stability
41. On 15 July, nearly nine months since his designation as Prime Minister, Saad
Hariri withdrew from the government formation process. President Aoun
subsequently convened binding parliamentary consultations, r esulting in the
designation of former Prime Minister Najib Mikati on 26 July. Mr. Mikati received
the support of 72 of the 118 Members of Parliament (10 of the 128 seats are vacant).
On 10 September, President Aoun and Prime Minister Mikati signed the decr ee
establishing a 24-member Government, including one woman.
42. On 20 September, Parliament voted 85 to 15, out of 100 present members, in
favour of granting confidence to the new “Together for Rescue” Government. On
22 September, the International Support Group for Lebanon issued a statement urging
“Lebanon’s leaders to move quickly to alleviate the burden of socioeconomic
hardship on the people of Lebanon and restore basic services” and “to prepare for fair
and transparent elections to take place on time in 2022”.
43. During the reporting period, Lebanon suffered worsening shortages of fuel and
electricity. State-provided electricity was reduced to one to two hours per day, with
nationwide blackouts on several occasions. With illicit market distortions a s well as
hoarding and smuggling of fuel, there were disruptions to essential services, including
hospitals and water distribution facilities, and lengthy queues at fuel stations. Owing
to insufficient foreign reserves, the Central Bank reduced subsidies o n fuel on
11 August. Fuel prices were raised several times, as import subsidies were phased out
completely by the end of September.
44. On 4 September, then-caretaker Deputy Prime Minister, Defense Minister and
acting Foreign Minister Zeina Akar led a Lebanese delegation to Damascus to request
Syrian assistance in transferring Egyptian gas and Jordanian electricity through
Syrian territory. In follow-up, representatives of Lebanon, Jordan, Egypt and the
Syrian Arab Republic met in Amman on 8 September and 6 October to agree on a
framework and timeline.
45. Protests and roadblocks continued across Lebanon during the reporting period.
On 26 June, five civilians and 10 Lebanese Armed Forces soldiers were injured in
clashes in Tripoli and Sidon. One person died and 25 were injured following clashes
between armed protestors and the Lebanese Armed Forces on 16 July, in Jabal
Muhsin, Tripoli. On 26 July, in Tripoli, a man fatally self-immolated.
46. Numerous altercations at fuel stations resulted in seven peopl e killed and nearly
100 injured. From 27 to 29 August, the Lebanese Armed Forces intervened when a
dispute at a fuel station escalated into clashes between residents of the Christian majority village of Maghdushah and the neighbouring Shiite-majority village of
Anqun in south Lebanon. On 15 August, near Akkar, north Lebanon, a reservoir
containing around 60,000 litres of fuel exploded following an altercation between
reservoir workers and local residents, killing 36 and injuring over 80 people. The
Higher Defense Council subsequently directed security forces to monitor commercial
fuel distribution.

8/19

21-16822

S/2021/953

47. On 4 August, France and the United Nations co-chaired a conference in support
of the population of Lebanon, at which international donors pledged $370 million to
fund urgent food security, water and sanitation, and health and education needs. In
the joint conclusions, conference participants stated that “structural economic and
financial assistance will require profound changes expected from Lebanon’s leaders”.
48. In follow-up to the 17 June ministerial conference to mobilize emergency
support for the Lebanese Armed Forces, the Special Coordinator for Lebanon
co-chaired with the Lebanese Armed Forces a meeting on 21 September to take stock
of contributions and call for increased and expedited assistance for the Lebanese
Armed Forces and other national security forces.
49. Following approval by Parliament on 30 June, the then-caretaker Government
announced on 9 September the launch of a ration card to be made available to some
505,000 vulnerable Lebanese households from October. Implementation of the
$556 million programme remains pending, with programmatic, financ ing and
operational details to be finalized.
50. On 23 August, the World Bank announced that an agreement had been reached
with the Lebanese authorities to disburse cash transfers under the Emergency Social
Safety Net in dollars. On 17 September, the Finance Ministry confirmed that Lebanon
received $1.139 billion from the International Monetary Fund’s special drawing rights
allocation.
51. According to the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia,
multidimensional poverty in Lebanon has nearly doubled, from 42 per cent in 2019
to 82 per cent in 2021. The multifaceted socioeconomic crisis, exacerbated by the
deepening fuel crisis, is having an adverse impact on all sectors, from health care, to
education, to food security, to water and sanitation, with a particular impact on women
and marginalized groups. Most hospitals are limiting admissions to life -threatening
conditions, while severe shortages in medical supplies, equipment and medications
persist. In July, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICE F) warned that up to 4
million people could lose access to water. According to the Lebanese Central
Administration of Statistics, the consumer price index rose from 251.50 in September
2020 to 613.96 in September 2021 (144 per cent), with the cost of food and
transportation quadrupling.
52. The parallel market exchange rate fluctuated significantly over the reporting
period, reaching 22,000 Lebanese pounds to the dollar, following Mr. Hariri’s
withdrawal from the government formation process on 15 July, and improving to
around 14,000 pounds to the dollar following the formation of the Mikati
Government. As at 25 October, the unofficial exchange rate was 20,500 Lebanese
pounds to the dollar, while the official government rate remained at 1,507.
53. On 7 July, Parliament adopted the public procurement law. With the suspension
of the banking secrecy law to expire in December (see S/2021/240, para. 44), the
Government of Lebanon signed a new contract with Alvarez and Marsal, on
17 September, for the forensic audit of the Central Bank.
54. The National Anti-Corruption Institution is still not operational, pending the
appointment of its commissioners. The National Commission for the Missing and
Forcibly Disappeared in Lebanon and the National Human Rights Commission,
including the Committee for the Prevention of Torture, remain inoperative, absent
budget allocations. The reporting period was also marked by the ongoing strike of the
Beirut Bar Association in protest at perceived interference in the work of the judiciary.
55. More than one year since the Beirut port explosion, the judicial investigation
continues, notwithstanding demands from political actors and legal challenges from
those called for questioning to have the lead investigative judge removed. The request
21-16822

9/19

S/2021/953

of Judge Bitar, submitted to Parliament on 2 July, to lift the immunity of members of
Parliament and former ministers was not granted. Parliamentary immunity was
subsequently lifted on 20 September, when Parliament granted confidence to the new
Government, until the start of Parliament’s regular session on 19 October. In
September and October, three sitting parliamentarians – all also former ministers –
and a fourth former minister filed motions demanding that the lead investigative judge
be removed from the case after having been summonsed for questioning. Two of the
motions were dismissed, with the other two pending a decision by the Court of
Cassation. Judge Bitar has issued arrest warrants for two of the four individuals for
failing to appear for questioning. The investigation was raised in a Cabinet session on
12 October, leading to an adjournment and suspension of Cabinet sessions since.
56. Several protests calling for accountability for the Beirut por t explosion led to
violent confrontations with security forces, including on 12 August, when two
journalists were reported to have been beaten by members of the parliamentary police
and unidentified men armed with batons.
57. On 14 October, Hizbullah, Amal and Marada Movement supporters protested
Judge Bitar’s handling of the Beirut port blast investigation, demanding his dismissal.
During the march towards the Justice Palace in Beirut, unidentified gunmen opened
fire on protesters in the Tayyunah area. Armed clashes, involving the use of automatic
weapons and rocket-propelled grenades, subsequently erupted between the
predominantly Shia protesters and affiliates of the majority-Christian adjacent
neighbourhood of Ayn al-Rummanah. Seven individuals were killed and
approximately 30 injured. The Lebanese Armed Forces, which deployed to prevent
further escalation, arrested 19 persons and opened an investigation. President Aoun,
Prime Minister Mikati, Hizbullah and Amal all subsequently called for calm, with the
President rejecting the use of arms and urging respect for the rule of law and its
institutions.
58. As at 25 October, there has still been no progress in the investigation into the
4 February 2021 killing of Lokman Slim.
59. In a statement following a meeting with the Special Coordinator on
22 September, President Aoun stressed that “the parliamentary elections will take
place on time on May 8 [2022] in a democratic and transparent climate so that
Lebanese voters at home and abroad can carry out their duty freely and responsibly.”
On 19 October, Parliament recommended 27 March as the date for the 2022
parliamentary elections. The United Nations, with the National Commission for
Lebanese Women and civil society, continued to roll out a framework of support f or
aspiring women candidates and to advocate for a gender quota in Lebanon’s electoral
system. Separately, a national-level dialogue process between women in political
parties, hosted by the United Nations, continued.
60. As at 30 September, 866,452 refugees and asylum seekers were registered with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Lebanon,
including 851,522 Syrian refugees and 14,930 refugees and asylum seekers of other
nationalities. The number of registered Syrian refugees continues to decrease owing to
small numbers of returns to the Syrian Arab Republic, resettlement to third countries,
deaths, and irregular and onward movements. With new registrations of Syrian refugees
by UNHCR suspended by the Government since 2015, the actual number of Syrians in
need of international protection in Lebanon is unknown. The Government of Lebanon
estimates that there are 1.5 million Syrian refugees in Lebanon.
61. As at 30 September, UNHCR is aware of 27 movements by sea from Leb anon,
involving 1,137 individuals, mostly Syrian nationals, in 2021, a significant increase
over previous years. From June to August, Cypriot authorities increasingly returned
the boats to Lebanon without allowing them ashore. The United Nations continues to
10/19

21-16822

S/2021/953

engage with the Cypriot and Lebanese authorities to ensure the protection and rescue
of people in distress at sea and respect for the principle of non -refoulement.
Meanwhile, deportations by Lebanese authorities of Syrians who entered or
re-entered Lebanon irregularly after 24 April 2019 continue, often without the
application of legal procedural safeguards.
62. With severe shortages of fuel and electricity in Palestine refugee camps,
UNRWA worked to secure water supply and provide additional cash assis tance.
However, as needs outstripped the Agency’s capacity, protests against the Agency
continued, including physical attacks on its staff and installations. In Nahr el -Bared
camp, near Tripoli, north Lebanon, on 19 September, UNRWA sustained serious
damage to its offices and vehicles from a crowd demanding increased assistance.
63. As at 25 October, Lebanon had recorded 637,817 cumulative cases of
COVID-19 and 8,453 associated deaths, while nearly 2 million individuals had been
partially or fully vaccinated. On 29 September, the Higher Defense Council extended
the state of general mobilization until the end of 2021. The intensive care unit
occupancy rate increased from 9 per cent in June to 37 per cent in September.
64. The United Nations, under the leadership of the Humanitarian Coordinator and
together with implementing partners, launched on 4 August an emergency response plan
for 12 months in the amount of $383 million to provide life-saving humanitarian
assistance to 1.1 million of the most vulnerable Lebanese and migrants. This
complements existing humanitarian programmes for Palestine and Syrian refugees, as
well as host communities. The Humanitarian Coordinator for Lebanon also announced a
one-off $6 million allocation from the Lebanon Humanitarian Fund to support critical
medical facilities affected by fuel shortages. This complements a $4 million allocation
from the Central Emergency Response Fund in support of water services across Lebanon.
65. As at 30 September, available funding to the Lebanon Reform, Recovery and
Reconstruction Framework stands at $32.8 million of the $426.3 million required (7.7
per cent).
66. As at 30 September, assistance to Lebanon reported by donors stood at
$1.66 billion, including $1.23 billion disbursed in 2021 and $430 million carried over
from 2020. Donors reported $534 million in outstanding commitments for 2021 and
$382 million in commitments for 2022 and beyond. The Lebanon Crisis Response
Plan for 2021 is 24 per cent funded, at $645.5 million, with United Nations en tities
and non-governmental organizations reporting $287.8 million in funds received in
2021 and $357.7 million carried over from 2020.
67. Owing to funding constraints, in 2021 the Special Tribunal for Lebanon will
only be able to continue the prosecution’s appeal proceedings against the acquittal of
Mr. Merhi and Mr. Oneissi in the main Ayyash et al. case, while proceedings in the
“connected cases” concerning the attacks against Mr. Hamade, Mr. Hawi and
Mr. El-Murr remain stayed by order of Trial Chamber II. For 2022, the budget of
$8.3 million approved by the Tribunal’s Management Committee will include funding
for the completion of the appeal, drawdown activities and the commencement of the
residual phase of the Special Tribunal once the appeal is compl eted.

III. Security and safety of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
68. The COVID-19 country-wide business contingency plan of Lebanon continued
to inform United Nations preparedness measures, in line with World Health
Organization guidelines, including quarantine and remote working arrangements, as
appropriate.
21-16822

11/19

S/2021/953

69. In accordance with the Action for Peacekeeping commitment to improve the
safety and security of peacekeepers, UNIFIL continuously reviewed its security plans
and risk prevention and mitigation measures in close coordination with the Lebanese
authorities. Strict security measures remained in place in the Arqub area (Sector East),
including the use of armed escorts for official movements by all United Nations
personnel. UNIFIL facilitated 24 missions to the Arqub area by members of the
United Nations country team. UNIFIL also completed the upgrading and enhancing
of protection infrastructure in 21 of its positions.
70. On 30 July, a UNIFIL peacekeeper was hospitalized with severe injuries
sustained during a demining activity in Mays al-Jabal. UNIFIL evacuated the patient
to Jordan for essential treatment on 18 August. The patient was repatriated on
23 September. On 20 July and 4 and 6 August, UNIFIL personnel were instructed to
go to the bunkers following reports of incoming artillery fire, in the context of the
incidents detailed in paragraphs 3, 4 and 6 of the present report.
71. In accordance with resolution 2589 (2021), UNIFIL continued to monitor
proceedings in Lebanese military courts against individuals susp ected of planning or
perpetrating serious attacks against peacekeepers. The United Nations has not been
informed of any criminal proceedings to bring to justice the perpetrators of the
incident of 4 August 2018 in the village of Majdal Zun (Sector West), i n which armed
individuals attacked a UNIFIL patrol, as described in my report dated 15 November
2018 (S/2018/1029).

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
72. As at 25 October, UNIFIL comprised 10,351 military personnel, including 678
women (6.5 per cent), from 46 troop-contributing countries; 240 international civilian
staff, including 91 women (37.92 per cent); and 555 national civilian staff, including
151 women (27.21 per cent). The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force comprised five
vessels, one helicopter and 683 of the Force’s military personnel, including 31 women
(4.5 per cent). In addition, 52 military observers, including 6 women (11.5 per cent),
from the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization serve with Observer Group
Lebanon, under the operational control of UNIFIL. The most senior military women
serve at the rank of Colonel; the most senior civilian woman serves at the D -2 level.
73. UNIFIL continued to collect verified data and produce analysis as part of the
mission’s Comprehensive Planning and Performance Assessment System.
74. In accordance with the implementation of the Action for Peacekeeping
commitments and resolution 2436 (2018), UNIFIL finalized the assessment of 19
subordinate military units and one ship for logistics, training and operational
preparedness on 30 June. Shortfalls identified within four military units, related to
logistics and information technology awareness, have been addressed. A second
assessment of 14 additional military units and two ships was completed on
30 September, with minor shortcomings identified within three military units related
to emergency stocks and engineering works. In October, the mission initiated the
assessment of 17 additional military units and the Maritime Task Force headquarters.
75. UNIFIL continued consultations with the parties on aspects of the
implementation of the assessment of the continued relevance of UNIFIL resources (see
S/2020/473), pursuant to resolution 2539 (2020). By 1 July, the mission had
implemented all staffing table adjustments in line with the approved mission budget
for 2021/22.

12/19

21-16822

S/2021/953

V. Conduct and discipline
76. Neither UNIFIL nor the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
Lebanon received any new allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse during the
reporting period. Both missions continued to implement activities related to
prevention, enforcement and remedial actions regarding misconduct, in particular
sexual exploitation and abuse, sexual harassment and fraud, taking into account the
increased risks of sexual harassment and domestic violence associated with the impact
of the economic crisis, and continued to raise public awareness. All personnel were
trained, and military commanders continued to receive briefings on their
accountability in respect of conduct and discipline matters.
77. The United Nations country team, with international and national
non-governmental organizations, supported the prevention of sexual exploitation and
abuse network of Lebanon through the development of inter-agency standard
operating procedures, an information-sharing protocol on allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse, awareness-raising materials and technical guidance
documents to strengthen prevention and response efforts, in addition to awarenessraising with frontline aid workers and promoting the integration of a prevention of
sexual exploitation and abuse approach to the COVID-19 response.

VI. Observations
78. While the formation of the new Government is a welcome step, I urge the new
Government to implement a tangible reform agenda that addresses the needs and
aspirations of the Lebanese people and that includes the timely holding of legislative
elections. The United Nations will work with the Government in that regard. The
acute impact of the country’s crisis on basic essential services, including health care,
food, water and electricity, for a growing majority of the population is deeply
concerning. I appeal to the Government to protect the country’s most vulnerable,
including women. Ensuring the full participation of women across all sectors of
Government and in the forthcoming elections will be important.
79. The polarization of political views with respect to the Beirut port explosion
investigation, as manifested in deadly clashes in Beirut on 14 October, is deeply
concerning. The unauthorized use of weapons outside of State authority is to be
condemned, as is political pressure on the judiciary. The country’s political leaders
are urged to enable the efficient functioning of the State’s legislative, executive and
judicial institutions without interference and with respect for the rule of law. I
commend the contribution of the Lebanese Armed Forces in restoring calm and the
critical role it plays in safeguarding the security and stability of Lebanon. I reiterate
my calls for the conduct of an impartial, thorough and transparent investigation into
the devastating port explosion. The Government must also follow through on
previously announced investigations into serious violations and abuses of human
rights, including in relation to the killing of Lokman Slim.
80. Acknowledging assurances from Lebanese authorities that elections will be held
on time in 2022, I underscore the need for the Government and Parliament to prioritize
the necessary technical, administrative and legislative preparations. Clarity on the
applicable electoral framework and specific measures, including quotas and other
temporary special measures, to fast-track the participation of women, youth and
persons with disabilities in the political process, are encouraged. I hope the upcoming
elections will thus offer an opportunity to increase women’s representation in the
country’s institutions, including in Parliament.

21-16822

13/19

S/2021/953

81. The rocket fire from Lebanon towards Israel and the response fire by the Israel
Defense Forces represent serious violations of resolution 1701 (2006). I am
particularly concerned about the airstrikes by the Israel Defense Forces and the
subsequent use of a multi-barrel rocket launcher by Hizbullah. This marked escalation
in offensive action poses significant risks to the cessation of hostilities and underlines
the urgent need for addressing the outstanding provisions of resolution 1701 (2006).
The possession of unauthorized weapons on these occasions are clear violations of
resolution 1701 (2006). I reiterate my appeal to all parties to honour their
commitments to fully implement resolution 1701 (2006), to cease these violations and
to respect the cessation of hostilities.
82. The importance of the UNIFIL liaison and coordination arrangements with the
Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense Forces was underlined with the
restoration of the cessation of hostilities following the abovementioned incidents. The
Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense Forces are strongly encouraged to
remain actively engaged with UNIFIL in this regard.
83. The continued violations of Lebanese airspace by Israeli aircraft, including
allegedly to carry out strikes inside the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as of lo w-flying
aircraft and unmanned aerial vehicles, remain of deep concern. The overflights
constitute violations of resolution 1701 (2006) and of Lebanese sovereignty and cause
distress to the Lebanese population. I reiterate my condemnation of all violations of
Lebanese sovereignty and call again on the Government of Israel to cease all
overflights of Lebanese territory. The continued occupation by the Israel Defense
Forces of northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line equally
represents a continuing violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and must cease.
84. I urge both parties to do their utmost to prevent violations of the Blue Line,
which must be respected in its entirety. It is essential that the parties avoid provocative
actions and inflammatory rhetoric, exercise utmost restraint and refrain from hostile
activity that could put at risk the cessation of hostilities.
85. The freedom of movement of UNIFIL in its entire area of operations, including
along the full length of the Blue Line, remains critical. I reiterate my call on the
Lebanese authorities to investigate the attacks against peacekeepers in Bar‘ashit and
Blida, on 10 February and 25 May 2020 respectively, and in Majdal Zun on 4 August
2018, as well as acts of harassment and intimidation of UNIFIL personnel. The seizure
of weapons and other items from peacekeepers during standoffs with civilians
obstructing UNIFIL patrols is also of concern. It is incumbent upon the Lebanese
authorities to take appropriate measures to prevent all such incidents, help to recover
items taken from peacekeepers and bring the perpetrators to justice. I urge Lebanese
authorities to facilitate requests for medical evacuation of UNIFIL personnel to
appropriate locations as determined by medical considerations in each case. I also call
upon the Lebanese authorities to grant UNIFIL full and timely access to all locations
north of the Blue Line as requested in connection with the mission’s investigations,
including with regard to the recent incidents of rocket fire from Lebanon and
retaliatory actions by the Israel Defense Forces, and the tunnels crossing the Blue
Line confirmed by UNIFIL in December 2018 and early 2019. I further call upon the
Lebanese authorities to ensure full and timely access by UNIFIL for its daily
monitoring of the Blue Line, as mandated by resolution 1701 (2006) and recalled in
resolution 2591 (2021).
86. I encourage Lebanon and Israel to resume talks regarding their maritime and
land boundaries. The United Nations, through its representatives, remains ready to
support that process as requested by the parties and within its capacity and mandate.
87. I strongly encourage the parties to engage with UNIFIL to make full use of the
tripartite mechanism to reach an agreement on outstanding points of contention along
14/19

21-16822

S/2021/953

the Blue Line. I recall that the identification of the Blue Line in 2000 was solely the
responsibility of the United Nations for the practical purpose of confirming the
withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces from Lebanon in compliance with Security
Council resolution 425 (1978) and without prejudice to future border agreements.
Both sides, despite their respective reservations, undertook to respect the Blue Line
as identified by the United Nations. Progress on Blue Lin e marking would mitigate
potential friction, strengthen the security infrastructure along the Blue Line and serve
as an invaluable confidence-building measure between the parties. Using established
channels, the United Nations will continue to support efforts to defuse tensions
through dialogue, pursue opportunities for confidence-building and create a
conducive environment for resolving underlying disputes in support of efforts
towards a permanent ceasefire.
88. I reiterate my appeal to the parties to cooperate with UNIFIL in the
implementation of all recommendations of the UNIFIL assessment report, which are
intended to optimize the use of UNIFIL resources, including with regards to the use
of advanced technology for protective measures. The Secretariat an d UNIFIL remain
committed to implementing all recommendations in consultation with the parties,
members of the Security Council and troop-contributing countries, as appropriate.
89. I am increasingly concerned that the continued socioeconomic deterioratio n and
inability of Lebanese State institutions to deliver basic services, including fuel and
electricity, and to exercise control over all of Lebanese territory undermines
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). The diminished capacity of the Lebanese
Armed Forces to maintain its operations in the UNIFIL area of operations is of
particular concern, as is the impact of the country’s financial and fuel crisis on the
refurbishment works of the model regiment headquarters and advanced naval training
modules required for a partial transfer of UNIFIL Maritime Task Force
responsibilities to the Lebanese Navy.
90. It is in this context that support to security institutions, especially the Lebanese
Armed Forces as the only legitimate armed forces of Lebanon, is of paramount
importance. I welcome the preparation by UNIFIL for the provision of temporary and
special measures of support to the Lebanese Armed Forces, pursuant to resolution
2591 (2021). I thank all donors who have bolstered their contributions and given
emergency assistance to the security institutions of Lebanon and encourage partners
to continue that critical support.
91. The continued self-acknowledged maintenance of unauthorized weapons outside
of State control by Hizbullah and other non-State armed groups represents a persistent,
grave violation of resolution 1701 (2006). I call upon the Government of Lebanon to
take all actions necessary to ensure there will be no weapons or authority in Lebanon
other than those of the Lebanese State, including through the full implementation of
the relevant provisions of the Taif Accords and of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680
(2006), which require the disarmament of all armed groups in Lebanon. Earlier
decisions of the National Dialogue pertaining to the disarmament of non-Lebanese
groups and the dismantling of the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation
of Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada should be implemented.
92. I call upon the Government of Lebanon to abide by its policy of disassociation,
consistent with the Baabda Declaration (2012) and for all Lebanese parties and
nationals to cease their involvement in the Syrian conflict and other conflicts in the
region. I condemn any movement of fighters and war materiel across the Lebanese
border with the Syrian Arab Republic in violation of resolution 1701 (2006).
93. Lebanon is to be commended for its continued hospitality towards refugees, and
I thank donors for their enduring support. While the United Nations and partners
continue to work towards creating the conditions for safe, dignified and voluntary
21-16822

15/19

S/2021/953

returns, respect for due process of law and enabling refugees to live in dignity remains
indispensable. I call upon the international community to continue its support to an
integrated humanitarian and resilience response through the Lebanon Crisis Response
Plan.
94. I reiterate my call for the international community to uphold its commitments
and ensure that UNRWA can continue to provide services to the Palestine refugee
community.
95. I reiterate my gratitude to all countries contributing military personnel and
equipment to UNIFIL and Observer Group Lebanon and encourage them to increase
the number of women among military personnel in UNIFIL. Recognizing the
increasingly difficult operating environment facing United Nations personnel in
Lebanon, I thank my Special Coordinator for Lebanon, Joanna Wronecka, and the
staff of her office; the UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander, Major
General Stefano Del Col, and the civilian and military personnel in UNIFIL under his
leadership; and the members of the United Nations country team.

16/19

21-16822

S/2021/953

Annex I
Restriction on the freedom of access and movement of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon from 19 June 2021 to
25 October 2021
1.
In its resolution 2591 (2021), the Security Council urged the parties to ensure
that the freedom of movement of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) in all its operations and UNIFIL access to the Blue Line in all its parts are
fully respected and unimpeded and called on the Government of Lebanon to facilitate
prompt and full UNIFIL access to sites requested by the mission for the purpose of
swift investigations, in line with resolution 1701 (2006), while respecting Lebanese
sovereignty.
2.
During the reporting period, UNIFIL conducted an average of 6,273 monthly
patrols during the day and night, of which 2,161 (34.1 per cent) were foot patrols. The
mission conducted an average of 2,313 patrols each month along the B lue Line, both
by vehicle and on foot (47.4 and 52.6 per cent, respectively). In addition, the mission
conducted an average of 72 helicopter patrols each month and an average of 936
inspection activities, including the operation of temporary and permanent
checkpoints, and counter-rocket-launching operations. While the freedom of
movement of UNIFIL was respected in most cases, there were instances of restrictions
of the freedom of movement.
3.
The Lebanese Armed Forces continued to object to some patrol rou tes that were
proposed by UNIFIL in order to expand its presence in areas outside main routes and
municipal centres, on the grounds that they were either private roads or involved areas
of strategic importance to the Lebanese Armed Forces. UNIFIL has consi stently
followed up on reported incidents with the appropriate authorities and continuously
engages with the Lebanese Armed Forces to secure freedom of movement and
unrestricted access to all areas within its area of operations.
Access to all locations along the Blue Line
4.
UNIFIL has yet to gain full access to several sites of interest, including a number
of Green without Borders sites, despite repeated formal requests to the Lebanese
Armed Forces. Access to those locations is required both in conne ction with
investigations and as part of the mission’s daily monitoring of the Blue Line, as
mandated under resolution 1701 (2006) and recalled in resolution 2591 (2021).
Freedom of movement incidents
5.
On 29 July, a UNIFIL patrol was obliged to stop its vehicles because building
materials were blocking a dirt road in the vicinity of Aytarun (Sector West). An
estimated 13 individuals and two vehicles approached the patrol and started taking
photographs and recording the registration plates of the vehicles. Subsequently, others
arrived at the scene with vehicles and motorbikes, reaching a total of approximately
20 individuals, seven vehicles and four motorbikes, and surrounded the UNIFIL
patrol. Three individuals climbed on top of the UNIFIL vehicles. A short time later,
the Lebanese Armed Forces arrived at the scene and addressed the crowd, after which
the crowd dispersed and the patrol was able to continue. No harm to UNIFIL
personnel, nor damage to UNIFIL vehicles, were reported. The following day, the
mayor of Aytarun requested that UNIFIL be accompanied by the Lebanese Armed
Forces to avoid similar incidents.
6.
On 30 July, a number of individuals in Bint Jubayl (Sector West) blocked the road
of a UNIFIL patrol by placing vehicles across the road in front of and behind the patrol.
21-16822

17/19

S/2021/953

The individuals proceeded to deflate the tires of the UNIFIL vehicles, damaged the
electric system of one of them, opened the rear door of a UNIFIL vehicle and seized
one assault rifle, a scope, two magazines and one body armour vest. About an hour
later, the Lebanese Armed Forces arrived at the scene, whereafter all individuals left
the incident site, taking with them the equipment which they had seized. All UNIFIL
personnel and vehicles departed towards a nearby United Nations position. No UNIFIL
personnel was harmed during the incident, but the vehicles sustained extensive damage.
UNIFIL is in contact with the Lebanese Armed Forces, who are trying to retrieve the
stolen equipment. UNIFIL has launched an investigation into the incident.
7.
On 17 August, several individuals in civilian clothes blocked the road of a
UNIFIL convoy in Bint Jubayl by placing vehicles and a motorcycle across the road
in front of and behind the convoy. Through a UNIFIL interpreter, the individuals
complained about the UNIFIL convoy using a secondary road through the village and
claimed that UNIFIL personnel had been taking photographs of the area. Soon
thereafter, more civilians joined the scene. After receiving information from UNIFIL
about the incident, the Lebanese Armed Forces arrived at the scene, persuaded the
civilians to remove their vehicles and escorted the patrol out of the village .
8.
On 21 August, while moving from Naqurah to Dayr Kifa (both Sector West), a
UNIFIL convoy inadvertently deviated from its intended route in Majdal Silm (Sector
East) and was surrounded by approximately 30 individuals in civilian clothes. Some
of the civilians enquired as to why the convoy was passing through their village,
arguing that it was not a place where UNIFIL was supposed to be, while others stated
that the UNIFIL peacekeepers should have been accompanied by the Lebanese Armed
Forces. After receiving information from UNIFIL about the incident, the Lebanese
Armed Forces arrived and facilitated the resumption of the convoy’s movement. The
following day, UNIFIL contacted the mayor of Majdal Silm, who explained that the
patrol had been stopped as it had entered a narrow road and that the residents were
concerned about potential damage to the road and nearby walls.
9.
On 29 August, a UNIFIL convoy and a patrol moving through Majdal Silm
towards Naqurah was stopped by an individual in civilian clothes who told the
UNIFIL personnel not to proceed on the road, as it was too narrow for the convoy
vehicles. Subsequently, more people arrived at the scene, surrounding the vehicles
and making it impossible for the convoy to continue its movements. Shortly
thereafter, a second UNIFIL patrol reached the location and was forced to stop behind
the convoy. The size of the crowd gradually increased to approximately 20
individuals, who behaved in an overall calm manner. Four of the individuals took
photos of the UNIFIL vehicles with mobile phones and one recorded the plate
numbers of the UNIFIL vehicles. After being contacted by UNIFIL, the Lebanese
Armed Forces arrived at the scene and facilitated the resumption of the convoy’s
movement. The same day, UNIFIL contacted the mayor, who explained that incident
was due to a misunderstanding.
10. On 24 October, a group of 17 to 20 individuals in civilian clothes stopped a
UNIFIL patrol, consisting of two soft-skin vehicles, in the vicinity of Kunin (Sector
West) by placing several vehicles across the road. The crowd surrounded the vehicles,
demanding the peacekeepers hand over their electronic devices, including a camera
and Global Positioning System (GPS). When the patrol refused, the crowd damaged
the vehicles, including the windshield, flagpole, tyres, side mirrors and registration
plates. Approximately 30 minutes later, several Lebanese Armed Forces personnel
arrived, whereafter the crowd dispersed. The damaged United Nations vehicles were
recovered by UNIFIL, and the peacekeepers returned to Bint Jubayl (Sector West). A
tyre pump, flashlight, notebook and GPS watch remain missing. One of the UNIFIL
peacekeepers sustained minor injuries due to broken glass. UNIFIL has launched an
investigation into the incident.
18/19

21-16822

S/2021/953

Annex II
Implementation of the arms embargo
1.
In paragraph 21 of its resolution 2591 (2021), the Security Council recalled
paragraph 15 of resolution 1701 (2006), according to which all States shall take the
necessary measures to prevent, by their nationals or from their territories or using flag
vessels or aircraft, the sale or supply of arms and related materiel to any entity or
individual in Lebanon other than those authorized by the Government of Lebanon or
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). The United Nations
continued to engage with Member States on allegations of weapons transfers and
efforts to address such violations of resolution 1701 (2006).
2.
No response was received during the reporting period to my letter dated
22 October 2019 addressed to the President of Lebanon, in which I reiterated my
request that the Government of Lebanon share with the Secretariat any pertinent
information or developments related to the arms embargo.
3.
Paragraph 15 of resolution 1701 (2006) stipulates that all States shall take the
necessary measures to prevent, inter alia, the sale or supply to any entity or individual
in Lebanon of arms and related materiel of all types. During the reporting period, no
new information was shared with the Secretariat in this regard.
4.
The United Nations remains committed to supporting overall compliance by the
parties with resolution 1701 (2006) in all its provisions and to advancing its
implementation. This applies to the implementation of the arms embargo unde r
paragraph 15 of resolution 1701 (2006) and any decision that would be adopted by
the Security Council in this regard. I look forward to continued dialogue with the
Council and its members on furthering our joint goal of the full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006).

21-16822

19/19
