S/2014/533

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 July 2014
Original: English

Letter dated 25 July 2014 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the tenth monthly report of the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), submitted pursuant to paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution 2118
(2013) (see annex). The present letter provides information requested in that
resolution on the activities of the United Nations from 24 June to 25 July 2014
related to the implementation of the resolution.
Introduction
During the period under review, the Joint Mission of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the United Nations for the Elimination of the
Chemical Weapons Programme of the Syrian Arab Republic continued its work.
Following the completion of the removal of declared chemical weapons materials
from the Syrian Arab Republic at the end of the previous reporting period, attention
focused on the remaining aspects of the elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons
programme as reported in my letter dated 26 June 2014 (S/2014/444).
Activities towards the elimination of the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic
On 2 July 2014, the Danish cargo vessel Ark Futura successfully transloaded
the majority of its cargo of priority chemical weapons materials to the United States
maritime vessel Cape Ray at the Italian port of Gioia Tauro. Destruction of these
materials has since commenced on board the Cape Ray in international waters.
Delivery of the remaining chemical weapons materials on board the Ark Futura and
those transported by the Norwegian cargo vessel Taiko was successfully concluded
during the reporting period.
The Joint Mission participated in technical meetings held in Moscow on
27 and 28 June, and in Beirut on 14 and 15 July, at which the participants sought to
prepare a comprehensive proposal for the destruction of the 12 remaining
production facilities. On 24 July, the OPCW Executive Council approved the
combined plans for the destruction and verification of 12 declared chemical
weapons production facilities in the Syrian Arab Republic.
During the period under review, the Joint Mission maintained its engagement
with the Syrian Arab Republic regarding the original declaration of its chemical
weapons programme. OPCW technical experts were deployed to Damascus from
14-58234 (E)

250714

*1458234*

S/2014/533

28 June to 5 July, to seek clarifications on outstanding issues. States parties to the
Chemical Weapons Convention continued to review this issue at OPCW
headquarters.
The Joint Mission continued to adjust its footprint inside the Syrian Arab
Republic, in accordance with the requirements following the removal of the last
remaining declared chemical weapons materials during the preceding reporting
period and the prevailing security situation. At all times the Joint Mission
maintained readiness to respond to any changes in those requirements at short
notice. Discussions continued with OPCW regarding possible successor
arrangements.
Conclusion
I welcome the decision of the OPCW Executive Council on the combined
plans for the destruction and verification of 12 declared chemical weapons
production facilities in the Syrian Arab Republic. I call upon the Syrian Arab
Republic to implement that decision in a timely manner. I also urge the Syrian Arab
Republic to continue its efforts towards the full elimination of its chemical weapons
programme at the earliest possible opportunity, including the resolution of any
possible outstanding issues related to its initial declaration.
I remain very concerned about continuing allegations regarding the use of
toxic chemicals in the Syrian conflict. I strongly condemn any such use by any party
to the conflict. I trust that those found responsible will be brought to justice.
Innocent civilians continue to be the principal victims of the protracted
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic. The violence must stop. While modest in
comparison with the greater challenges of the Syrian conflict, the progress towards
the elimination of the chemical weapons programme continues to highlight the unity
of purpose and commitment of all stakeholders who are making this progress
possible and to whom I would like to reiterate my appreciation.
I would like to take the opportunity to thank the Special Coordinator, Sigrid
Kaag, and all staff of the Joint Mission for their continuous efforts to ensure full
implementation of mandated tasks.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex urgently
to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2/8

14-58234

S/2014/533

Annex
I have the honour to transmit to you my report entitled “Progress in the
elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme” prepared in accordance
with the relevant provisions of decision EC-M-33/DEC.1 of the Executive Council
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013), both dated 27 September 2013, for transmission to the
Security Council (see enclosure). My report covers the period from 24 June to 24 July
2014 and also covers the reporting requirements of Executive Council decision
EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November 2013.
(Signed) Ahmet Üzümcü

14-58234

3/8

S/2014/533

Enclosure
Note by the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Progress in the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme
1.
In accordance with subparagraph 2(f) of the decision by the Executive Council
(hereinafter “the Council”) at its Thirty-Third Meeting (EC-M-33/DEC.1, dated
27 September 2013), the Technical Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”) reports
to the Council on a monthly basis regarding the implementation of that decision. In
accordance with paragraph 12 of United Nations Security Council resolution 2118
(2013), the report by the Secretariat is also submitted to the Secu rity Council
through the Secretary-General. This is the tenth such monthly report.
2.
The Council, at its Thirty-Fourth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled
“Detailed Requirements for the Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons and Syrian
Chemical Weapons Production Facilities” (EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November
2013). In paragraph 22 of that decision, the Council decided that the Secretariat
should report on its implementation “in conjunction with its reporting required by
subparagraph 2(f) of Council decision EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
3.
This report is therefore submitted in accordance with both above -mentioned
Council decisions and includes information relevant to their implementation during
the period from 24 June to 24 July 2014.
Progress achieved by the Syrian Arab Republic in meeting the requirements of
EC-M-33/DEC.1 and EC-M-34/DEC.1
4.
In accordance with subparagraph 1(c) of EC-M-33/DEC.1, the Syrian Arab
Republic was required to complete the elimination of all chemical weapons material
and equipment in the first half of 2014. As reported in the previous monthly report
(EC-76/DG.14, dated 25 June 2014), the final shipment of declared chemicals
identified for removal from the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic took place on
23 June 2014. In addition, all declared stocks of the Category 1 chemical
isopropanol have been destroyed within the Syrian Arab Republic. Progress
achieved within the current reporting period by the Syrian Arab Republic in
fulfilling other obligations is described below:
(a) Intensive consultations have taken place relating to the destruction of
aircraft hangars and underground structures at 12 chemical weapons production
facilities (CWPFs). A technical meeting between representatives of the Russian
Federation, the Syrian Arab Republic, and the United States of America, as well as
representatives of the Secretariat, took place in Mo scow from 26 to 28 June 2014.
A technical meeting between the Secretariat and representatives of the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic was also held in B eirut from 14 to 15 July 2014. As a
result of these discussions and the progress that was made, the Council at its FortyThird Meeting adopted a decision on the combined plans for the destruction and
verification of 12 declared CWPFs in the Syrian Arab Republic (EC-M-43/DEC.1,
dated 24 July 2014). The Council also noted a Note by the Director-General on the
destruction and verification of these facilities (EC-M-43/DG.1/Rev.1, dated 21 July

4/8

14-58234

S/2014/533

2014), a Note by the Director-General on the combined destruction and verification
plans for these facilities (EC-M-40/DG.2, dated 27 March 2014 and Add.1, dated
20 July 2014), as well as a national paper by the Syrian Arab Republic on the
detailed destruction plan for these facilities (EC-M-40/P/NAT.2, dated 24 March
2014, and Add.1 and Add.2, both dated 20 July 2014);
(b) On 14 July 2014, the Syrian Arab Republic submitted a further
amendment to its initial declaration submitted on 23 October 2013. In the
amendment, the Syrian Arab Republic declared as a CWPF a facility for the
production of ricin. The newly declared facility is subject to verification and
destruction, although it is located in an area that is not under Syrian Government
control. According to the amendment, the entire quantity of ricin produced was
disposed of prior to the entry into force of the Convention for the Syrian Arab
Republic. The amendment also includes information regarding two other chemical
weapons related facilities for research and development as well as Category 3
unfilled chemical munitions;
(c) On 14 July 2014, the Syrian Arab Republic also submitted to the
Secretariat a destruction plan for the two items declared by the Government as
abandoned chemical weapons (ACWs) which, as verified by the Secretariat, contain
the chemical agent sarin. The plan will be submitted to the Council for its approval
in due course;
(d) Pursuant to paragraph 19 of EC-M-34/DEC.1, the Syrian Arab Republic
is required to submit a monthly report to the Council regarding activities on its
territory related to the destruction of its chemical weapons and CWPFs. The eighth
such report was submitted to the Secretariat on 18 July 2014 and made available to
the Council (EC-M-43/P/NAT.1, dated 18 July 2014); and
(e) In accordance with subparagraph 1(e) of EC-M-33/DEC.1 and paragraph 7
of United Nations Security Council resolution 2118 (2013), the Syrian Arab
Republic shall cooperate fully with all aspects of the implementation of the decision
and the resolution. The Syrian authorities have continued to extend the necessary
cooperation to the OPCW-UN Joint Mission (hereinafter “the Joint Mission”) in the
conduct of its activities during the reporting period.
Progress in the elimination of Syrian chemical weapons by States Parties hosting
destruction activities
5.
Following the complete removal of identified chemicals from the Syrian Arab
Republic on 23 June 2014, destruction activities are well under way. The following
subparagraphs provide information on the destruction of Syrian chemical weapons
on board the United States vessel MV Cape Ray, at commercial facilities selected
pursuant to paragraph 24 of EC-M-34/DEC.1, and at facilities sponsored by States
Parties pursuant to paragraph 7 of decision EC-M-36/DEC.2 (dated 17 December
2013):
(a) The MV Cape Ray arrived on 1 July 2014 at the Italian port of Gioia
Tauro, where shipping containers holding the declared chemicals HD and DF were
transloaded from the Danish cargo ship Ark Futura. The MV Cape Ray then
proceeded to international waters in the Mediterranean on 2 July 2014. Destruction
operations on board the MV Cape Ray began on 9 July 2014. An OPCW inspection
team is on board the MV Cape Ray to verify the destruction and to ensure that it is

14-58234

5/8

S/2014/533

in accordance with paragraph 8 and subparagraph 12(f) of EC-M-34/DEC.1. As at
the cut-off date of this report, 22 per cent of the DF has been verified as destroyed
on board the MV Cape Ray. All liquid waste produced by the hydrolysis of DF was
pumped directly into ISO tanks on the ship, pending further treatment at the
Ekokem Riihimäki waste treatment and disposal facility in Finland, one of the two
commercial facilities selected through the tender process organ ized by the OPCW;
(b) As reported in the previous monthly report, the Ekokem Riihimäki
facility in Finland received chemicals transported by the Norwegian cargo ship
Taiko, following their offloading at the port of Hamina Kotka on 21 June 2014. The
last consignment of four maritime shipping containers with chemicals was offloaded
from the Ark Futura at the port of Hamina Kotka in Finland on 20 July 2014. As at
the cut-off date of this report, 38 per cent of the received chemicals have been
destroyed by Ekokem in Finland, with one of the Category 1 chemicals received
with the first delivery on 21 June 2014 having been completely destroyed;
(c) Veolia ES Technical Solutions, LLC in the United States of America, the
other commercial facility selected through the tender process organ ized by the
OPCW, received the declared chemicals transported by the Taiko on 9 July 2014.
Destruction activities began on 11 July 2014 and, as at the cut-off date of this report,
42 per cent of the received chemicals have been destroyed by Veolia ES Technical
Solutions, LLC;
(d) Veolia Environmental Services (UK) in the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland received declared chemicals transported from the
Syrian Arab Republic by the Ark Futura on 15 and 16 July 2014. Because of the
delayed removal from the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic of the remaining
hydrogen fluoride and hydrochloric acid, these chemicals could not be transported
by the Norwegian cargo vessel Taiko to Veolia ES Technical Solutions, LLC, in the
United States of America as originally intended. As a result, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland offered, through an in -kind contribution, to
directly sponsor Veolia Environmental Services (UK) and Mexichem UK Limited to
destroy the aforementioned remaining hydrochloric acid and hydrogen fluoride,
respectively. This offer was formalized in an exchange of letters dated 8 July 2014
and, at its Seventy-Sixth Session, the Council considered and approved amendments
and modifications to the original facility arrangement (EC -76/DEC.5, dated 11 July
2014). As at the cut-off date of this report, 4 per cent of the received chemicals have
been destroyed by Veolia Environmental Services (UK). Destruction activities at
Mexichem UK Limited are planned for late 2014;
(e) Once the neutralization operation on board the MV Cape Ray has been
completed, the vessel will deliver the HD effluent to the GEKA facility in Munster,
Germany, and the DF effluent to Ekokem’s facility in Riihimäki, Finland, for
disposal.
6.
Taken together, the destruction activities described in subparagraphs 5 (a) to 5 (d)
above mean that, as at the cut-off date of this report, 36.6 per cent of the Category 1
chemicals and 12.4 per cent of the Category 2 chemicals had been destroyed,
representing a combined total of 32 per cent, including the isopropanol previously
destroyed in the Syrian Arab Republic. The Secretariat will continue to provide such
information during briefings to States Parties in The Hague and through the monthly
reports. Timelines for the completion of the destruction of Syrian c hemical weapons
were provided in the overall report on the elimination of the Syrian chemical

6/8

14-58234

S/2014/533

weapons programme (paragraph 25 of EC-76/DG.16, dated 4 July 2014), which was
noted by the Council at its Seventy-Sixth Session.
Activities carried out by the Secretariat with respect to the Syrian Arab Republic
7.
Effective cooperation with the United Nations in the context of the Joint
Mission has continued with close coordination between the two organ izations and
between the offices in The Hague, New York, Damascus, and Cyprus. The DirectorGeneral and the Special Coordinator of the Joint Mission, Ms Sigrid Kaag, have
maintained regular contact. As at the cut-off date of this report, two OPCW staff
members were deployed as part of the Joint Mission in Damascu s, and one logistics
officer in Beirut.
8.
The Director-General has continued to meet with senior representatives of the
States Parties hosting a destruction facility or otherwise providing assistance with
transport or destruction of Syrian chemical weapons, and to communicate regularly
with senior officials from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. As
requested by the Council at its Seventy-Fifth Session (paragraph 7.12 of EC-75/2,
dated 7 March 2014), the Secretariat has continued to provide regula r information
briefings to States Parties in The Hague on behalf of the Director-General.
9.
A team of four OPCW inspectors is permanently on board the MV Cape Ray as
it neutralizes HD and DF, and OPCW inspectors have carried out inspections at the
commercial facilities to verify destruction activities. OPCW inspectors were also
present when the Taiko delivered chemicals in Finland and in the United States of
America, and when the Ark Futura delivered chemicals in the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and in Finland. OPCW inspectors were also
present in Gioia Tauro when declared chemicals were transloaded from the Ark
Futura to the MV Cape Ray on 2 July 2014. The OPCW is receiving weekly updates
on the progress of the destruction of Syrian chemical weapons and, as instructed by
the Council in paragraph 4 of decision EC-M-38/DEC.1 (dated 30 January 2014),
reports on them through these monthly reports. In the interests of transparency, the
OPCW is also reporting on the progress in destruction through its public website.
10. The Secretariat briefed the Council at its Seventy-Sixth Session on its ongoing
consultations with the Syrian Arab Republic regarding its declaration and related
disclosures. A team of experts from the Secretariat visited t he Syrian Arab Republic
from 30 June to 5 July 2014. Further details regarding the outcome of the most
recent technical discussions are provided in subparagraph 4 (b) above. The Council
urged the Secretariat and the Syrian authorities to continue to cooper ate through
technical discussions on outstanding issues regarding the Syrian Arab Republic ’s
declaration, with a view to resolving as quickly as possible questions raised by the
Secretariat to ensure the declaration’s accuracy and completeness.
11. During the reporting period, the Secretariat agreed upon amendments and
modifications to the arrangement with the Government of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland governing on-site inspections at the Ellesmere
Port High Temperature Incinerator and Marchwood Military Port, which was
adopted by the Council at its Seventy-Fifth Session (EC-75/DEC.3, dated 5 March
2014). As reported in subparagraph 5 (d) above, the amendments and modifications
were considered and approved by the Council at its Seventy-Sixth Session.

14-58234

7/8

S/2014/533

Supplementary resources
12. As at the cut-off date of this report, the total contribution received in the Syria
Trust Fund for the Destruction of Chemical Weapons stood at EUR 50.3 million.
Contributions have been received from Argentina, Australia, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, the Czech Republic, the European Union, Finland, Germany, India, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
the Republic of Korea, Slovakia, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. This includes the contributions that
were originally made to the first OPCW Trust Fund for Syria and which have, at the
request of the donor, subsequently been transferred, in part or in who le, to the Syria
Trust Fund for the Destruction of Chemical Weapons.
Conclusion
13. The complete removal of the identified chemicals from the Syrian Arab
Republic and the steady progress being made in their destruction are welcome
developments, as is the Council’s decision on the issue of the destruction of the
12 remaining CWPFs. Destruction activities at those locations are expected to begin
within two months’ time. The Secretariat will regularly report to the Council on the
progress being made, together with recommendations for any adjustments in the
destruction schedule, if necessary.
14. With regard to the Fact-Finding Mission to establish the facts surrounding the
allegations of the use of toxic chemicals, reportedly chlorine, for hostile purpose s in
the Syrian Arab Republic, the Council at its Seventy-Sixth Session underlined that
the use of chemical weapons by anyone under any circumstances would be
reprehensible and completely contrary to the legal norms and standards of the
international community. The Council re-emphasized its unequivocal support for the
Director-General’s decision to continue the Mission, while stressing that the safety
and security of Mission personnel remains the top priority.

8/8

14-58234
