A /75/PV.90

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

90th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 7 July 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Arriola Ramírez
(Paraguay), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 123 (continued)
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/729)
Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): My delegation thanks the
Secretary-General and the President of the General
Assembly for their comprehensive statements, and we
take note of the Secretary-General’s report (A/75/729).
As a country that had to face the scourge of
terrorism for more than three decades, Sri Lanka
wholeheartedly condemns terrorism and violent
extremism conducive to terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. It is in that context that the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is an
essential tool to rally us in our collective call for action.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism strategy
review resolution — resolution 75/291 — provides
a clear and solid road map for our common counterterrorism efforts for the coming years.
It is appropriate that we have adopted the new
strategy as we mark the high-level Counter-Terrorism
Week in New York and have held the second High-level
Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of
Member States. That meeting provided an opportunity
for Member States to create networks and partnerships
and share information and strategies in order to

strengthen cooperation, as is envisaged in the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
At the conference, the Secretary-General noted
this week that the fight against terrorism has seen
important advances, with some attacks having been
thwarted across the world and hundreds of terrorists
being brought to justice. However, the threat continues
to loom, and many terrorist groups continue to thrive
on the continued exploitation and manipulation of
social grievances and injustices to inspire lone actors
and co-opt other groups, with deadly results.
We remain concerned at the increasing polarization
and normalization of hate speech, which have benefited
many such groups. It is clearly evident that terrorist
groups have exploited hardships and inequalities related
to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and
used much disinformation and many false narratives to
further their twisted causes.
Terrorism and violent extremism conducive to
terrorism are not exclusive to any one country or region
but spread across national borders. That growing scourge
threatens the very fabric of the principle of sovereign
States upon which the international legal order is based.
We extend our most sincere condolences to the families
of the victims of terrorists and sympathize with those
around the world who have suffered injuries since the
year began; we heard about the most recent of those
incidents this morning, with the terrible assassination
of the President of Haiti.
In this evolving context, the core principles of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-18152 (E)

*2118152*

A/75/PV.90

remain fully valid and have been updated to meet many
of the new challenges. There is a need to intensify
consistent, coordinated and comprehensive efforts
across our countries in terms of human rights and the
rule of law. Information-sharing must take place, not
only on an international or cross-regional level but
also between local State institutions and other counterterrorism mechanisms, including the private sector
and civil society. Countering terrorism is not only
an all-of-United Nations approach; it must be an allof-country approach.
We would like to commend the tireless work
done by Ambassador Mohamed Al Hassan of Oman
and Ambassador Agustín Santos Maraver of Spain as
co-facilitators of the lengthy, in-depth negotiations on
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, during which
discussions were held on the gamut of issues related to
terrorism and counter-terrorism and which featured an
inclusive process of consultations with Member States
and regional groups, including stakeholders such as
United Nations entities, academia and civil society.
We are aware of the fact that the issues are
complex and that the quest for consensus was often
not the easiest in the endeavour to bridge differences
and encompass multiple different views and concerns.
However, in this common fight against terrorism we
need to ensure that we work together and reaffirm
consensus, diplomacy and dialogue in the work before
us. A modern and updated strategy cannot be pushed on
States or decided on the basis of might or by a group of
States, large or small. There is no one-size formula that
fits all instances, nor can we ever seek to encompass
every eventuality or issue.
We must be united, with a spirit of equity and
togetherness, and be able to listen to one another to look
for common ground in our larger purpose to update a
strategy to work collectively to confront the menace of
terrorism. Since 2006, we have implemented a counterterrorism strategy and sought to update its plans to
address many of the challenges that we face as a result of
the changing dynamics of terrorism, transnational crime
and violent extremism. Those issues have been further
compounded by the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters; the financing of international terrorism; the
rapid advancement of technology, including social
media; porous borders; and large movements of people
due to strife and conflict.
2/20

07/07/2021

The international landscape of terrorism is not static
and has continued to expand. International networks
increasingly linked to organized crime are a crucial
lifeline that sustains terrorists and violent groups. It
is therefore vital that all Member States work together
with greater dedication to pool resources and share
intelligence databases, expertise and best practices
so that we can effectively combat that scourge. Issues
must be looked at holistically.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has brought
the world together to tackle a virus. We must use the
same unity, urgency of purpose and cooperation to
work together to address terrorism and its root causes.
We should not take refuge in saying that terrorism is
another country’s problem or an issue that only holds
sway far from our shores. We are dismayed that in
the past decade the world has seen an increase in the
number of terrorist attacks, and civilians the world over
have been affected. It is a sad reflection of our era that
no country is immune to terrorist attacks.
In our work before us, with the exponential growth
of the media, and particularly the rise of social media,
while acknowledging the importance of the freedom of
expression and the flow of information to inform people,
we must be vigilant that it is not used as a platform for
hatred, bigotry and extremism. We must be increasingly
aware and actively seek to prevent people from using
social media to promote a culture of racism, hate and
intolerance. As we fight terrorism, we must ensure the
promotion of the fourth pillar of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy — ensuring human rights and the
rule of law. In our common fight against terrorists, we
should not embrace the lawlessness of the terrorists and
must never abandon our common humanity, which is
what binds us together and gives us the strength and
purpose to pursue our fight against terror.
Finally, the adoption of resolution 75/291, on
the seventh review of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, provides the means to enhance national,
regional, and international efforts to fight terrorism.
We must use this movement and make further
renewed commitments to strengthening our normative
framework and international cooperation in this area, in
particular through measures in the Ad Hoc Committee
to eliminate international terrorism and in the Working
Group, which has already resulted in the adoption of a
large number of sectoral conventions on the suppression
of terrorism.
21-18152

07/07/2021

Despite the strong support of Member States and
the General Assembly mandate to come up with a
comprehensive legal framework to fill possible gaps
in the existing sectoral conventions on terrorism, it
is regrettable that we have not been able to break the
current impasse surrounding the draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism. While work has
been accomplished in the Ad Hoc Committee, we need
the necessary political will to move forward to conclude
the convention at the earliest.
In closing, Sri Lanka welcomes and supports the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and reaffirms Sri
Lanka’s commitment to implementing the Strategy
across its four pillars.
Mrs. Liolocha (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): Allow me, on behalf of my delegation,
to thank Secretary-General António Guterres for his
report (A/75/729 and A/75/729/Corr.1) and UnderSecretary-General Vladimir Voronkov for convening
the United Nations High-Level Conference of Heads
of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member States. Our
thanks also go to the President of the General Assembly
at its seventy-fifth session for convening this meeting
on the seventh biennial review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
In particular, we would like to thank the facilitators
for their efforts and dedication throughout the
review process, which culminated in draft resolution
A/75/L.105 being submitted for adoption and in its
adoption by consensus in resolution 75/291 on 30 June
2021 (see A/75/PV.88). The adoption of the Strategy
demonstrates the commitment of States Members of the
United Nations to work together in the face of a threat
that continues to dominate the global security agenda.
Continued terrorist attacks around the world have
shown us that no nation or region is immune and that
there is no short-term solution to the threat of terrorism
and its devastating consequences. If we are to triumph
over this scourge, we must, in addition to our national
efforts, strengthen cooperation and coordination efforts
at the international, regional and subregional levels.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo maintains
that a multilateral framework remains essential to
preventing and combating the diverse and evolving
aspects of this threat. It is imperative to reinvigorate
a multilateralism that is not only consistent with
international law and the United Nations Charter, but
also is adapted to the problems of the day.

A/75/PV.90

The leadership of the United Nations is
therefore very important in efforts aimed at helping
Member States and international, regional and
subregional organizations to intensify their actions in
implementing the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
in an integrated and balanced manner through its
four pillars. My delegation commends the work done
by the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Office, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and all their
affiliated entities and hopes that the necessary means
will be made available to them to enable them to assist
States and regional and subregional organizations in
implementing the Strategy. In this regard, we believe
that there is a need for the international community
to support the efforts of States and regional and
subregional organizations to combat terrorism and
violent extremism by sharing experiences and best
practices and by providing technical assistance and
adequate resources for capacity-building.
At the national level, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has ratified several international counterterrorism
instruments. It has established, inter alia, the National
Coordination Committee to Combat International
Terrorism, the National Financial Intelligence Unit, the
Consultative Committee to Combat Money Laundering
and the Financing of Terrorism and the Fund for the
Fight against Organized Crime.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo continues
to improve its national measures to fight terrorism
and violent extremism by strengthening its legislative
framework. These initiatives include incorporating
into its Military Penal Code and other specific laws
terrorist acts provided for in international instruments;
the preparation of a draft anti-terrorism law that
provides, among other things, for the transfer of
jurisdiction to ordinary courts to try cases of terrorism,
given that these matters were previously under the
jurisdiction of military courts; the law on combating
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism,
particularly in terms of criminalizing the financing
of terrorism; and the mechanism for implementing
targeted financial sanctions relating to Security
Council-designated entities.
At the regional and subregional level, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a party to the
regional framework agreement on police cooperation
to strengthen the fight against transnational organized
crime, radicalization, violent extremism and terrorism,

21-181523/20

A/75/PV.90

07/07/2021

signed in April 2019 in Tanzania. Currently, my country
is revising its national counter-terrorism strategy,
which takes into account the content of the Global
Strategy, the Strategies adopted by the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and the
Southern African Development Community (SADC),
respectively. In order to enrich our national strategy,
a consultation workshop with civil society will be held
in September of this year. However, in view of the rise
in terrorism and violent extremism in the region, there
is a need for ECCAS and SADC countries to intensify
their cooperation by pooling their efforts to eradicate
these scourges.

part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo — as a
Da’esh-affiliated terrorist group.

As mentioned in paragraph 6 of the report of the
Secretary-General, the signs of the threat emanating
from the Islamic State in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in Mozambique through local entities
affiliated with the group remain of great concern.
Indeed, the Democratic Republic of the Congo has been
experiencing insecurity for more than two decades as a
result of the activism of several armed groups identified
in its eastern part, including the jihadist Forces
démocratiques alliées (ADF), which is considered
the terrorist group that has pledged allegiance to the
Islamic State.

In that context, my delegation welcomed the
decision by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to visit the Democratic Republic of Congo in
order to conduct an assessment to monitor, promote and
facilitate the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions on countering terrorism.

The ADF is known for forced recruitment of
children, indoctrination into radicalization and massive
human rights violations against civilians, including
massacres, killings, beheadings, looting, arson, rape, and
abductions, as well as attacks on humanitarian workers,
security forces and United Nations peacekeepers. This
terrorist group relies on a ruse to deceive young people
and even adults that they will be sent to study the Koran
abroad, specifically in Medina, so that they can become
imams, or they promise them paid work, when in fact
they are sent to Madina, a town located in the territory
of Beni, where they are indoctrinated in the holy war.
The use by those terrorists of improvised explosive
devices and the use of suicide bombings observed
recently in Beni should be condemned here. While
alarmed by the proliferation of such new practices,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo welcomes
the United States Department of State designating
affiliates and leaders of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) in the Democratic Republic of Congo
as terrorists and its imposition of sanctions against
them. We also welcome the Government of Canada
designating the ADF — an armed group of Ugandan
origin responsible for several massacres in the eastern
4/20

The Democratic Republic of the Congo calls on the
United Nations to take very seriously the connection
between the ADF and ISIL and to avoid waiting until
it is too late to make the appropriate recommendations
to the Counter-Terrorism Committee. Several events
have demonstrated and confirmed the presence of
Islamist terrorists in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We must not wait to take action
before their roots have taken hold, as the situation could
become more complex.

Due to the pandemic, the visit was scheduled to be
conducted in two parts, the first by virtual means and
the second in person. The virtual visit was conducted
in April, when we had a constructive and mutually
beneficial exchange. The in-person visit will be
conducted as soon as health conditions allow. We hope
that, after the Committee’s visit, an evaluation will be
made to enable the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to benefit from appropriate technical assistance and
capacity-building support.
In conclusion, we would like to take this
opportunity to reaffirm that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo stands ready to work with the Office of
Counter-Terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and other United Nations entities
for the comprehensive and balanced implementation of
the Strategy and to pursue our counter-terrorism efforts
in accordance with the principles of the United Nations
Charter, international law and respect for national
ownership and priorities.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): At the outset, on behalf
of my delegation, let me extend my condolences to
the family of the Haitian President, His Excellency
Mr. Jovenel Moïse, and to the Government and the
people of Haiti for his appalling assassination. We
stand in solidarity with our colleagues and friends from
the Permanent Mission of Haiti to the United Nations.
21-18152

07/07/2021

The past months have confirmed our belief that
only through a strengthened multilateral framework can
we better and more effectively address challenges of a
global nature. That is ever-more relevant when it comes
to the evolving and multifaceted terrorist threat. Nearly
15 years since its adoption in the General Assembly
Hall, the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy remains as relevant as ever. The adoption
by consensus of resolution 75/291, on the seventh
biennial review of the Strategy, reflects the continued
commitment of Member States as well as the pivotal
role of the General Assembly in preventing terrorism
and the violent extremism leading to it.
In that regard, I would like to thank the
co-facilitators, Ambassadors Agustín Santos Maraver
of the Kingdom of Spain and Mohamed Al Hassan of the
Sultanate of Oman, as well as their teams of experts, for
their commendable work and tireless efforts throughout
the negotiations. We also extend our gratitude to the
Office of Counter-Terrorism for its support during
the process.
Moreover, I wish to align myself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (see A/75/PV.88).
Terrorist and violent extremist groups have always
been on the lookout for grievances to exploit and use
to fuel their narratives and propaganda. The pandemic
and consequent related measures have multiplied such
grievances and, in some cases, have further eroded
trust in Governments, while giving rise to further
misinformation and disinformation campaigns. That
has mainly been happening via online platforms,
aggravating the challenges posed by the misuse
of technologies.
It only shows how rapidly the terrorist threat can
evolve, as well as how reactive such groups can be,
highlighting ever more the imperative of a constant
review of the Strategy — but, most important, the
imperative of the implementation of all four pillars of
the Strategy. We value the inclusion in the text of the
resolution of the reference to the need to monitor and
address the short-, medium- and long-term impacts of
the pandemic on the evolution of the global terrorist
threat. We also welcome the strengthening of the
language on gender, civil society and the private sector.
In such times of turmoil, prevention and human
rights compliance are essential and must be at the

A/75/PV.90

forefront of any fight against terrorism. As inequalities,
marginalization and human rights violations run
rampant, addressing them will surely contribute to the
achievement of fairer and more inclusive societies. It
implies the continued involvement of all relevant actors
of a society — Governments, young people, women,
civil society organizations and the private sector.
The alarming crisis in Lebanon and the hardship
faced by the Lebanese people are a real threat to its
stability and future. The responsibility of getting
Lebanon out of the crisis rests primarily with the
Lebanese themselves, but the support and help of
the United Nations and Lebanon’s friends have been
tremendous in mitigating the crisis and helping the
Lebanese people. We hope that help and support will
continue as Lebanon extracts itself from this situation.
Despite that, the determination of Lebanon in
combating terrorism, in accordance with the Strategy
and our international obligations, remains unabated.
The Lebanese army, for instance, dismantled earlier
this year terrorist cells linked to Da’esh and continues
to fend off terrorist threats on Lebanese soil. We are
working towards finalizing a comprehensive national
counter-terrorism strategy, which will be in line with
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
As we look around the world, terrorism has claimed
many lives, especially those of leaders and journalists
just this past year. Lebanon is no stranger to that and
has had its share of lives lost in the past two decades.
That is why Lebanon is committed to the completion of
the work of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon — the first
and only tribunal of its kind established to prosecute
terrorist acts.
Lebanon is grateful to the United Nations and all
the countries that have supported the Tribunal since its
establishment to bring long-awaited relief to the victims
and their families and end impunity for the perpetrators
of the heinous terrorist acts committed in 2005, which
claimed the lives of Prime Minster Rafic Hariri and
his associates.
International tribunals are important to bring about
justice and end impunity, but international tribunals
should be effective and complete their work in a timely
fashion. Otherwise, they send the wrong message about
tribunals and international justice. The saying “justice
delayed is justice denied” is only too true in that context.

21-181525/20

A/75/PV.90

Mr. Moon (Republic of Korea): At the outset, the
Republic of Korea would like to align itself with the
statement made by the representative of Turkey on
behalf of the MIKTA countries — Mexico, Indonesia,
South Korea, Turkey and Australia (see A/75/PV.88).
First of all, my delegation welcomes the adoption by
consensus of resolution 75/291, on the seventh review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We would like to express our sincere gratitude to the
co-facilitators, Ambassador Mohamed Al Hassan,
Permanent Representative of Oman, and Ambassador
Agustín Santos Maraver, Permanent Representative
of Spain, and their teams for their tireless efforts in
facilitating the consultations and achieving consensus.
It is truly meaningful that the General Assembly speaks
with one strong voice against terrorism.
We have seen the various impacts of the coronavirus
disease pandemic, many of which are also related to the
terrorist landscape. Although we had to postpone the
seventh review, owing to the pandemic, we achieved our
goal of updating the Strategy by successfully adopting
resolution 75/291. The international community has
witnessed evolving terrorist threats for the past three
years. Those who are responsible for terrorist acts have
justified their atrocities based on a variety of reasons,
but terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
committed by whomever, wherever and for whatever
purpose, should not be forgiven and cannot be justified.

07/07/2021

international law, including international human rights
law and international humanitarian law.
The international community has recognized
the need to prevent violent extremism conducive to
terrorism and made various efforts in that regard. We
have witnessed various forms of violent extremism and
realized that there are a variety of causes behind them,
which requires a whole-of-society approach to address
them. At the same time, it is important to develop and
implement plans of action to prevent violent extremism
in a way consistent with international law.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
mention a few elements of the resolution on the seventh
review of the Strategy that we should duly take note of.
First, considering the many voices expressing
concern about the financial situation of the Office
of Counter-Terrorism, the General Assembly has
come together to give clearer direction on how to
move forward. We expect the Secretary-General to
make an in-depth assessment of the Office’s finances
and, based on that, to provide convincing budgetary
recommendations to the General Assembly in 2022.
We are all aware of the important role that the Office
has played, especially in coordinating global counterterrorism activities, and we therefore need to ensure
that its operation is sustainable.

Terrorists have used new as well as traditional
ways of carrying out terrorist acts. We are deeply and
especially concerned about the use of new technologies
for terrorist purposes. Hostility, hatred and violence
have been propagated by such groups using information
and communication technologies for terrorist ends. We
should take special heed of the possibility of young
people being exposed to terrorist content through the
Internet and social media platforms. In the course of the
seventh review, all Member States tried to reflect that
reality in resolution 75/291, and my delegation believes
that the international community can move forward
based on the direction suggested by the resolution.

Secondly, my delegation would also like to take note
of some developments regarding the proposed results
framework to ensure the comprehensive, balanced and
integrated implementation of the Strategy. We attach
great importance to such a framework in order to track
progress against the expected results and impact under
each of the four pillars. It would be pointless to do our
work without properly reviewing our performance. A
comprehensive results framework would contribute to
enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of counterterrorism efforts. We look forward to seeing additional
elaborated options in the next report of the SecretaryGeneral for Member States’ further consideration
during the next review process.

We have also seen ongoing threats and the direct
targeting by terrorists against civilians, women,
children and humanitarian actors. The seventh review
resolution reflects, to some extent, that worrisome
reality and the willingness to address it, but the
international community should go further to protect
those entitled to be protected in accordance with

Thirdly, in the course of the informal consultations,
there were notable initiatives to enhance the
effectiveness of our efforts to prevent and counter
terrorism and violent extremism conducive to terrorism,
namely, by strengthening the elements related to
women, civil society and the fight against the financing
of terrorism. We believe that there is a global consensus

6/20

21-18152

07/07/2021

on the importance of the whole-of-society approach, in
which women and civil society play a crucial role.
Moreover, countering the financing of terrorism
is part and parcel of our efforts to prevent and
suppress terrorist acts. Although those elements were
only partially incorporated into the seventh review
resolution, we have no doubt that all Member States and
international and regional organizations will base their
counter-terrorism efforts on those important elements.
In conclusion, the adoption of resolution 75/291
symbolizes the determined attitude of the international
community against terrorism. We all need to take part
in this fight. The Republic of Korea will also make the
utmost effort to play its part in achieving a world free
of terrorism.
Ms. Ighil (Algeria): My delegation aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the Permanent Representative
of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (see A/75/PV.88).
At the outset, let me commend the co-facilitators
of the seventh review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, Ambassador Mohamed
Al Hassan of Oman and Ambassador Agustín Santos
Maraver of Spain, on their tireless efforts and leadership
on highly complex issues.
Algeria welcomes the adoption by consensus
of resolution 75/291, on the Strategy, for the seventh
consecutive time. I see this opportunity as one to
reiterate our strong condemnation of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, regardless of its motivation,
wherever, whenever and by whomever committed. At
the same time, we continue to reject any association of
terrorism with any religion, nationality, civilization or
ethnic group.
The world is currently witnessing an increasing
threat of terrorism. Such growth shows its capacity
for adaptation and innovation, namely, in its modus
operandi. Emerging terrorist threats, in addition to
traditional ones, are of serious concern, including in
the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, which has added a layer of complexity to the
phenomenon. The United Nations and Member States
must therefore respond accordingly by intensifying
global efforts to counter terrorism by strengthening the
existing strategies to address such threats.
Against that backdrop, the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy remains a critical, holistic

A/75/PV.90

and comprehensive instrument for addressing the
scourge of terrorism and violent extremism conducive
to terrorism. In that regard, we affirm our support
for the Strategy, its review processes and its balanced
implementation across its four pillars.
The seventh review of the Strategy offered an
important opportunity to renew our collective and
determined resolve to combat terrorism. It remains
critical to underline the importance of uniting efforts
within the Strategy by enhancing cooperation at the
bilateral, regional and international levels, strengthening
capabilities and exchanging best practices and expertise
in counter-terrorism.
We appreciate the reaffirmation in the seventh
review of the need to adhere to the norms of international
law and the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, as well as the primary responsibility of
Member States in the implementation of the Strategy.
As three years have elapsed since the previous review
of the Strategy, it is also essential for that important
instrument to focus on new and emerging challenges.
We therefore appreciate the reference made in
the seventh review to the COVID-19 pandemic, the
financing of terrorism, the nexus between terrorist
groups and organized crime, the misuse of new
technology by terrorist groups, the threat posed by
foreign terrorist fighters, the rise of hate speech,
xenophobia, racism and Islamophobia, the increase in
attacks against cultural property and religious sites and
the human rights dimension in countering terrorism.
Equally important, we continue to support the work
of the Office of Counter-Terrorism and its leading role
in the implementation of the Strategy and the capacitybuilding of Member States, upon their request, as well
as its coordinating role in counter-terrorism and the
prevention of violent extremism conducive to terrorism.
It also remains critical to provide the Office with
sufficient human and financial resources through the
United Nations regular budget to withstand the current
challenges posed by terrorism.
As a nation at the forefront of the fight against
terrorism and radicalization, Algeria continues to
believe that preventing and combating terrorism
continue to require mobilization and multifaceted
cooperation at the national, regional and international
levels. Clearly, terrorism cannot be defeated
exclusively through repressive measures but requires

21-181527/20

A/75/PV.90

a more coherent political strategy and addressing its
root causes.
Algeria remains steadfast in its vigilance and
commitment to countering terrorism and radicalization.
The focus is mainly placed on the implementation
of policies, strategies and development programmes
geared towards the fight against factors of exclusion,
marginalization and social injustice, as well as
promoting democracy, human rights, good governance
and living together in peace, as effective tools to counter
terrorism and combat violent extremism conducive
to terrorism.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Algeria’s resolve
to implement the Strategy, as well as our strong
commitment to continuing our efforts and cooperation
at all levels to defeat the scourge of terrorism, which
continues to represent a serious threat to international
peace and security.
Mr. Bastaki (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I should like to begin by aligning my
country’s delegation with the statement delivered by
the representative of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (see
A/75/PV.88).
The United Arab Emirates welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 75/291, on the seventh review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We thank His Excellency Ambassador Mohamed Al
Hassan, Permanent Representative of the Sultanate
of Oman, and His Excellency Ambassador Agustín
Santos Maraver, Permanent Representative of Spain, on
leading the negotiation process successfully.
The United Arab Emirates supports the periodic
review process on the Global Strategy, which is a
living document reflecting the latest developments
and challenges related to preventing and countering
terrorism, especially as extremist and terrorist groups
continue to develop their ways and means to realize
their destructive objectives.
As the international community, we must therefore
work together to address new trends and proactively
face emerging threats in order to deal with all aspects
of this scourge and eradicate it completely under the
four pillars of the Strategy and international law. We
must first continue to work towards addressing the
factors leading to terrorism, while taking into account
the specific contexts of every State. We must focus in
8/20

07/07/2021

particular on preventing actions related to religions
contempt and their sanctities while addressing all forms
of discrimination and denouncing hate speech. To that
end, and according to the Strategy, we must work with
all the relevant actors, especially religious leaders, the
media and the private sector.
The United Arab Emirates continues to support
efforts that lead to strengthening peaceful coexistence
among peoples, including resolution 75/200, which was
introduced together with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
the Arab Republic of Egypt and the Kingdom of Bahrain,
and which proclaimed 4 February as the International
Day of Human Fraternity. My country also welcomes
the call of the Strategy on Member States to focus on
the effective role of women in countering extremism
and terrorism. We stress the importance of the leading
role of women in those efforts, and my country aspires
to ensure their participation, in particular through the
launching of its national action plan this year on women
and peace and security.
My country also attaches great importance to
the issue of using modern technology and innovation
in countering terrorism. Modern technologies are a
two-edged sword. Extremist and terrorist groups use
such modern technologies and the Internet to finance
their actions, rally militants and find new sources
of financing, which are hard to trace and prevent by
Member States. However, advanced technology has
helped Member States to develop programmes and tools
that help in exchanging information and expertise while
facilitating the process of tracing and preventing the
movement of foreign terrorist fighters. Consequently,
we should continue to work — especially with
technology developing companies — to understand all
aspects of this issue and develop methods that limit the
use of this technology by terrorists.
Eradicating terrorism will not be possible without
eliminating its funding resources. For example, Da’esh
has assets of $300 million in total. We must therefore
intensify our international efforts to combat the
financing of terrorism, especially by understanding the
growing link between organized crime and terrorism
and how terrorists use financial institutions and the
dark web to obtain financing.
The United Arab Emirates continues to implement
the latest recommendations by the Financial Action
Task Force, in addition to providing our financial
intelligence units with state-of-the-art equipment and
21-18152

07/07/2021

expertise. My country also established an executive
office this year to address money-laundering and the
financing terrorism, as the competent authority to
combat those crimes.
Similarly, we should continue our efforts to
understand how the coronavirus disease pandemic
is being used by terrorist groups to their advantage.
Terrorist groups have used the pandemic to spread
their extremist rhetoric and launch more attacks.
Countries should also continue to enhance their
national frameworks and implement their commitments
under the relevant United Nations resolutions and
international law. My country has adopted many
national laws to combat terrorists and fight ways of
financing them. We also joined more than 15 regional
and international counter-terrorism conventions,
in addition to sponsoring many relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Military action by the international community
against terrorist groups continues to be necessary. My
country therefore continues to support the international
coalition against Da’esh and provides assistance to
regional and international forces, such as the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel, to fight terrorism
wherever it is found.
In conclusion, the international community must
continue its efforts to combat terrorism, its perpetrators
and those who provide them with support and funding.
My country stresses that this issue remains at the top
of our priorities, including during our membership in
the Security Council for the term from 2022 to 2023.
We look forward to working with all Member States
to make more progress in this regard and maintain
international peace and security.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
country’s delegation commends the co-facilitators, the
Permanent Representative of the sisterly Sultanate of
Oman and the Permanent Representative of the friendly
Kingdom of Spain, for their tireless efforts to bring
together views throughout the long negotiations on the
seventh review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of the sisterly
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (see A/75/PV.88).

A/75/PV.90

Terrorism, which is a cross-border phenomenon
with multiple sources of financing, is a global
challenge that affects various aspects of life and is a
grave violation of the legal and ethical frameworks
that prevail throughout the international community.
It poses a constant and serious threat to international
peace and security. Iraq is one of the countries that have
been most severely affected by terrorist acts. Terrorist
groups have constantly attempted to undermine the
security and stability of my country by targeting its
infrastructure, killing civilians and spreading terror in
the form of atrocities and horrific acts of torture.
The Iraqi security forces have taken full
responsibility for responding to that threat. In defence
of the peace and security of Iraq and the international
community, they spare no effort in combating terrorism
and violent extremism conducive to terrorism, at the
cost of thousands of victims and martyrs. Despite
significant national and international efforts, Da’esh
gangs and other terrorist groups continue to target
the Iraqi people and undermine the country’s security
and disseminate extremist ideas that run counter to
the principles of Islam and other religions, as well as
human values in general.
Iraq’s experience in combating terrorism compels
us to reaffirm the importance of strengthening
international cooperation and ensuring that Member
States deliver on their commitments under the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular those on
preventing the financing of terrorism, providing
logistical support to terrorists and the illicit trade by
terrorist gangs in oil, weapons and archaeological
artefacts, while making concerted and determined
efforts to prevent foreign terrorists from crossing
international borders.
We do so because of our great concern for
international peace and security. Our experience
in the area of counter-terrorism has shown that the
threat posed by terrorism is not limited to specific
peoples or geographic regions. The Government of the
Republic of Iraq remains committed to cooperating
with the international community to combat terrorism,
especially the terrorist group Da’esh, with a view to
eradicating it completely and bringing terrorists to
justice to be duly punished in order to strengthen the
foundations of international peace and security.
My country’s Government reiterates its commitment
to combating terrorism in all its forms and rejects any

21-181529/20

A/75/PV.90

entity or approach that embraces violence, terrorism,
Takfirism and hate speech. The Government is also
committed to prohibiting the use of its territories as a
theatre of operation for terrorists. Iraq condemns all
terrorist acts in all countries of the world and calls for
the consolidation and coordination of all international
and regional efforts to counter terrorism, regardless
of its origin or name. We also call for strengthened
cooperation among security forces and intelligence
agencies and the sharing of experiences and information
at the bilateral and multilateral levels.
Iraq is determined to develop its national counterterrorism strategy in line with the latest international
developments in the area of combating terrorism and
the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Iraq is committed to
ensuring that its national strategy will be an inclusive
one that combats extremist ideas and organized crime,
while eliminating the sources of terrorist financing and
fighting terrorism on the ground.
In that regard, Iraq appreciates the sustained
efforts of relevant United Nations entities, led by the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
in their endeavours to coordinate international efforts
and enhance national capacity through workshops and
capacity-building programmes. Iraq stands ready to
share its experience with the international community
in various areas of counter-terrorism.
My country prioritizes the following issues in
countering terrorism: eliminating terrorist financing
sources, repatriating the families of foreign terrorists,
monitoring cyberthreats, border control, tackling
organized crime linked to terrorism, preventing access
for terrorists to chemical and biological weapons and
sharing intelligence and experiences. My delegation
noted that the long and difficult negotiations on
the seventh review of the Strategy were sometimes
complicated, leading to sharp differences of opinion.
That is undesirable, as it hampers the efforts to combat
the shared threat of terrorism.
As we were determined to reach a unanimous
outcome, my delegation showed flexibility during
the negotiations and made several compromises with
regard to some of its priorities and concerns related to
counter-terrorism.
I would like to commend the work of the
co-facilitators and the supportive and flexible positions
10/20

07/07/2021

demonstrated by Member States to preserve the text
concerning the return to their countries of origin of
the detained families of foreign terrorists held in Iraq
and Syria. My delegation believes that settling that
issue and preventing foreign terrorists from crossing
borders would greatly reduce the chances of the spread
of violent extremism conducive to terrorism and the
resulting material and security burden shouldered by
my Government in that regard.
In conclusion, my delegation supports and welcomes
the adoption of resolution 75/291, while underscoring
its great concern about strengthening a number of areas
of cooperation with the international community.
Mr. Imohe (Nigeria): Nigeria aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (see A/75/PV.88), which
highlighted the extreme flexibility demonstrated by all
parties in this Hall to ensure that the seventh review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
achieved consensus.
Nigeria welcomes the consensual adoption of
the review in resolution 75/291, as this is yet further
testament to the universal condemnation of terrorism
in all its manifestation and signals increased global
resolve and cooperation to squarely address the threat.
The review also provides another opportunity to
strengthen multilateral structures to deny terrorists
and violent extremists the ability to radicalize, recruit,
plan, acquire funds and weapons, travel and execute
terrorist attacks.
The review also attempted to update the Strategy
to account for new and emerging trends in the
terrorism landscape. In that regard, I would like to
extend my delegation’s gratitude to the Permanent
Representatives of Oman and Spain, as co-facilitators of
the process, as well as to their delegations, for convening
the informal briefing on the threat of terrorism in Africa
and for their tireless and robust efforts in steering the
review process to reach consensus.
Nigeria continues to grapple with the threat of
terrorism, and we are now, unfortunately, witnessing a
growing nexus between terrorism, banditry and other
forms of criminality in the country. In response, our
Government continues to prioritize the strengthening of
our criminal justice system to ensure that all terrorists
are held to account for their crimes.
21-18152

07/07/2021

The growing affiliate relationships among terrorist
groups in the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel and Da’esh
and Al-Qaida for the purposes of funding, training,
expansion and influence continue to be a worrisome
trend that has global implications. As such, we urge all
Member States and the wider international community
to see the threat of terrorism in any particular country
as a threat to global peace and security.
The increasing incidence of mass kidnappings
of students from schools is a significant threat to
education in the country, which is fast becoming a
great disincentive for both parents and students. It is
pertinent that the seventh review once again upholds
the right to education for all children and their primary
status as victims. The Government of Nigeria continues
to take feasible measures to protect schools from
terrorist attacks in order to ensure that all children
have unimpeded access to education. We are also fully
committed to promoting and protecting the rights of all
victims of terrorism and look forward to the convening
of the first Global Victims of Terrorism Congress later
this year.
Furthermore, we acknowledge that online terrorist
content is a critical driver for recruitment, and in recent
times we have seen how that threat has aided the rise of
ethnic- and religious-motivated terrorist attacks across
the world. As such, we welcome the new language in
the review that addresses the dissemination of hate
speech, misinformation and propaganda, as well as the
misuse of information and communications technology
by terrorist groups.
We recognize the need to embed respect for the rule
of law, human rights law and international humanitarian
law in counter-terrorism measures. However, given
the immense devastation brought upon communities
and their residents, especially women and children,
by these terrorists, we support the position taken by
other delegations during the negotiations that there
are no obligations under international law that require
the unrestricted delivery of humanitarian or other
assistance to terrorist groups or individual terrorists at
all times.
Lastly, we appreciate the continued efforts of
the Office of Counter-Terrorism in implementing
its mandate, especially its deployment of capacitybuilding programmes, and we look forward to working
with all mandated United Nations entities to achieve the
integrated and balanced implementation of the Strategy

A/75/PV.90

across the United Nations system, consistent with
respect for national ownership and national priorities.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, allow me to thank the President
of the General Assembly for the opportunity to
make some concluding remarks at today’s debate
to mark the seventh review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the end of
Counter-terrorism Week.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General and
the Under-Secretary-General of the Office of CounterTerrorism, Vladimir Voronkov, for the intense schedule
and high level of preparation for the Conference of Heads
of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member States.
Russia took an active part in that event. During
the Conference, our approaches and best practices
on the most pressing issues on the counter-terrorism
agenda were shared by high-ranking representatives
of competent agencies in our country. We would
like to use our statement today to provide general
observations and takeaways with regard to the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy review
process and the development of our joint statement
by a group of like-minded States, which we presented
after the adoption of resolution 75/291, on 30 June
(see A/75/PV.88).
The Russian delegation would like to congratulate
all those colleagues present in the Hall on the conclusion
of the negotiating process. Despite the difficult and
at times tense discussions, we were able to maintain
consensus on the resolution. That is key for further
productive counter-terrorism work within our global
Organization. It is an outcome we achieved together.
The text of the resolution was prepared under the
unprecedented and difficult conditions of the pandemic.
To address common issues such as the coronavirus
pandemic, the attendant radicalization of the population
and evolving terrorist threats, the international
community must come together as a unified counterterrorism front. We must also provide comprehensive
assistance to countries in need, in particular those
whose capacity was weakened by the pandemic.
The events of the past century tell us that there
is no other way forward. One of the consequences
of the bloodshed and disunity among States during
the First World War was the inability of the warring
States to successfully address the insidious common

21-1815211/20

A/75/PV.90

threat of the Spanish influenza epidemic. In that
context, negotiations on this resolution, in particular
during the later stages of the process, led to unpleasant
associations.
The Second World War led to even worse
consequences for humankind, as a result of the spread
of an ideological plague — Nazism and fascism.
Despite the plague’s obvious evil, it was not eliminated.
Recently, Nazism and fascism have again emerged and
even found Government support in certain countries.
We consider them to be the most serious kinds of racially
motivated extremism, as described in the Strategy.
Moreover, we must not forget the traditional threats
from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida,
associated groups and international battalions of foreign
terrorist fighters (FTFs). Our joint efforts have allowed
us to preserve and strengthen in the resolution the
language of all key provisions regarding the criminal
prosecution of FTFs, on the basis of the extradite or
prosecute principle, with the ultimate goal of ensuring
the inevitability of punishment. Similarly, we welcome
the new provisions on ensuring the proportionality
of criminal sentences to the gravity of the crimes
committed by the fighters.
On 2 July, a decree from the President of the Russian
Federation, Mr. Putin, approved a new national security
strategy. We are pleased to note that, with regard to
counter-terrorism, our strategy fully adheres to the
substance of the review resolution. Both documents
prioritize intercepting the financing and resource
channels that assist terrorists. The resolution focuses
in particular on directives to combat the illicit trade
in weapons, ammunition and explosives, as well as
on provisions to combat the nexus between terrorism,
organized crime and drug traffickers. The document
also highlights the issue of terrorists using new
technology for propaganda, recruitment and training
purposes and for committing terrorist attacks.
Lastly, in the text of the resolution we underscored
the primary responsibility of States to ensure the
protection of critical infrastructure from terrorism.
To succeed in those tasks, it is crucial to develop
cooperation among intelligence agencies, security
services and law enforcement entities, which is also
emphasized in the resolution we adopted. For our part,
we aim to rigorously adhere to all outcomes of the
Strategy review. That is an imperative for our country,
12/20

07/07/2021

as we are well aware of the burden of combating
terrorism and foreign interference.
The Strategy review addressed one of the principal
disputes — that of determining which is of greater
importance: ensuring the safety of citizens or protecting
their rights. Russia has consistently supported the
underlying rationale of the Strategy, which is itself
based on the complementary nature of such efforts and
the equal importance of all four pillars of the Strategy.
However, during the review we observed flagrant
examples of double standards on that issue. Several
of our Western colleagues who made strident calls
for human rights to be prioritized changed their tune
when the issue of repatriation from conflict zones was
raised. They placed their own security above the rights
of citizens.
Over the past two weeks, much has been said
about the need to save under-age children in camps in
northern Syria and the importance of their swift return
home, rehabilitation and return to peaceful life. We
have nothing to add to that discussion. We can only
hope that, in accordance with the new provisions of
resolution 75/291, all participating States will work
to maintain the inalienable rights of those innocent
children — first and foremost the right to life.
The task of eliminating extremist and terrorist
ideology is extremely urgent. For years, it was repeatedly
explained to us that deleting terrorist content from the
Internet was not a matter to be addressed in General
Assembly decisions. As it turns out, that was true only
until terrorist propaganda began to pose a direct threat
to certain countries. Ultimately, what is important is
that we were able to find mutually acceptable formula:
communication service providers must strictly adhere
to the legislation of the country in which they operate
as it pertains to countering illegal content.
We would also like to draw attention to the new
provisions on the so-called humanitarian dimension of
measures to ensure security. At the outset, it should be
stated that the importance of unimpeded provision of
humanitarian aid to areas of armed conflict is by no
means in doubt. The declared objective of creating
the conditions for humanitarian organizations and
medical personnel to operate, in and of itself, should
not be used as the basis for States not to fulfil their
counter-terrorism obligations.
The adoption of the resolution also exacerbated the
issue of institutional parameters of counter-terrorism
21-18152

07/07/2021

efforts under the auspices of the United Nations. We are
of the view that addressing the allocation of additional
resources from the regular budget to the Office of
Counter-Terrorism is of paramount importance.
Attempts to shape the Office’s activities based on
the priorities of specific countries are absolutely
unacceptable.
The Secretary-General is tasked with presenting
a range of recommendations by the time of the next
Strategy review, including on the human rights aspects
of counter-terrorism. We expect that they will be
drafted in close cooperation with interested States,
in compliance with United Nations practices for the
division of labour. The effectiveness of the relevant
Secretariat entities must be assessed based on counterterrorism activities. For the human rights component
to be assessed, we need nothing more than the entities
already in existence.
Regrettably, we must end our statement on a negative
note, with our right of reply. Yesterday, our Ukrainian
colleagues attempted to change the discussion on
counter-terrorism in the General Assembly and move
it onto a propagandistic path (see A/75/PV.89). Once
again, these baseless accusations against Russia are a
clear example of what Ukraine calls a disinformation
campaign at the State level.
From the very beginning of the internal conflict
in Ukraine, the authorities of this country preferred to
refuse to engage in direct dialogue with its own people
and relief on a military solution for the accumulated
problems. Ignoring Security Council resolution 2202
(2015), which set out the Minsk agreements and how
they would be implemented, Ukraine continues to
wage a war with the people of Donbas and does not
cease its futile attempts to find the culprits behind
its own mistakes and crimes in Moscow. Regrettably,
that approach has not only proved to be ineffective
in resolving the conflict, but it also undermines
international cooperation in combating terrorism.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on this item. There
is a request for the exercise of the right of reply. May
I remind members that statements in the exercise of
the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first
intervention and five minutes for the second and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

A/75/PV.90

Mrs. Syrota (Ukraine): I would like to make some
brief remarks in response to the Russian delegation’s
intervention. I will not repeat the statement I made
yesterday (see A/75/PV.89) or go through the long list
of legal instruments that have been violated by the
Russian Federation, not to mention all the evidence
of numerous crimes, because they go far beyond the
counter-terrorism framework.
We truly regret that the list of international legal
norms that have been brutally violated by the Russian
Federation, including in the areas of counter-terrorism,
is getting longer. The same trend is happening with the
list of victims of Russian aggression, including medical
personnel, journalists, women and girls. The continuing
calls to halt violations of international law and stop
undermining institutions are not heard by Russia.
The situation proves that accommodating or
appeasing an aggressor risks further aggression. The
switching of blame, manipulation and propaganda,
interference in the internal affairs of States, fuelling
international conflicts and killing civilians — that is the
political course of the Russian Federation. That is why
it is critically important to firmly hold the aggressor to
account and employ all the necessary instruments to
make it return to the tenets of international law.
We believe that sooner, rather than later, Russia
will have to recognize and experience the power,
efficiency and effectiveness of international law, and
the perpetrators will be brought to justice for all the
crimes they have shamelessly and brazenly committed.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 123?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 72 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
Draft decision A/75/L.106
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Members
will recall that the General Assembly concluded its
consideration of agenda item 72 at its 48th plenary
meeting, on 31 December 2020. In order for the
Assembly to take action on the draft decision, it will be
necessary to reopen consideration of agenda item 72.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to reopen its consideration of agenda item 72?

21-1815213/20

A/75/PV.90

It was so decided (decision 75/504 B).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Members
will recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting, held on
18 September 2020, the General Assembly decided to
allocate agenda item 72 to the Third Committee. To
enable the Assembly to take action expeditiously on
the document, may I take it that the Assembly wishes
to consider agenda item 72 directly in plenary meeting
and proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We shall
now proceed to consider draft decision A/75/L.106,
entitled “Towards torture-free trade: examining the
feasibility, scope and parameters for possible common
international standards”.

07/07/2021

The Secretary-General conducted such consultations
with the Government of Cambodia and the Extraordinary
Chambers. The result of those consultations is the
draft addendum to the agreement between the United
Nations and the Royal Government of Cambodia
concerning the prosecution, under Cambodian law, of
crimes committed during the period of the Democratic
Kampuchea, on the transitional arrangements and on the
completion of work of the Extraordinary Chambers, as
contained in the annex to the draft resolution. If adopted,
the resolution would approve the draft addendum so
that it can enter into force and be implemented in a
timely manner. The draft resolution also requests the
Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
its seventy-seventh session.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/75/L.106?

We would like to thank the sponsors, including
Cambodia, and would welcome any further sponsors.
It is our hope that the draft resolution can be adopted
by consensus.

Draft decision A/75/L.106 was adopted (decision
75/571).

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We shall
now proceed to consider draft resolution A/75/L.107.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 72.
Agenda item 92 (continued)
Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of
Cambodia — residual functions
Draft resolution A/75/L.107
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Sweden to
introduce draft resolution A/75/L.107.
Ms. Schlyter (Sweden): Sweden, together with
France, is pleased to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.107, entitled “Extraordinary Chambers in the
Courts of Cambodia-residual functions”.
In its resolution 75/257, of 31 December 2020, the
General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to
continue consultations with the Extraordinary Chambers
in the Courts of Cambodia and the Government of
Cambodia in order to finalize, for consideration by the
Assembly, a proposed framework for the completion
of the work of the Extraordinary Chambers, including
with regard to the drawdown of activities and residual
functions requiring performance.
14/20

I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 2 and 3 of draft
resolution A/75/L.107, the General Assembly would urge
“the Secretary-General and the Royal Government
of Cambodia to take all the measures necessary to
allow the draft addendum referred to in paragraph
1 to enter into force in a timely manner, and to
implement it fully after its entry into force”
and would request
“the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its seventy-seventh session on the
implementation of the present resolution.”
With regard to those paragraphs of the draft
resolution, it is understood that the costs of translating
the report in six languages, as well as the cost of
carrying out the residual functions outlined in the draft
addendum, would be funded by voluntary contributions
received by the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts
of Cambodia, on the assumption that the amount of
voluntary contributions would be sufficient to cover
21-18152

07/07/2021

A/75/PV.90

such costs. Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution
A/75/L.107 would not entail any budgetary implications
with regard to the programme budget.
The statement I just read out was distributed through
the plenary place on the e-deleGATE portal and will be
made available in The Journal of the United Nations
and under the e-statements link for today’s meeting.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/75/L.107, entitled “Extraordinary Chambers in the
Courts of Cambodia-residual functions”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to the delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/75/L.107: the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Finland, Georgia and Ukraine.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/75/L.107?
Draft resolution A/75/L.107 was adopted (resolution
75/257 B).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Cambodia,
who wishes to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted.
Mr. Ke (Cambodia): At the outset, I would like to
thank the President for convening this meeting under
agenda item 92 for the consideration of, and action on,
resolution 75/257 B, entitled “Extraordinary Chambers
in the Courts of Cambodia-residual functions”. I
would also like to express my sincere thanks to the
Secretary-General for his report (A/75/809) pertaining
to the completion of the mandate of the Extraordinary
Chambers. My sincere thanks and appreciation also
go to the representative of Sweden for introducing
the resolution under this agenda item. As one of the
co-sponsors, Cambodia fully supports and welcomes
the adoption of the resolution.
In accordance with its mandate, the Extraordinary
Chambers prosecuted the most senior members of
Democratic Kampuchea for the serious crimes they
committed during the period from 1975 to 1979,

including genocide and crimes against humanity, in
grave violation of national laws and international law,
as well as grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions
of 1949. The perpetrators have been brought to
justice. The successful completion of the mandate
of the Extraordinary Chambers would send a clear
message that the international community supports
the institutions established to bring justice for, and
protect the victims of, crimes against humanity and to
hold those perpetrators accountable. That is a historic
achievement not only for Cambodia but also for
all humankind.
As the Extraordinary Chambers winds down
its work, it is recognized that there is a need to
address residual functions after its closure. Through
consultations, the Government of Cambodia and the
United Nations concluded a framework in the format of
the draft addendum to the 2003 Agreement between the
United Nations and the Royal Government of Cambodia
concerning the Prosecution under Cambodian Law of
Crimes Committed during the Period of Democratic
Kampuchea on the transitional arrangements and the
completion of work of the Extraordinary Chambers
(resolution 75/257 B, annex), including the drawdown of
activities and residual functions requiring performance.
The resolution before the Assembly today provides
the mandate for the Secretary-General and the Royal
Government of Cambodia to take the necessary
measures to allow the draft addendum to enter into
force in a timely manner. I would therefore like to
thank all the States Members of the United Nations for
supporting the resolution. After this adoption, the Royal
Government of Cambodia will take the necessary steps
in a timely manner to ratify the draft addendum.
I would also like to reiterate our appeal to the
international community for its continued support,
including financial support, to the Extraordinary
Chambers to fully complete its mandate and begin its
residual functions promptly and smoothly.
In conclusion, I would like to convey my
Government’s sincere appreciation and deep gratitude
to the Principal Donors Group for its contribution and
good cooperation throughout the process. I would
also like to express our thanks and gratitude to His
Excellency Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares, UnderSecretary-General for Legal Affairs and United
Nations Legal Counsel, as well as Mr. Steven Mathias,
Assistant Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, and his

21-1815215/20

A/75/PV.90

07/07/2021

team for all the support and cooperation rendered to the
Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia.

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the only speaker in explanation of position after
the adoption.

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to the delegations listed on the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/75/L.103: Albania, Andorra, Armenia,
Austria, Belgium, Benin, the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Canada, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Ecuador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland. France, the Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Ireland, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Morocco, Nauru, the Niger, Palau, Papua
New Guinea, the Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, the
Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand,
Togo, Tunisia, Ukraine, the United States of America,
Uruguay and Vanuatu.

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 92?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 130 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(j) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Organization of
la Francophonie
Draft resolution (A/75/L.103)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Côte d’Ivoire to
introduce draft resolution A/75/L.103.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to warmly thank all the delegations
that took part in the negotiations on draft resolution
A/75/L.103, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the International Organization of la
Francophonie”, which is on the agenda of this meeting
of the General Assembly.
During the 13 informal consultations and the 20 or
so bilateral meetings, delegations showed flexibility
and a spirit of compromise, which enabled us to hope
that this draft resolution could be adopted by consensus.
We remain optimistic about a successful outcome
despite the observations that could be made by certain
delegations, whose constructive participation we once
again welcome.
Côte d’Ivoire therefore urges all delegations to
work towards the adoption of the draft resolution
by consensus.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/75/L.103, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the International Organization of la
Francophonie”. For the Assembly’s information, the
draft resolution has closed for e-sponsorship.
16/20

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Armenia on a
point of order.
Mr. Grigoryan (Armenia): On a point of order,
I would like to draw the attention of the General
Assembly to the fact that there has been a change in
draft resolution A/75/L.103. There are some differences
between the draft text that passed the silence procedure
and the draft text that is now presented, and they are not
just procedural. There are important differences. We
would therefore like to ask the Secretariat to go back to
the draft text that already passed the silence procedure.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I give
the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): As the President announced
for this meeting and was announced for this meeting in
The Journal of the United Nations, the Assembly has
before it document A/75/L.103. That is the proposal that
the Assembly has before it at this meeting.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Does
that address the query put forward by the representative
of Armenia?
I give the floor to the representative of Armenia.
21-18152

07/07/2021

Mr. Grigoryan (Armenia): I thank the Secretariat
for its comment, but I would like to insist that these
changes are important. I would also like to insist that
the Secretariat present the draft text that initially passed
the silence procedure and was agreed by the members
of the Assembly.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I give
the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): Through you,
Mr. President, I would like to advise the delegation of
Armenia that the silence procedure did not go through
the Secretariat. The only document that the Secretariat
was asked to process for issuance is the draft document
A/75/L.103, which the Assembly has before it.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I give
the floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Grigoryan (Armenia): I apologize for taking
the floor again but, in order to show that the change
that has been made is not procedural and that it is very
important, I would like to stress that, in the twelfth
preambular paragraph, the language agreed by the
Assembly during the negotiations was the following:
“Welcoming the adoption of the Yerevan
Declaration at the seventeenth Summit of la
Francophonie, held in Yerevan on 11 and 12 October
2018 on the theme ‘Living together in solidarity,
with shared humanistic values and respect for
diversity: a source of peace and prosperity for
the French-speaking community’, and noting the
decision to hold the eighteenth Summit in Djerba
in November 2021”.
In the draft text, we now have a different picture.
The draft text that I read out, which passed the silence
procedure, was also the agreed language of the previous
similar resolution 73/290.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I will
now suspend the meeting for 10 minutes. May I kindly
request delegations to remain in their seats while we
conduct consultations. I would ask the Permanent
Representative of Côte d’Ivoire to consult with the
representative of Armenia with a view to finding a
solution to this particular issue.
The meeting was suspended at 11.50 a.m. and
resumed at noon.

A/75/PV.90

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): During the suspension of the
meeting, the Secretariat was informed by the sponsor of
draft resolution A/75/L.103 that the draft has now been
orally corrected to change its thirteenth preambular
paragraph. That paragraph begins “Recalling the
adoption of the Yerevan Declaration”. The word
“Recalling”, according to the information provided to
the Secretariat by the sponsor of the draft resolution,
has now been corrected to read “Welcoming”. So the
thirteenth preambular paragraph of draft resolution
A/75/L.103 has now been corrected to read “Welcoming
the adoption of the Yerevan Declaration”.
The Assembly now has before it draft resolution
A/75/L.103, as orally corrected.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that the General Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/75/L.103, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/75/L.103, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 75/307).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to speakers in explanation of vote, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Gusman (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
the delegation of Côte d’Ivoire, the facilitator of
resolution 75/307, for its dedication and tireless work
on resolution 75/307.
We recognize that cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations is essential to the
promotion of the purposes and principles of the United
Nations. As a strong advocate of enhancing dialogue
between civilizations and cultures, Azerbaijan supports
and shares the main objectives of the International
Organization of la Francophonie, which has become an
important multilateral cooperation framework.
The French language, education and culture are
thriving in Azerbaijan. In 2014, a French lyceum was
opened in Baku that now has more than 400 students
and operates based on the French national curriculum.
Another successful educational project is the French
Azerbaijani University, a joint project led by the

21-1815217/20

A/75/PV.90

University of Strasbourg and the Azerbaijan State Oil
and Industry University.
The delegation of Azerbaijan actively participated
in the process of negotiations on the draft resolution
contained in document A/75/L.103. We took note of the
fact that the proposal we put forward during informal
consultations was given some consideration.
We joined the consensus on the resolution 75/307
today. However, we dissociate ourselves from the
thirteenth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraph 48. The reasons for that, unfortunately,
remain the same this year, and our delegation has
already explained its position to that end previously.
Mr. Altarsha (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation joined the consensus
on resolution 75/307, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the International Organization
of la Francophonie”, prepared by the delegation of
Côte d’Ivoire.
However, we must express our dissatisfaction
because the text contained a set of phrases and words
that are not consensual and do not take our concerns
into consideration. The most important of those is
contained in operative paragraph 9, which is aimed,
in form, at focusing on the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in all aspects and at all levels of
conflict. But what do we mean by saying in all aspects
of conflict|? The protection of women is the same as
that of any other individual and is linked to protecting
society as a whole in all cases, not only in conflict
situations. We also note that it would have been better
for the text to stay away from any reference to meetings,
forums or initiatives that do not enjoy international
participation and attempts to reflect their outcome in a
consensual text to be considered under an agenda item
of the General Assembly.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation supported resolution
75/307, prepared by Côte d’Ivoire, on “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the International
Organization of la Francophonie”.
However, we wish to express our disappointment
at the fact that this document contains a range of
formulations that do not reflect the concerns of our
delegation. These include the issue of the proposed
drafting of operative paragraph 9, on issues related to
women. We regret that the author, instead of reflecting
18/20

07/07/2021

language from 2019 in that paragraph, chose instead to
use language that is unclear and had not been previously
agreed upon on the full, equal and meaningful
participation and protection of women in all aspects
and at all levels of conflict prevention.
Because of our love and respect for women, we are
of the view that decisions on the participation of women
in these issues should not be taken automatically
but, rather, should be based on the criteria of actual
contributions that one candidate or another could make
to peacebuilding efforts.
Regarding the protection of women and of the
civilian population as a whole, it must be ensured not
only in the context of conflict prevention but also during
armed conflict and in post-conflict reconstruction. It is
also unclear what the authors meant by “all aspects and
at all levels of conflict prevention”.
Finally, our comments on operative paragraph 41
were not included. That paragraph includes a reference
to the controversial Franco-Mexican initiative entitled
Generation Equality Forum. The Russian Federation has
repeatedly expressed its concerns about that Forum’s
inclusion, as its approaches are not consensus-based
and its organizers are striving to force their vision of
women’s issues onto the United Nations.
As members are aware, the States Members of the
United Nations did not mandate the holding of the Forum
but simply noted the initiative, which was carried out
under the leadership of the two aforementioned States.
That is our understanding of the issue.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in explanation of vote after
the voting.
We will now hear a statement following the
adoption of resolution 75/307.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today’s adoption of resolution
75/307, on “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Organization of la Francophonie”.
Last year was a special year for the International
Organization of la Francophonie (OIF), as it celebrated
its fiftieth anniversary. Throughout the years, the
organization has expanded considerably, from 21 to 88
full member States, associate members and observers,
located on five continents. The organization thus
represents more than a third of the States members
21-18152

07/07/2021

of the General Assembly and promotes multilateral
cooperation in common areas of interest.
As an observer country to the OIF, Ukraine fully
supports the activities of the organization aimed at
addressing global challenges, ensuring sustainable
development and defending democracy and human
rights throughout the world. We fully support the
activities aimed at promoting the French language
and at guaranteeing peace, democracy and solidarity,
as these are at the heart of the concerns of millions of
people throughout the world.
I wish here to commend the efforts made by the OIF
to address the coronavirus disease pandemic, including
through the creation of the La Francophonie avec Elles
solidarity fund, which provides technical and financial
support to women and girls in vulnerable situations,
so that they have full and equal access to economic
development, education and health care.
We encourage the OIF to continue to protect human
rights, guarantee gender equality and the empowerment
of women, girls and youth, and to ensure their more
active participation in society, as they are our future.
We are convinced that the actions taken by the OIF
through diplomatic channels and direct contacts, as
we are doing today, contribute significantly to the
promotion of the principles of democracy, building the
rule of law and to peace and security.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is crucial in promoting the
purposes and principles of the United Nations. The
OIF’s activities have become an important framework
for multilateral cooperation. Ukraine fully supports
the activities of the organization in combating
disinformation, in particular efforts undertaken to
counter the spread of stigmatization and false and
misleading information.
According to the Charter of the OIF, the
organization focuses particularly on facilitating the
prevention, management and settlement of conflicts
and focuses on the promotion of the rule of law and
human rights. Those goals are areas of interest for the
Security Council.
Since the founding of the United Nations, the
fundamental norms of its Charter have been violated
repeatedly. I wish to take this opportunity to thank
the OIF for having supported the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and political independence of Ukraine, as

A/75/PV.90

well as its policy condemning the attempted annexation
by Russia of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and
the city of Sevastopol and its non-recognition of the
legitimacy of that annexation. That is fully in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the Charter of the OIF. Please be
aware that we in Ukraine greatly appreciate this.
The success of the OIF’s action for peace and
democracy depends first and foremost on our solidarity.
On behalf of my country, I wish to reiterate Ukraine’s
firm commitment to promoting those values and the
fact that the organization can always count on us.
In conclusion, I wish to underline that the role of
regional organizations depends greatly on cooperation
with the United Nations. That will make the world more
peaceful and stable, more resistant to conflicts and
pandemics and more open and united.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the observer of the International
Organization of la Francophonie.
Ms. Herdt (International Organization of la
Francophonie) (spoke in French): We learned with
horror of the assassination of President Jovenel Moïse,
and, on behalf of the International Organization of
la Francophonie (OIF), we wish to express our most
sincere condolences to his family and to the people
of Haiti. We are more than ever at the side of Haiti, a
founding member of the OIF.
I wish, on behalf of the OIF, to thank the members
of the General Assembly for the adoption by consensus
of resolution 75/307, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the International Organization
of la Francophonie”. I wish to convey the gratitude of
Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, Secretary General of the
International Organization of la Francophonie, and all
the members of the organization, that is, 88 member
States and Governments spread over five continents, of
which 81 States are Members of the United Nations.
I wish to express the gratitude of the OIF to the
President of the General Assembly at its seventyfifth session, His Excellency Volkan Bozkir, and to
the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres, for the importance that they attach to the
partnership with our organization.
The resolution, elaborated and discussed by States
Members of the United Nations, was facilitated by
the delegation of Côte d’Ivoire, which I warmly thank

21-1815219/20

A/75/PV.90

07/07/2021

for its tireless efforts. I also wish to commend the
mobilization and solidarity of the Group of Francophone
Ambassadors, which contributes significantly to the
promotion of the values and ideals of the Francophonie
within the United Nations.

within our multilateral system, to achieving peak
performance of peacekeeping operations and to
defending fundamental rights and human dignity as
well as realizing gender equality and the full potential
of youth.

We welcome the fruitful cooperation between the
United Nations and the OIF and the joint actions that we
carry out daily on the ground. Resolution 75/307, which
the Assembly has just adopted, reflects the values that
we share and our common understanding of the fact
that we have major challenges to address as well as
opportunities that we must seize so as to build a world
that is more just and an economy that is more sustainable
in response to the coronavirus disease pandemic.

The resolution is thus a reflection of the efforts
undertaken by the OIF and the United Nations to better
coordinate our actions and to achieve more concrete
results for the peoples that we serve. I thus reiterate
the full availability of the OIF to work in an ongoing
manner to bolster that cooperation in future.

Given those challenges, the International
Organization of la Francophonie is working to become
a force for proposals and for action. We are contributing
fully to the defence of multilingualism and to ensuring
increased priority for cultural and linguistic diversity

20/20

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of sub-item (j) of agenda
item 130?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

21-18152
