UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

MAY2 9 1986

2194’”

MEETING:

31 JANUARY

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
. . , . , . . . . . , , . , . , , . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . , . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . , . . . , , , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 25 January 1980 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Malawi to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13764) . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2194)

SlPV.2194

I+{
,j’

j *.. :;:,- .,i,i

i, ,$.’

NOTE

Symbols of,United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined”iith
figures;“~Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document,
“.
!+*i;‘. !! b&ume&
ofit’ho Se&rity Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Officicrl Records of tke Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions bind
Decisiorrs of the Secwity Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2194th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
Presidenr:

Mr. Jacques LEPRETTE

31 January

(France).

Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Zaire in which he requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in conformity
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh,
China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2194)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kamanda
wa Kamanda (Zaire) took the place reserved for him
at the side of the Council chamber.

1.

Adoption

2.

Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 25 January 1980 from the Chargt
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Malawi to the United Nations addressed to
the President
of the Security
Council
(S/ 13764)
The meeting

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretution from French):
The first speaker is the representative
of Somalia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
4. Mr. SHARIF
(Somalia):
Mr. President, I am
grateful to you and to the other members of the
Security Council for giving me this opportunity
to
speak on a matter of deep concern to my Government.
We are concerned about the situation in Rhodesia,
not only as an African State, but also as a member
of the Liberation Committee
of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU).

was called to order at 4.55 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 25 January 1980 from the Charg6
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Malawi
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/13764)

5. Ever since Ian Smith’s unilateral declaration of
independence, Somalia has done all it could to give
moral and material support to the legitimate struggle
of the people of Zimbabwe for freedom from racist
colonial domination.
After I4 years marked by cruel
oppression and tragic conflict-a
conflict that was
wasteful in terms of human lives and political and
economic progress- the authentic leaders of the people of Zimbabwe were able to win for them the prospect of peace and an opportunity
to fulfil their just
political and social aspirations. Today that prospect
is once more in jeopardy and the Security Council
must again deal with a problem that has shattered the
peace of a region and threatened international
peace
and security.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 2192nd
and 2193rd meetings, I invite the representatives of
Algeria, Botswana, Cuba, Egypt, Liberia, Malawi,
Mozambique,
Nigeria, Somalia, the United Republic
of Tanzania, Viet Nam and Yugoslavia to participate
in the debate without the right to vote.
Af the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Becfiaoui
(Algeria), Mr. Tlou (Botswana),
Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba),
Mr. Ahdel Meguid (Egypt),
Mr. Dennis (Liberia).
Mr. Muwamba
(Malawi),
Mr. Monteiro
(Mozambique), Mr. Clark (Nigeria),
Mr. Sharif (Somalia),
Mr.
Mkapa
(United
Republic
of
Tanzania),
Mrs. Nguyen Ngoc Dung (Viet Nam) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia)
took the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
I should like to inform the members

from

1980, at 4.30 p.m.

6. In September 1979 we hoped, with the rest of the
international community, that the unnecessary Rhodesian war would be ended and that peace and stability
would be established for Rhodesia and its neighbours.
The United Kingdom’s
assumption of its responsibilities towards a dependent
Territory
and rebel
regime,
though sadly belated,
was nevertheless
heartily welcomed by my Government., We knew that
the pre-independence
period, coming after the bitter-

French):

of the Security
1

majority of the personnel of the Monitoring
Force
would be British, with participation
by forces of
specific Commonwealth countries. The purpose of the
Monitoring
Force is simply to observe and to report
on the maintenance of the cease-fire by the Rhodesian
army, on the one hand, and by the Patriotic Front
forces, on the other. It is clearly inappropriate and
contrary to the letter and spirit of the cease-fire
agreement for units with close attachments to one
side of the conflict to be used for monitoring or security purposes. When these units do not confine themselves to observing and reporting, but engage in
harassing and intimidating Patriotic Front supporters,
then this violation of the cease-fire takes on even more
serious proportions.

ness of a protracted liberation struggle, would be a
difficult one calling for the exercise of good faith,
good judgement and discipline by all concerned.
7. The Patriotic Front must certainly be commended
for its tremendous achievement in complying with the
cease-fire agreements as far as was humanly possible
in the limited time allotted and for its sincere efforts
to turn around a war effort and redirect it towards
the goals of peace and national unity. Unfortunately,
it has become obvious that the achievements of the
last five months could be easily erased if the conditions established for free and fair elections are
violated.
8. Under the Lancaster House Agreement,’
all
powers of government are concentrated in the Governor “--iduring the pre-independence
period and ah
allegattons of improper activity are d&it with by him or
his deputy. Serious and well-substantiated allegations
of improper activity have been made by the Patriotic
Front. The Security Council clearly has a grave
responsibility
in this matter, having decided in resolution 460 (1979) that it would keep the situation in
Southern Rhodesia under review until the Territory
attained full independence.

13. It would be a more constructive approach for the
Governor to work more closely with the Cease-fire
Commission
on which all parties are represented.
Acceptable ways of handling difficult situations that
arise might then be worked out.
14. The use of South African and auxiliary forces
becomes doubly partisan and threatening when it is
seen in conjunction with the continuing detention of
political
prisoners, the restoration
of emergency
powers and martial law and the denial of the right of
return to thousands of refugees. All these actions
contravene specific provisions of the Lancaster House
Agreement. The question of the refugees in neighbouring countries is a particularly important one. It
was promised at Lancaster House that the British
Government
would facilitate their speedy return so
that they could take part in the elections.

9. The charges of the Patriotic Front were carefully
investigated by the Liberation Committee of OAU,
and the Committee’s
findings led it to ask the African
Group at the United. Nations to call for this meeting
of the Security Council. I should like to comment
briefly on some of those charges.

I

10. First of all, the use of South African troops in
Rhodesia is not only a gross violation of the Lancaster
House Agreement and of a specific provision of resolution 460 (1979), but is also an action fraught with
real danger and hateful symbolism for the people
of Zimbabwe. Zimbabweans cannot forget the Pretoria
regime’s sustained and vocal support for minority rule
in Southern Rhodesia or its declaration last year that
it could not allow a Government of which it did not
approve to assume power in Rhodesia. Neither can
they ignore the virulent propagandacampaign
launched
by South Africa through its communications
media
against the Patriotic Front.

15. The British
House that

Government

stated at Lancaster

“The question now at issue is who is to form the
future independence
Government.
The British
Government’s
position is that this must be decided
by the people of Zimbabwe in free and fair elections
in which all parties will be able to take part on equal

terms.”
And yet it is now possible for us to observe that the
administering
Power is trying to police the campaign,
if not to decide it, and to favour some candidates over
others.

11. The decision to allow South African forces to
police certain areas of Southern Rhodesia was at best
an insensitive error of judgement. Unhappily, it can
also be seen as a serious breach of faith with partisan
overtones, seriously compromising
the promise of
free and fair elections.

16. This situation is, of course, painfully apparent to
those whom it directly affects in Rhodesia and who
are appealing to the international community to bring
pressure to bear on the United Kingdom to rectify a
deteriorating situation.

12. The deployment of auxiliary forces which have
strong connections with the Rhodesian army and
the Muzorewa-Smith
regime is equally deplorable.
This development has been commented on in sections
of the international
press generally supportive of the
administering
Power. It should be noted that the
United Kingdom stated at Lancaster House that the

17. My delegation believes that the Security Council
must reaffirm and reinforce the call, made in resolution 460 (1979), for strict adherence to the agreements
reached and for their full implementation
by the
administering
Power and all the parties concerned.
The Council must demand of the United Kingdom that
justice be done and be seen to be done.
2

k

18. At the close of the Lancaster House Conference,
its Chairman, Lord Carrington, exhorted the Patriotic
Front and the Salisbury delegation to sign the ceasefire agreement and approve the pre-independence
arrangements in the following words: “To deny the
people of Rhodesia this opportunity to resolve their
problems by peaceful means would be unforgiveable”.
The administering Power could well take these words
to heart at the present time and take proper and
decisive steps to clear the path to genuine independence for the people of Zimbabwe.

24. That gentleman, who bears the primary responsibility
for ensuring strict compliance
with the
Lancaster House Agreement,l
has been conniving at
the plots of the racists and the illegal presence of
South African armed forces and mercenaries in Rhodesian territory and is refusing to facilitate the speedy
return of Zimbabwean refugees to the country, as
was stipulated in the Lancaster House Agreement.
Sources close to the patriots of Zimbabwe estimate
the South African military presence at approximately
6,000 men, organized in four battalions of infantry,
one of parachute troops, two artillery regiments and
six squadrons.

19, The PRESIDENT
(i/lte,prercrtion from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
20.

25. The Governments of the Commonwealth
and of
the front-line States, as well as the Commonwealth
Commission for Southern Africa, have drawn attention to the numerous and increasingly serious violations of the Lancaster House Agreement. The Liberation Committee
of OAU, for its part, adopted a
strong resolution at its thirty-fourth
session held at
Dar es Salaam from 21 to 25 January 1980 [see
S/13768], which expressed its serious concern about
these violations.

Mr.

ROA KOURf (Cuba) (interpretntion
jrom
Mr. President, at the outset I should like to
thank you and, through you, the other members of
the Council for having given us an opportunity to take
part in the discussion dealing with the situation in
Southern Rhodesia.

Spmish):

21. For the non-aligned countries, and in fact, for
the overwhelming majority of the international community, the accession of Zimbabwe to real independence and sovereignty constitutes a matter of principle. When it adopted resolution 460 (1979), the
Security Council called for “strict adherence to the
agreements reached [at Lancaster House], and for
their full and faithful implementation
by the administering Power and all the parties concerned”.

26. The Chairman of the movement of non-aligned
countries and President of the Republic of Cuba,
Comrade Fidel Castro, also recently sent a message
to the heads of State or Government of the non-aligned
countries regarding this dangerous situation.
27. The international
community
is observing with
increasing disquiet the evolution of events in Southern
Rhodesia and the role played by the Governor, Lord
Soames.

22. In his speech before the General Assembly at
its thirty-fourth
session, President Fidel Castro,
expressing the will of the heads of State or Government of the non-aligned countries, confirmed the
acceptance by the movement of negotiated solutions
for the problem of Zimbabwe,

28. In view of the repeated and gross violations of
the Lancaster House Agreement, it is proper to ask
oneself what are the real motives of those who are
impeding its proper implementation.
Perhaps, as has
been said in various publications,
what is involved is
a deliberate manczuvre to ensure that there will not be
true independence in Zimbabwe. Many, with wellfounded apprehension,
believe that the colonial
authorities, closely connected with the racist rCgime
of South Africa and with notorious interests in the
area, were merely planning for window dressing in
Rhodesia, having miscalculated
the powerful popular
support of the Patriotic Front forces; and that, given
the obvious manifestations of sympathy for the independence leaders, they are now attempting to apply
the old neo-colonialist
solution thus expressly contravening the Agreement
that they had solemnly
entered into.

I‘ I . . so long as they lead to the establishment
of a real government representing the majority and
the achievement of an independence that is satisfactory to the fighting peoples-and
that this be done
in accordance with the resolutions of such bodies
as the OAU, the United Nations and our own
movement of non-aligned countries.“2
23. This series of meetings of the Security Council
has been convened precisely because the administering Power, the United Kingdom, has not fulfilled
fully and faithfully the Agreement reached about a
month ago in London at the Lancaster House meeting.
To the contrary, the British Governor of Southern
Rhodesia, Lord Soames, has seriously violated the
Agreement and imperilled its very future by permitting
the Smith-Muzorewa
troops and their so-called
auxiliaries to harass and assassinate the sympathizers
of the Patriotic Front rather than confining them to
barracks as had been agreed in London.

29. The truth is that, contrary to what was agreed on
at Lancaster House, the Rhodesian forces and the socalled auxiliaries have not been confined to barracks;
South Africa is carrying out a systematic press and
radio campaign against the Patriotic Front; the Governor has not facilitated the return of the Zimbabwean
refugees to their country; the United Kingdom has
3

not fulfilled its commitment to expel the South African
military forces and mercenaries from Southern Rhodesia; there have been repeated violations of the ceasefire agreement, and it has even been claimed that the
patriots should hand over their weapons to the auxiliaries and the Rhodesian so-called security forces;
and the provisions of resolution 460 (1979) have been
ignored, particularly with regard to strict compliance
with the Lancaster House Agreement and the expulsion of all foreign troops, whether regular forces or
mercenaries.

sentative of the African National Congress of South
Africa, whom the Security Council, at its’ 2192nd
in the discussion,
meeting, invited to participate
pursuant to rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
36. Mr. MAKATINI:
Mr. President, we thank you
most sincerely for giving us this opportunity to speak.
37. The African National Congress of South Africa
(ANC) attaches a great deal of importance to the
debate now being held in the Security Council, for we
are convinced that the explosive situation prevailing
in Zimbabwe has a direct bearing on the permanently
explosive situation obtaining in South Africa.

30. In such circumstances, it is obviously not possible to establish the climate appropriate to the holding
of free and fair elections in Zimbabwe.
31. The non-aligned
countries firmly support the
Liberation Committee of OAU in its request that the
British Government comply with and implement fully
and impartially
the Lancaster House Agreement and
immediately
confine to barracks the so-called security
forces of Rhodesia and the auxiliaries, that it establish
conditions to ensure the holding of free and fair elections and to prevent the collapse of the Lancaster
House Agreement, that it take the following actions
immediately
so as to ensure that all citizens of Zimbabwe can participate freely in the electoral process:
(a) the release of all political prisoners; (b) the granting
of permission to return to all Zimbabwean exiles in
accordance with the Lancaster House Agreement;
(c) the immediate and total withdrawal of the South
African troops as well as the mercenaries now serving
in the so-called security forces of Southern Rhodesia.

38. We commend the African Group on the speedy
implementation
of the resolution on Southern Rhodesia taken at the recent session of the Liberation
Committee of OAU [ibid.] that called for the urgent
convening of the Security Council. The unfolding situation in Southern Rhodesia has been aggravated and
rendered more explosive by the numerous violations
of the Lancaster House Agreement’ being committed
by the Government of the United Kingdom.
39. We salute the African Ministers who have taken
the time to come here and present the African viewpoint-a
viewpoint that is shared by all the African
leaders and peoples, as well as the rest of progressive
mankind. The urgency with which they have reacted
to this prevailing situation is eloquent testimony to
independent Africa’s loyalty to the sacred objective
conceived by the founding fathers of OAU-that
is,
the total liberation of the African continent, inchtding
South Africa. It inspires us with the hope that, despite
the highly orchestrated campaign waged by the
Western media to derail the struggle for liberation and
genuine independence in southern Africa, the vigilance
manifested by OAU will help foil all the imperialist
manceuvres designed to perpetuate the plunder of
Africa’s riches and the exploitation
of its peoples in
southern Africa.

32. The British Governor should in no way whatsoever provide facilities to Mr. Muzorewa to carry
out his electoral campaign but should rather maintain
a strictly impartial position.
33. The Security Council should, likewise, condemn
the illegal activities being carried out by the racist
Government
of South Africa against the patriotic
forces of Zimbabwe and, particularly,
the campaign
that has been unleashed against the Patriotic Front.
The Council should also demand the immediate withdrawal of South African troops, both those which are
guarding the Beit Bridge-with
the authorization
of
Lord Soames, as he himself has confessed-and which
withdrew just yesterday, if we are to believe the
reports in the press, and those which have been
deployed throughout the Territory according to the
denunciations of the patriots of Zimbabwe.

40. The international community recalls that it was in
the wake of the dissolution of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland and the accession to independence by Zambia and Malawi, which ensued after a
bitter struggle, that the die-hard racists proclaimed the
so-called unilateral declaration of independence in
Southern Rhodesia. It will also be recalled that in the
face of that rebellion, characterized as “treason”,
the British Government stubbornly refused to use
force against its “kith and kin”. It was then that the
people of Zimbabwe took up arms and appealed for
support from the independent African countries and
other justice-loving
nations. In their wisdom and
magnanimity,
the independent
African countries,
which had correctly seen the birth of Ian Smith’s
creation as the extension of the Fascist Pretoria
regime-and
at that time that regime was rearing its

34. Finally, it is our considered opinion that the
Security Council should state, clearly and unequivocally, that the international community will not recognize any Government or institution in Southern Rhodesia that is not the free and sovereign choice of the
people of Zimbabwe.
35. The PRESIDENT
(interpret&ion
from French):
The next speaker is Mr. Johnstone Makatini, repre4

ugly head with impunity, as it continues to do-decided
against mobilizing
the international
community
to
join them and wage war to crush that illegal rbgime.
Instead, they supported Britain’s initiative towards
the imposition of sanctions, on the basis that the Ian
Smith rkgime constituted a threat to peace and international security. Today it is common knowledge that
the South African regime systematically flouted the
Security Council decision by bolstering Ian Smith’s
rkgime economically
and militarily.
The apartheid
rkgime made no secret of its strategy. It declared that
the white man was to remain “master” for ever in
South Africa. Mindful of the fact that it was sitting on
a powder-keg, it lent its military support not only to the
Smith rhgime, but also to the erstwhile Portuguese
colonial empire in Mozambique and Angola. Its aim
was to help perpetuate the stators quo in those territories which served as protective belts around South
Africa.

44. I must add that the message from our President,
Oliver Tambo, also instructed me to request the
Secretary-General
to use his good offices to persuade
the British Government to secure the release of our
compatriots. I am encouraged by the report I received
from the office of the Secretary-General
that the
representative of the United Kingdom has given the
assurance that these freedom fighters will in no circumstances be sent to South Africa. In expressing our
appreciation
for that assurance, we should like to
appeal for the speedy solution of this problem.
45. A number of speakers have expressed indignation at the presence of South African troops in Southern
Rhodesia. We join them in condemning
this as a
violation of the Lancaster House Agreement.
It is
common knowledge that at the Lancaster House Conference, the British Government opposed the use of
United Nations or Commonwealth
forces. It also
opposed the use of a sufficiently big force to monitor
effectively and enforce the cease-fire.

41. In the wake of the collapse of the Portuguese
colonial empire, thanks to the heroic struggle waged
by the people of Guinea-Bissau, Angola and Mozambique, the struggle in Zimbabwe entered a new stage
of ever-escalating armed conflict.

46. Today, a country that has distinguished
itself
by its systematic opposition to and violation of United
Nations decisions is being unilaterally
assigned the
role of gendarme in Southern Rhodesia on the basis
that its troops are present to protect the vital lines of
communication.
That is not only unacceptable to the
African people as a whole, but also makes us suspect
that it is part of the global South African strategy to
ensure the imposition
to power of the SmithMuzorewa axis, whose military pact with the nparfheid rbgime of South Africa is intended to constitute
the basis for the formation of the so-called constellation of States of southern Africa. The recent bombing
and destruction of Zambia’s bridges and rail links,
except the one linking it with Southern Rhodesia,
must be seen as part of this strategy.

42. Convinced of the correctness of the position
taken by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana
from 3 to 9 September 1979, which declared that
“southern Africa as a whole constituted one single
theatre of operations, in which apartheid South Africa
was the central strategic issue”,3 ANC decided it
could not stand idly by and watch the people of
Zimbabwe fight the combined Rhodesian and South
African forces. In its efforts to wage the armed struggle recognized as legitimate by the United Nations,
it ordered its armed forces not to surrender when and
if they made contact with the Rhodesian troops in
transit on their way to South Africa. Some of them
were captured on the battlefield and sentenced to
death by the Smith rCgime, which later commuted
those sentences to life imprisonment.
They remain
imprisoned in Southern Rhodesia to this very day.

47. All the speakers who preceded us stressed the
fact that the small contingent of troops reported to
be protecting the Beit Bridge was but an insignificant
part of the larger South African force deployed all
over the country and integrated into the Rhodesian
army. When we listen to the South Africa Radio
propaganda, it becomes clear that the presence of
South African troops in Southern Rhodesia is viewed
by Pretoria as legitimate and that it is part of South
Africa’s role as an ally of the Western world to
prevent the assumption of power by the Patriotic
Front. We must not forget that South Africa has
arrogated to itself the right to intervene militarily
in
all African countries south of the equator. We must
not forget that not long ago, Botha declared that, if
the Patriotic
Front were to win the elections in
Southern Rhodesia, South Africa would intervene.

43. In his statement to the Council yesterday,
Sir Anthony Parsons, the representative of the United
Kingdom, said: “An amnesty has been granted for
all acts in furtherance of, or resistance to, the illegal
declaration
of independence”.
[2/92nd
meeting,
parn. 39.1 The 18 or 20 ANC members-two
are
believed to have died in prison-were
captured while
participating in the struggle of resistance to the unilateral declaration of independence. And only the day
before yesterday we received information that they
were about to be deported to South Africa, where
they would certainly be prosecuted and possibly
executed. We call on the British Government, which
has fully
assumed administrative
authority
in
Southern Rhodesia, to take appropriate action to
secure the release of these men.

48. Finally, it is our humble submission that the
call on the British Government
to secure the immediate, complete
and unconditional
withdrawal
of
South African troops and strict adherence to the
Lancaster House Agreement is a friendly act towards
5

an intransigent
nationalist
police repression.

Britain. Those of us who read The Washington Post
yesterday will agree that the danger to peace and
international
security which the upcrrthrid
regime
constitutes has today reached the point where it calls
for immediate
action in the form of mandatory and
comprehensive
sanctions. It is in the long-term
interests of Britain and its allies to join Africa and
progressive
mankind
in helping to eradicate this
inhuman system from southern Africa.

struggle

and unrelieved

Fre17ch):

54. After all those ups and downs and delays, we are
thus very disappointed to see that the United Kingdom,
the administering Power responsible for the Lancaster
House Agreement, is not acting fully in conformity
with the spirit of that Agreement, and that could
jeopardize what we all hoped would be the successful
outcome of the Rhodesian question. One of the primary beneficiaries of such an unfortunate development would be South Africa, which is still actively
participating and interfering in the internal affairs of
the British colony. This is, unfortunately, once again
an extremely serious situation, and there is still too
much complicity
between the United Kingdom and
the racist regime of Pretoria. At any rate, that is the
only construction we can put on this too obvious
tendency to destroy with one hand what is painstakingly built with the other.

50, It is that very threatening possibility that is of
concern to us here. When the Lancaster House negotiations were announced with a view to seeking an
equitable solution to the problem of Rhodesia, Africa
and the world as a whole gave a deeply felt sigh
of relief. The United Nations itself, which had a very
large file on the matter after 14 years of African
struggle and denunciation, suspended its consideration
of the matter so as not to jeopardize the difficult
negotiations by an excess of zeal. We followed those
negotiations
very carefully,
because they were
extremely important and of international scope.

55. We cannot understand that in this pre-electoral
period, when bitterness and distrust are especially
deeply felt in Zimbabwe, that the concern of the
administering Power should be anything other than to
seek to establish internal peace by patiently promoting
an atmosphere of confidence and trust among the
parties to the elections, an ongoing dialogue between
the provisional
Administration
and the patriotic
movements and fair play in the full and responsible
implementation
of the commitments
entered into by
the administering
Power and the other signatories of
the Agreement.

51. It was not in vain, because the merit of the
Lancaster House Agreement was that it succeeded
in establishing the modalities for a return to legal
sovereignty in Southern Rhodesia and also in deciding
on an immediate proclamation of a cease-fire throughout Rhodesian territory. It is only right that I should
take this opportunity to welcome this new awareness,
this albeit rather delayed awakening, on the part of
the United Kingdom,
whose delaying tactics had
caused us concern for 14 years and for 14 years had
left us thinking that what the United Kingdom intended
to do in that connection was already done and that all
was settled there so far as it was concerned.

56. Of course, in the present atmosphere in Zimbabwe, we admit that there may be excesses on both
sides. There may be a lack of discretion on all sides.
We might even say that this is a normal reaction.
Walking, as the saying goes, is only a series of falls
that have been avoided, However, we cannot but be
deeply and greatly concerned when there are multiple violations of commitments
solemnly entered into
and when there is an open inclination to deal with
force or contempt with agreements whose vigorous
and faithful implementation
is in the realm of the
possible.

49.

Mr.

OUMAROU
(Niger) (interpretcrtion
fro117
The thinker who said that it was easier to
make war than to establish peace was quite right.
The Lancaster House Agreement’, offered us very
encouraging prospects, but now we are having trouble
reaching port. Unfortunately,
we have serious reasons
to fear that the hope which was born on 21 December
1979 in London may soon be transformed into an
eruption of anger in Zimbabwe which has suffered
so much and is today living through a particularly
critical period in its history.

57. That is why, agreeing with the disappointment
and the accusations voiced by the leaders of the Patriotic Front, we request the United Kingdom to cali
the local Administration
to order and to make quick
amends for the violations attributed to that Administration. For, as President Seyni Kountche once said,
“water coming from the same spring cannot be both
fresh and salted”. The British Administration
cannot
at the same time clearly work for Zimbabwe to be
at last rehabilitated
and genuinely independent and
just as clearly manceuvre for the establishment in that
country of a regime in keeping neither with the
wishes of the heroic population concerned nor with the
expectations of the international community.

52. Once the Lancaster House Agreement
was
signed, all that was left was to wait until the bitterness
calmed down and loyalty prevailed everywhere so
that Zimbabwe could emerge from the dark night.
53. The United Kingdom, more than any other country, had to make sure that everything went all right,
because it was better informed than anyone of the
geographical and human environment and, above all,
because it knew the value that the international community attached to the outcome after so many years
of unanimous condemnation
of a situation that had
regularly been fanned into flame by the tragedies of
6

58. The Security Council must help it to abandon
this game by stipulating that it scrupulously abide by
the spirit and the letter of the Lancaster House Agreement, which is based on the sacred principle of the
right of peoples to peace and sovereignty. Only such
an inducement, in keeping with international law and
equity, can today prevent the situation in Zimbabwe
from deteriorating once again, this time at the risk of
becoming an acute factor for the destabilization
of
international peace and security.

the national and social development
of the African
peoples. For the sake of preserving their positions in
the African continent, they are carrying out a policy
of whipping up tension in and around Africa and for
their own selfish purposes are trying to stir up fratricidal conflicts between Africans. They are attempting
to arrogate to themselves the right to determine the
fate and the future of the African peoples. The Western
countries are pursuing the goal of forcing the African
continent to abandon its position of non-alignment,
subjecting it to pressures from the forces of imperialism, racism and reaction. The imperialist Powers
play a central role in these plans and try to steer the
evolution of problems in southern Africa on a neocolonialist course.

59. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (inrerpretntion
fkw
Russicrn): The United
,Nations, in particular the Security Council, has for
many years been dealing with the problem of the
liberation of the people of Zimbabwe from colonialist
and racist oppression, Last year alone the Security
Council adopted three resolutions [reso/~r~ions 445
(1979), 448 (1979) rind 460 (1979)] confirming
the
inalienable right of the people of Zimbabwe to selfdetermination,
freedom and independence and calling
for the speedy establishment of true majority government in that country. Now we are once again meeting
at the request of the African countries to discuss
in the Security Council the serious and explosive
situation which has developed in Rhodesia. What is
at stake here is the fate of a great people that has
suffered grievously and is still struggling. The importance of this can be seen from the fact that several
Ministers for Foreign Affairs have come from Africa
to participate in the deliberations of the Council.

64. For several years now the Western Powers
have been trying to crush the national liberation
movement in Zimbabwe and to impose a minority
racist rkgime bn’ the people of that country. To that
end they have used various ways and means, reiying
on the racist rkgimes of Salisbury and Pretoria. The
Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe and neighbouring African
States have suffered from harsh methods of mass
terrorism and a virtual war has been waged against
them. At the same time, attempts have been made to
set up a puppet rkgime in Zimbabwe to serve as a
cover-up for the continuation
of the colonial order.
Those same goals have been sought by the British
Government during the London negotiations.
65. During the recent consideration
of the question
of Southern Rhodesia in the General Assembly and
the Security Council, the Soviet delegation expressed
very serious doubts as to whether developments
in
Southern Rhodesia on the basis of the Lancaster
House Agreement’ would in fact lead along the path
towards true independence for the people of Zimbabwe. As can be seen, our fears have been fully
justified by the facts.

60. The question of a settlement in Rhodesia is one
of the most important aspects of the problem of
eliminating
the last remnants of colonialism
and
racism in southern Africa.
61. During the whole period of their activities in the
United Nations, the Soviet Union, the socialist countries and other progressive States have been carrying
OR a consistent and principled
struggle for the complete elimination
of hotbeds of colonialism,
racism
and crpmheicl
and for the establishment of the right of
the peoples of southern Africa to determine their
own futures.

66. Today the Security Council has once again been
obliged to take up consideration of the situation w,hich
has developed in Southern Rhodesia as the result of
actions by the Government of the United Kingdom to
strengthen the position of the puppet regime in the
country in view of the forthcoming elections.

62. In the time that has elapsed since the adoption
of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, there
have been radical changes in Africa. Vast colonial
empires have collapsed. African countries that have
liberated themselves have carried out political and
social changes to wipe out the pernicious consequences of colonialism. The contribution of African
countries to the struggle to confirm and consolidate
the principles of equality in international
relations
has become increasingly significant.

67. In a letter to the President of the Security Council requesting an urgent meeting of the Council, the
African Group in the United Nations pointed to the
fact that an explosive situation had developed in
Southern Rhodesia as a result of the actions of the
United Kingdom
and indicated
that that posed a
serious threat to international
peace and security.
68. Developments in and around Southern Rhodesia
quite clearly confikm what we have said earlier in
connection
with the Lancaster House Agreement.
They have put the national patriotic forces in a clearly
unequal
position
vis-ir-ris
the racists and their
puppets.

63. This progressive process has given rise to rather
sharp opposition on the part of the imperialist Powers,
Particularly the United States of America, the United
Kingdom and their allies, which are striving to hamper
7

Rhodesian troops. They wear Rhodesian uniforms and
use vehicles with Rhodesian symbols and signs marked
on them.

69. And, really, can we say that the conditions in the
transitional period are calculated to ensure just, democratic and equal opportunities for truly free elections?
The very fact that only two months have been allocated
for preparations for the elections is clearly intended
to prevent tens of thousands of refugees from returning
from neighbouring countries to their homeland to participate in the elections. And now there are only four
weeks left. Now, is that really equal,opportunity?
The
national patriotic forces of Zimbabwe have virtually
been deprived of an opportunity to wage a broad preelectoral campaign, while at the same time favourable
conditions are being provided for the racists and their
puppets. This is another example of the “equal opportunities” which we have already mentioned.

74. Moreover, according to the British newspapelr
Tlze Ohserller of 20 January 1980, the British Government has authorized the Governor to carry on secret
talks with Pretoria in respect of the presence of its
troops in Rhodesia, without discussing this matter
with the parties to the Lancaster House Agreement.
75. It is perfectly clear that the presence of South
African troops in Rhodesia is a flagrant violation Of
the Agreement and that the threats by the South
African leaders to carry out broad-ranging
military
intervention in Rhodesia in the event of an electoral
triumph of the patriotic forces are nothing other than
a direct threat to the peace and security of that region,

70. Be that as it may, we do not wish to enter into
an analysis of the diskriminatory , one-sided and biased
nature of the Agreement, which has been imposed on
the patriotic forces of Zimbabwe. We should like
merely to stress that this Agreement is also being
crudely, flagrantly and grossly violated by the British
Conservative Government.

76. The representatives of the African countries and
the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe have also pointed
to many other facts that bear witness to the violations
of the Agreement by the British authorities. Here WI:
could refer to the deployment of the so-called Rhodesian troops, the mercenaries and the private terrorisit
army of Bishop Muzorewa, known as the auxiliaries,
This deployment is designed to place the PaCriotic:
Front in an obviously disadvantageous
position.,
Despite the agreement reached, the British authorities
are giving preferential treatment to the Rhodesian
troops and strengthening their position in a mannel
detrimental
to the forces of the Patriotic
Front.,
Governor Soames has done everything
possible to
hamper the return of the leaders of the Patriotic Front,
Mr. Mugabe and Mr. Nkom,o, so that Bishop MUZOrewa and his company could organize the electoral
farce in advance. The British authorities
are also
interfering with the return of the refugees. Without an)
justification,
they have extended the state of emergency in the country. Political prisoners have not been
released and, moreover, officials and supporters of the
Patriotic Front are still persecuted. Those are the
“equal opportunities”
that exist for the preparations
for the elections.

71. In the letter from the African countries to the
Security Council, as well as in the statements made
by Mr. Dennis, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Liberia,
Mr. Mkapa, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United
Republic of Tanzania, Mr. Monteiro,
Minister of
State for the Presidency of the People’s Republic
of Mozambique
[2/92rzd meeting] and also by the
representative
of the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe,
Mr. Kangai [2/93rd meeting], and others, many facts
have been cited testifying to the violations by the
United Kingdom
of Security Council resolution 460
(1979) and the Lancaster House Agreement.
72. Notwithstanding
the Agreement,
the British
authorities have not ensured the withdrawal of South
African troops from Southern Rhodesia, South African
soldiers and policemen still control a number of important transport Iinks and other facilities in the
country. Governor Soames takes advantage of the
presence of Rhodesian army detachments and the
so-called security forces to harass and liquidate the
fighters of the Patriotic Front. This is being done at a
time when, according to the Agreement, the units of
the Rhodesian army of the former puppet racist
rCgime should remain in their bases throughout the
whole period of the preparations for the elections, at
a time when they should not engage in any military
action and should not travel around the country,

77. As the representative of the Patriotic Front stntedi
this morning [21931~/ meeti/lg],
the attention
of the.
British Government has been drawn to these serious,
violations, but no steps have been taken to remedy
the situation. The representative of the Patriotic Front.
stressed that the situation continues to deteriorate,,
and thus there is a threat to the cease-fire agreemenl
as well as to peace and security. He said that the
Patriotic Front, for its part, was willing to co-operate.
in the future, as it has done in the past, to ensure the
creation of the conditions needed to guarantee the
independence of the people of Zimbabwe. This is the
tangible proof of the statesmanship and wisdom of
the leaders of the Patriotic Front. Even at a time when
the Front has been placed in this untenable situation,
it still believes that the British authorities and specifically, Governor Soames, may be brought to reason

73. The British Government is attempting to show
that the problem of the presence of South African
troops in Rhodesia has been settled because the South
African troops defending the Beit Bridge have already
left. However, in the statements made by the African
representatives,
it has been affirmed that at least
6,000 South African soldiers and policemen are still
present in various parts of Zimbabwe and that South
African troops are, in fact, in some cases part of the
8

:,

‘.

irn

”

,,

and will carry out in these last four weeks what is
written in the Lancaster House Agreement, which is
so unfavourable to the Patriotic Front.

regimes in southern Africa, acting with the connivance
and support of the major powers of NATO,
are
carrying out far-reaching, well-planned
measures to
preserve their domination, their interests and those of
their Western supporters.

78. And what are the British colonial authorities
doing? They are still relying on the former racist
administrative
machinery and punitive organs. Also,
South African regular troops have been brought into
Rhodesia and are waging an open struggle against the
national patriotic forces of Zimbabwe. They are trying
to prevent the victory of those forces in the future
elections, and they are providing direct help to the
racists and their supporters. South Africa and the
United Kingdom have been waging a tremendous
propaganda campaign against the patriotic forces.
Large firms have spent millions on this election
campaign in support of the puppets chosen by the neocolonialists. Of course, one can get anything done with
money, but the Patriotic Front does not have the
money; the racists and their supporters do have the
money. This demonstrates once more the so-called
equality in the pre-election preparations.

82. The South African racist regime poses a serious
danger to the peoples of southern Africa and the
national liberation
movements
in that region and
beyond it. In this connection, of particular importance
is the strict implementation
of the Security Council
resolutions [resolutions 418 (1977) and 421 (2977)]
on the arms embargo against the racist regime of
South Africa. Yet the United States, the United
Kingdom and some other Western Powers and transnational corporations are systematically
violating the
Council sanctions against South Africa. South Africa
is making large purchases of modern military technology from those countries. Those military purchases
by Pretoria from Western European countries are a
direct violation of the Security Council embargo.
83. Many cases of open violations of that embargo
have been exposed, and are being examined by the
Security Council Committee
established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning the question of South
Africa. It is obvious that a great many more cases of
this type have not yet been exposed. The report of the
Centre against Apartheid of September 1979 also
contains very serious material, concerning the help
South Africa receives from Western countries for
the development of its military potential.

79. It is apparent that the elections to be held in
Southern Rhodesia are, in our opinion, a new farce,
similar to what was staged in April 1979. The aim of
this comedy is to impose a neo-colonialist
puppet
rkgime on the people of Zimbabwe, with a view to
preserving the real power in the hands of those forces
that can ensure that the British interests will not be
harmed, that the interests of the foreign monopolies
will not be touched, and that the privileges of the
local European population will not in any way be
affected.

84. Developments in southern Africa very convincingly show the need for strict compliance with and
the expansion of sanctions against the racist regime of
South Africa.

80. Events in Southern Rhodesia can only be considered in relation to the events which are taking
place in southern Africa and around the continent. In
southern Africa-and
we must draw this conclusion
on the basis of all that we have heard-there
is an
extremely serious situation which is the result of
attempts by the imperialist Powers, under a new guise,
to preserve the colonial nature of the Governments
in
Zimbabwe and Namibia.
The imperialist
Powers,
primarily the United States and the United Kingdom,
are making increasingly broad use of the apat~lzeid
troops of South Africa to suppress and crush the
national liberation struggle of the African peoples.

85. The Soviet position on the situation in Southern
Rhodesia is very clear; it is based on the policy of
principle of our country aimed at the complete elimination of all remnants of the system of colonial
oppression, the elimination
of all infringements
of
the equality and independence of peoples, the elimination of all hotbeds of colonialism
and racism. We
have consistently supported, and we continue to support, the selfless struggle of the patriotic forces of
Zimbabwe for the freedom and independence of their
country, a struggle that they have been waging for
many years under the leadership of the Patriotic
Front, which the United Nations has recognized as
the sole legitimate
representative
of the people of
Zimbabwe. The Soviet Union has firmly supported,
and still firmly supports, the inalienable right of the
people of Zimbabwe to self-determination
and independence and the transfer of power in the country to
the true representatives of the people.

81. Extremely cruel acts of aggression have been
committed
against the neighbouring
countries of
Zambia, Mozambique, Angola and Botswana, with the
active participation
of the South African regime. In
recent months there have been frequent attacks against
Zambia, and the major transport arteries of the country and bridges have been destroyed. Airborne Rhodesian troops have made punitive raids even around
Lusaka as well as in many other areas. Rhodesian
troops have carried out raids into Mozambique,
killing
or wounding about 3,000 civilians-not
soldiers,
but civilians. Considerable material damage has been
done to the country. All of this shows that the racist

86. In the present grave circumstances,
it is absolutely ,essential that all measures be taken to stop the
attempts of the United Kingdom
and its allies to
preserve the neo-colonialist
puppet regime. The
9

Soviet Union agrees with the position of the Patriotic
Front and the demands of the African countries that
feel that the United Kingdom’s actions are depriiing
the people of Zimbabwe of their elementary rights and
the opportunity
to carry out elections in their own
country in conditions of justice and equality.

/

Republic of South Africa on the soil of Zimbabwe,
which runs totally counter to the assurances that were
provided when the Agreement was signed; the harassment and encircling by the Rhodesian forces and the
auxiliaries of the fighters of the Patriotic Front, which
have scrupulously
respected the cease-fire and
assembled in the agreed places; and the persecution
of the population in the zones that have been evacuated
by the forces of the Patriotic Front.

87. The representatives of the Patriotic Front of
Zimbabwe and other African countries have indicated
the measures that should be taken to ensure that the
United Kingdom authorities remedy the situation in
Rhodesia. They include: the monitoring of the withdrawal of South African troops and mercenaries;
restriction of the Rhodesian troops, confining them
to barracks; the disbandment of the auxiliaries; halting
discrimination
against the forces of the Patriotic Front;
an end to the unequal treatment of the various parties
to the election; the rapid return of the refugees; an
end to the unfavourable situation of the refugees; and
cessation of the emergency situation. We support all
those just demands,

93. It is difficult to say that these are not systematic
acts, part and parcel of the neo-colonialist
policy,
which is hostile to the right to independence and
self-determination
of the people of Zimbabwe.
94. It is particularly significant for the struggling
peoples to note that those who just recently were
particularly eager to pose at this rostrum of the United
Nations as defenders of the peoples of Kampuchea
and Afghanistan have now by their acts revealed
themselves as inveterate enemies of the freedom and
independence
of the people of Zimbabwe and are
attempting stubbornly to defend their sordid interests
and supporting a racist, Fascist minority that is guilly
of genocide and condemned by all mankind.

88. In carrying out its role, the Security Council
should adopt a resolution which fulfils the hopes
and aspirations of the people of Zimbabwe to create
an independent State. This is the duty of the United
Nations.

95. The tactics of these imperialist and reactionary
circles were initially
to harp abstract princip&
providing guarantees of their absolute fidelity to them
in order to dupe those who keep misinterpreting
those principles,
basing themselves upon formal
aspects. At the same time those circles are really
carrying out an antiquated colonial policy and depriving
peoples of their true right to self-defence and selfdetermination.

89. The PRESIDENT
(interprrtatior~
J-on7
French):
The next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam.
I invite her to take a place at the Council table and to
make a statement.
90.

Mrs. NGUYEN
NGOC DUNG (Viet Nam)(into.from
Fwrzch): Mr. President, I should like to
thank you and the other members of the Security
Council for having responded favourably to the request
of the delegation of Viet Nam to speak today.

pretcltion

96. But these manceuvres of sleight of hand to
conceal the real nature of the retrograde forces Of
colonialism and neo-colonialism and expansionism and
to reverse the roles of the victim and the perpetrator
of the crime are futile, because peoples that have paid
dearly for the right to independence and self-determination know very well whom to believe.

91. First, on behalf of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam, I should like to express total support for
the rights of the people of Zimbabwe and the Patriotic
Front, which are calling for strict respect for the
Lancaster House Agreement’
by the Administering
Authority of Zimbabwe, the United Kingdom.

97. The experience of the Vietnamese people has
convinced it that the Lancaster House Agreement
was not a gift from colonialist and racist forces, but
rather the direct outcome of the heroic armed struggle
waged by the people of Zimbabwe under the leadership of the Patriotic Front. For more than a decade,
how many maneuvres have there been, how many
tricks, how many crimes carried out by the imperialist
circles of the United Kingdom in collusion with the
racists of South Africa and supported by the United
States in order to maintain the puppet rkgime of
Muzorewa?

92. Viet Nam fully supports the position expressed
by the Chairman of the non-aligned movement, President Fidel Castro, in his message on the events in
Zimbabwe.
Viet Nam concurs with the statements
made at the Council’s 2192nd meeting by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania,
the Minister of State of the Presidency of the People’s
Republic of Mozambique
on behalf of the front-line
States, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Liberia,
on behalf of the Chairman of the Organization
of
African Unity and by the representative of the Republic of Malawi on behalf of the African Group in the
United Nations. All those statements condemn the
flagrant violations of the Lancaster House Agreement
that are characterized by obvious facts-that
is, the
presence of troops of the abhorrent regime of the

98. The history of struggle in our era has taught us
that it is customary, just when the colonial Powers
sense the inevitable collapse of their protected rkgimes
condemned by the majority of the peoples, for them
suddenly to show themselves to be reasonable and
10

even gracious and to seek a political solution so as
to ensure that there will be an apparent peaceful
transfer of power to the revolutionary forces.

105. Today it is to bring before the Security Council
facts of exceptional gravity that the African frontline’countries, the Liberation Committee of the Organization of African Unity and all independent Africa
supported by the non-aligned countries as a whole
have had recourse to this body. We have requested
this debate because there is so much at stake, since
the matters involved are so closely interconnected and
include the maintenance of peace and security in
Africa, the scrupulous respect in good faith for the
principles and norms of decolonization,
the fate of an
entire people which has suffered only too much and,
lastly, the peaceful future of all southern Africa.

99. In such circumstances, the finest promises, the
firmest assurances wrung from the imperialist Powers
during negotiations frequently turn out to be delaying
tactics, dangerous ploys aimed at liquidating
the
revolution by other means and keeping the neocolonialist regime in place under a different cloak.
100. Despite this sad fact, the peoples in the struggle
do not oppose solutions that can be obtained without
armed struggle, so long as they lead to a true independence.

106. Just a few weeks ago, we had thought, following
the signing on 21 December 1979 of the Lancaster
House Agreement,’
that the minority racist r6gime
of Southern Rhodesia was coming to an end, and that
along with it, there would be an end to the intolerable
oppression of an entire people and to the widespread
acts of aggression against the African countries in the
region on the part of a regime that had become the
agent for permanent insecurity and the creator of a
constant threat to international
peace and security.
The signing of the Agreement was the result of a very
long, tragic and devastating struggle waged by the
people of Zimbabwe, led by its legitimate representative, the Patriotic Front, to regain its independence
and authentic sovereignty.

101. For its part, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
reiterates its unswerving solidarity with the people of
Zimbabwe and with all the fraternal peoples of that
continent fighting for their political and economic
emancipation.
It endorses the demands contained in
the statements of the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe,
the front-line countries, the African Group in the
United Nations and the non-aligned group, that the
Security Council should adopt appropriate measures
requiring the British Administering
Authority strictly
to respect the agreements that have been concluded
and fully to implement them; more specifically, that the
South African forces of the opctrthrid regime should be
withdrawn immediately
from Zimbabwe; that the
patriots held in Zimbabwe should be immediately
released; that the state of emergency should be lifted
so as to create the conditions required for truly free
elections to take place in proper conditions with the
participation of the people of Zimbabwe and to guarantee security and facilities to the fighters and supporters
of the Patriotic Front for their electoral activities.
In our era, the peoples of the world cannot tolerate
the antiquated order of the colonial empires of the
past, even in its newest and most attractive guise.

107. The negotiations, begun at the initiative of the
United Kingdom
at Lancaster House, were very
arduous because of objective difficulties inherent in
the situation which nobody can deny. Nevertheless,
they clearly showed that the Patriotic Front is truly
representative, that it has a very clear sense of its
responsibilities,
a desire for dialogue and negotiation
and a particular skill and foresight in seizing every
opportunity
to reach peace. The Patriotic
Front,
wishing to spare the lives of the people, acting responsibly and mindful of its future, and anxious to secure
the happiness of its people, went to the extreme limit
in making all possible concessions.

102. The United Kingdom must match its words with
deeds, it must honour its commitments entered into in
the Lancaster House Agreement’s0
as to achieve
decolonization
as speedily as possible for the people
of southern Africa, thereby putting an end to this
shame of mankind and liquidating a hotbed of war
which seriously threatens the peace and security of the
peoples of this region.

108. Africa did everything
to contribute
to the
victory of reason and freedom for Zimbabwe because
it was well aware of the importance
of what was
at stake at Lancaster House. This is why, throughout
this very long phase of complex and critical negotiations, the front-line African countries, and Africa as
a whole, tried to make it easier for the United Kingdom
to play its role as it reassumed its responsibilities
as the administering Power that had been in abeyance
for 14 years. Heads of the front-line States did not
hesitate to go themselves to London in order to break
the deadlock in the over-ail negotiations to spell out
the terms of the Agreement.

103. The PRESIDENT
(irzterp,.et~rti~!?fi’~m French).
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
104. Mr. BEDJAGUI
(Algeria) (interpretcttiott f%tt?
French): Mr. President; the Algerian delegation is
very happy to be able to express to you its appreciation for your intelligence, patience and effectiveness
as you have presided over the Security Council during
this month, during which we have had to deal with SO
many crises and during which the international situation has been so delicate.

109. On another level, this time at the level of the
United Nations, the African Group twice deferred
debate on the question of Rhodesia so as not to
jeopardize in any way the negotiations that were under
11

“P

way, and it also encouraged the drafting of a resolution which, all in all, reflected the hopes of the
international community for a peaceful solution of the
problem.
110. Unfortunately,
despite the signing of the
Lancaster House Agreement by all parties concerned
and despite the cease-fire itself, which had been so
long awaited, over the last few weeks we have
witnessed what is really a distortion of the aims of the
Agreement and we have seen thinly veiled attempts
to deprive the Patriotic Front of the fruits of its tireless struggle on behalf of its people. There is a danger
that its sacrifices will be in vain. There have also
been attempts to favour factions that are not truly
representative.
111. No one was superficial enough to think that,
after the signing of the Agreement last December,
the process of the liberation
of Zimbabwe would
proceed normally
and smoothly.
Human history
teaches that the most decisive and therefore the most
delicate and testing time for a people which is struggling
is that last quarter of an hour, that crucial period
when the fate of a people is at stake and when the
colonial Administration
which is in eclipse tries, in a
last vain attempt to avoid the inevitable: the independence and sovereignty of the people which has been
subjugated.

and Muzorewa, is violating the commitments which he
entered into and thus can neither ensure nor guarantee
the fulfilment
of his responsibilities,
which consist
primarily
in ensuring the existence of conditions
which would permit free and fair elections in
Zimbabwe.
115. Everything suggests that the increase in incidents and acts of violence against the forces and
leaders of the Patriotic Front is intended to favour
one of the parties to the Agreement known for its neocolonialist tendencies, to the detriment of the nationalist forces. And yet, what a tremendous example of
political sense, of restraint, of moderation has been
given by the true nationalist forces in increasing
their assurances of the guarantee of the future of the
white community, which must be linked with the future
of the nation of Zimbabwe as a whole, provided that
the white,community
truly wishes it.
116. Zimbabwe is living through a crucial moment
of its history. For Zimbabwe, this is the fateful hour
when its destiny hangs in the balance. It cannot allow
the Governor sent to Zimbabwe by the administering
Power to try to sidetrack the process leading the country to independence in keeping with the Lancaster
House Agreement. The measures taken by the Governor cannot but elicit the most serious concern because
everything is happening as though what was desired
was the preservation of the racist and colonial sfarrrs
L/[/O in Rhodesia, while an attempt is made to lend to
its internal evolution a semblance of legality. There
are many examples of this.

112. It was this long experience of the colonial
situation that led the Security Council, with its sense
of political responsibilities,
to set forth in its resolution 460 (1979) clear provisions aimed at preserving
the people of Zimbabwe from more distressing trials
than those which it had endured and from particularly
frustrating
disappointment.
The Council therefore
called forcefully on all parties to the Agreement to
respect strictly, fully and faithfully the provisions of
that Agreement and it gave the administering Power
the imperative
duty of ensuring that no mercenary
forces or South African troops would penetrate into
Zimbabwe to try to force on it a certain fate.

117. In the first place, the maintenance of South
African troops in the Territory is in flagrant violation
of the Lancaster House Agreement and of Security
Council resolution 460 (1979), which I recalled a
moment ago. This is a threat to the internal security
of Zimbabwe and an attempt to try to affect decisively
the free choice of the Zimbabwean people, Who is
right: the United Kingdom
which, through Lord
Carrington, Secretary of State, undertook to ensure
the withdrawal of foreign troops immediately after the
Governor’s arrival, or the Governor himself, when he
decided not only to keep the troops in Zimbabwe but
even to justify their presence by invoking the need
to protect-one
wonders against whom-the channels
of communication
between Rhodesia and South
Africa?

113. But the sovereignty of a people cannot be
achieved by the enemies of that people. One cannot
build the true independence of a country with those
who are opposed to it. One cannot expect the racist
laws of Ian Smith, which are still in force, suddenly
and miraculously
to have a liberating rather than a
discriminatory
effect. The legislative arsenal and the
regulations of the lost rigime of Smith and Muzorewa
cannot provide liberty and freedom when they can
only produce terrorism and enslavement. One cannot
make those men who have unleashed their demons
to effect a policy of domination
contribute actively
to a policy of liberation. Demolition
experts cannot
become the builders of the new, free city.

118. Secondly, we know that difficulties of at1 kinds
may be encountered by the local authorities in connection with the return of the refugees. We do not in any
way underestimate those difficulties. But we do have
some cause for concern over the harassment and
intimidation
employed against those refugees and over
the artificial difficulties created to try to make them
abandon the idea of returning to their homeland. In
would one not be justified in
these circumstances,
believing firmly that such artificially created difficulties
actually tend to change the electoral situation and to
favour the Muzorewa-Smith
alliance?

114. The Governor of Zimbabwe, wishing systematically and scientifically
to change the balance of
internal forces in favour of the supporters of Smith
12

119. Thirdly, the arbitrary detention of many militants and supporters of the Patriotic Front is a serious
infringement on the freedom of action at the political
and electoral levels of one of the contracting parties
to the Lancaster House Agreement,
namely, the
Patriotic
Front, whose militants
are still being
described as rebels and bandits and are being pursued,
as such, by Southern Rhodesian troops. One might
wonder what happened to the Agreement that provided that those forces, today more free than ever in
their movements, would be confined to barracks just
as the forces of the Patriotic Front have been; indeed,
they have been practically locked up in their various
camps.

free and genuine elections, worthy of the
respect for the dignity of man on the part of the
homeland of habecrs corplrs.
table,

125. In my delegation’s view, the following conditions must be met if there is to be a normalization
of
the situation and a return to legality: first, all the
South African and foreign forces must be withdrawn
immediately;
they must not be readmitted to Rhodesian territory
under any pretext; secondly, the
return of the Zimbabwean refugees now in the neighbouring countries must be ensured, facilitated
and
guaranteed,
without any restrictions;
thirdly,
the
Rhodesian forces and the forces of the Patriotic Front
must be treated identically,
in conformity
with the
Lancaster House Agreement; fourthly, all the political
detainees must be released; fifthly, all the means
envisaged in the Agreement must be placed at the
disposal of the Patriotic Front so that it can successfully carry out all the preparations for the elections;
sixthly, an end must be put to the frantic and largescale radio and television propaganda by South Africa
in support of Muzorewa; that is inadmissible
interference in Zimbabwe’s internal affairs; seventhly, it
must be forcefully recalled that the United Nations,
primarily responsible for the decolonization
of Zimbabwe, will do everything necessary to ensure that
the people of that Territory wilI be able, in keeping
with all the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly, to exercise freely its right
to self-determination,
independence and sovereignty.

120, Fourthly, the auxiliaries of Salisbury-in
other
words, the armed supporters of Muzorewa-enjoy
complete freedom of action and movement throughout
the Territory. They make up the larger part of the
so-called security forces and thus, in the nature of
things, become the unchallenged
arbiters of the
political and electoral situation in the country. Those
forces are provoking and harassing the Patriotic Front
and trying to relegate it to the sidelines, as well as
intimidating
the population, so as-one might say-to
hold their own kind of referendum. The Pretorian
guard of 6,000 soldiers, in the personal pay and service
of Muzorewa, is freely roaming through the Territory
in violation of the Agreement and is engaging in
terrorism against the people.
121, Fifthly, the harassment and encirclement
by
the Rhodesian auxiliary forces of the Patriotic Front
fighters moving towards the assembly points provided
for in the Agreement constitute a flagrant violation of
that Agreement.
Indeed, does not the Agreement
envisage co-operation between the nationalist forces
and those of the Rhodesian regime?

126. We hope that the United Kingdom, a permanent
member of the Security Council, will understand all
the dangerous effects of the action by its representatives in Zimbabwe and the serious consequences that
such action could have for peace in southern Africa.
We would like to hope that the United Kingdom will
take into account the strong feelings aroused throughout the world by the turn of events in Zimbabwe, and
that it will very soon adopt an attitude in keeping
with the initiatives it took throughout the process of
the Lancaster House negotiations.

122. Sixthly, the considerable means of propaganda
made available to the supporters of Ian Smith and
Muzorewa are aimed at changing the electoral situation
in Zimbabwe and imposing on the people of that country, by illegal methods, a neo-colonialist regime with a
legalistic facade-of both doubtful and bitter taste.

127. Mr. MILLS (Jamaica): Mr. President, it was a
little over a month ago that my delegation had the
opportunity
of speaking in the Security Council
[218/st t?leering] on the subject of Southern Rhodesia.
That was on the occasion of the consideration by the
Council of the question of the lifting of sanctions
which had been imposed against the illegal regime in
that country. We emphasized our great satisfaction
with the sustained efforts on the part of all who had
contributed to the achieving of the results embodied
in the Lancaster House Agreement.’
We stressed that
this Agreement could be viable only if it was effectively and fairly implemented-a
task which placed
great responsibility
on the administering
Power, the
United Kingdom.

123. Those are just some examples that enlighten us
about the true intentions of the representatives of the
administering
Power. What is happening makes it
appear that there is a desire to revert to a situation
that we have always unanimously condemned,
124. Our duty today is to protect the fruits of the
struggle by the Patriotic Front, to guarantee the
aspirations of the people of Zimbabwe to true independence in a united State, freed of all the remnants of
the past and turned firmly towards the future. To that
end, the administering Power must respect the commitments entered into and apply the Lanca.&er House
Agreement in good faith. It must also ensure that all
the required conditions are satisfied with a view to
organizing, in accordance with the envisaged time-

128. It gives us no satisfaction, therefore, to find
ourselves-along
with others here-in
a most serious
13

A-L

debate concerning the turn of events in Southern
Rhodesia. The countries of Africa, through OAU,
called for the convening of the Council to consider
these events and to propose prompt and effective
action. Moreover, in the light of these developments,
it is wholly appropriate, in the view of my delegation,
that the Council should exercise, on behalf of the
international community,
its continuing responsibility
towards the people of Southern Rhodesia, and seek
to ensure that the process of their liberation and the
establishment
of a free, independent Zimbabwe are
carried out equitably and effectively.

:

,,

/

132. My delegation must therefore register its grave
concern at recent developments in Southern Rhodesia
which have called into question the integrity of the
processes now under way there. We face the real
possibility of a breakdown in this operation, a repudiation of the Agreement and a return to warfare.
133. It is our belief that the central issue is the
matter of confidence and credibility.
My delegation
is fully aware of the delicacy and complexity of this
final stage in the long process towards the decolonization of Southern Rhodesia, and these factors were
clearly demonstrated in the recent long and difficult
negotiations in London. We are aware of the vital
issues which time after time threatened those negotiations. No one could seriously have expected that
the implementation
of the Agreement, involving the
cease-fire, the preparation for the elections and other
elements, would have been easy. No one could
seriously have underestimated
the magnitude of the
task facing the Administering
Authority or the difficulties which would be encountered by the Patriotic
Front. It was inevitable that there would be unanticipated problems, delays, inefficiencies, and an element
of deliberate action by some interests to frustrate the
processes.

129. The basis of the discussion in the Council today
is the serious complaint which has been made concerning the manner in which the administering Power
has been carrying out its responsibilities
during this
transition period. Details of these complaints have
been forcefully
and eloquently
outlined
by the
Ministers of Liberia, United Republic of Tanzania and
Mozambique
[219211rr’ meeting], who have a special
mandate from OAU to come to New York to participate in this series of meetings; by the representative of the Patriotic Front; and by a number of
representatives here. They have made detailed presentations on the main issues of concern: the use of South
African forces by the British authorities in Salisbury;
the deployment of Rhodesian forces and the so-called
auxiliaries; the renewal of the state of emergency and
the maintenance of martial law; the denial of the fundamental right of large numbers of refugees to return
freely to their country; and the lack of impartiality
in the treatment of the different political groups in the
country- specifically, the bias against the Patriotic
Front. Each of those issues harbours grave implications, and the disputes surrounding them pose a most
serious threat to the prospect of free and fair elections,
and of peace in Southern Rhodesia and in fact the
entire southern African region.

134. In the circumstances, it is only the establishment and maintenance of confidence and credibilily
in respect of the processes and those involved in
them that could ensure the ability and willingness to
cope with such difficulties and differences as would
arise and ensure eventual success.
135. However, the truth is that the history and
experiences of the past years in respect of Southern
Rhodesia have been replete with incidents and circumstances which have made it most difficult to build
the necessary confidence and faith, in spite of the very
positive atmosphere and the optimism
generated
around the Lancaster House Agreement. We recall,
among other things, the bitter experience of the unilateral declaration of independence and the rooted
assumptions of racial superiority and perpetual whiteminority rule that came with it; the influence and the
activities of South Africa and the ambivaIence of
some Governments
in respect of that country’s
attitudes and activities in the area; and the apparent
readiness on the part of some countries to accept the
fraudulent elections and the rbgime of Mr. Muzorewa
which resulted from them. We recount these things,
not simply for the purpose of dwelling on the past, but
in order to underline the pressing need, against that
background,
for scrupulous attention to the maintenance of confidence in the integrity of the processes
flowing from the Lancaster Hous’e Agreement.

130. My delegation has heard the categorical repudiation of these charges by the representative of the
United Kingdom, who has underlined the considerable
amount of progress which has been made in the country
in a few short weeks, and has sought to explain the
manner in which the authorities in Salisbury have
carried out their very difficult tasks,
131. Let me say at this stage that Jamaica has a very
special interest in the question of Southern Rhodesia,
an interest which it has maintained throughout the
past 15 years. My country has given unwavering
support to the Patriotic Front, to the front-line States
and the other countries of Africa which have struggled
at great sacrifice to bring about the liberation of the
people of Zimbabwe from the crushing domination
of an illegal racist rigime. My Government,
and in
particular my Prime Minister, has had the honour of
participating
actively in negotiations to this end at the
Meeting of Commonwealth
Heads of Government
held at Lusaka from 1 to 7 August 1979 and elsewhere.

1

136. My Government has the strongest views on the
presence and deployment of South African forces in
Southern Rhodesia during this critical period. In B
statement issued on 17 January, the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Jamaica
14

:
.*

described this as “repugnant,
ceptable”.

provocative

and unac-

convinced that its inalienable right to freedom
independence will prevail over all obstacles.

137. If this were the only matter in the complaint it
would, nevertheless,
by itself constitute a most
damaging element in the situation. We are not unmindful of the fact that early last year the racist
regime of Pretoria revealed its sinister designs on the
peoples of Rhodesia and Namibia. Amidst offers of
generous military and economic assistance, Pretoria
then declared its concept of “a constellation
of
States”, which in all likelihood
was designed to
subject those countries to a satellite relationship and
to reverse the tide of liberation which has swept the
Africancontinent.
Whatever the pretext, my delegation
considers that there is and was no justification for the
presence of South African troops on any part of
Rhodesian territory.

and

143. We have listened carefully to the statements of
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the front-line
States, the representative of the United Kingdom
[ihid.] and other African representatives.
All those
statements have clearly confirmed the need to convene
this series of meetings of the Security Council and to
clarify, through open debate, the problems that have
arisen along the road of further unhampered progress
towards the implementation
of the provisions of the
Lancaster House Agreement’ on Zimbabwe. At this
critical moment also my country wishes to make its
contribution,
as it has already done in all the earlier
phases of the struggle of the people of Zimbabwe for
liberation and independence.
144. Yugoslavia, together with the other non-aligned
countries, has always maintained not only that the
liberation of the people of Zimbabwe from colonial
and racial oppression is the right and the concern of
the people of that country, but also that the obligation
of the whole international
community-and
of the
United Nations in the first place-is to help to promote
the realization of that right.

138. The deployment of the Rhodesian forces and
the so-called auxiliaries constitutes a serious departure
from the Agreement,
one which inevitably would
seriously call in question the entire operation.
139. The existence of serious obstacles to the free
return of refugees will inevitably lead to grave doubts
about the validity and fairness of the forthcoming
elections. The persons concerned are nationals of
Zimbabwe. Their participation
in an election which
will have such profound implications for their future
and the future of their country is a vital necessity.
These and other issues which have been raised call
for urgent action to repair breaches in the implementation of the Agreement. Jamaica joins others in calling
for the faithful and impartial implementation
of the
Lancaster House Agreement by the Administering
Authority.

145. The struggle waged by the people af Zimbabwe
under the leadership of the Patriotic Front, its sole
authentic representative, is simultaneously
part of the
overall efforts exerted by all peoples, and by the
peoples of southern Africa in particular,
for the
liquidation
of the vestiges of colonialism
and for the
further strengthening
of the independence
of the
free States of Angola, Botswana, Mozambique
and
Zambia. It is imperative, therefore, to ensure that the
struggle for liberation
is brought to a successful
conclusion,
either through armed confrontation
or
through the electorial process which can produce
lasting results only if it faithfully reflects the aspirations of the people of Zimbabwe.

140. The future of Zimbabwe and its people is at
stake here and with that the future of southern Africa
-forwhat
happens in Zimbabwe will have far-reaching
implications for the area. And, as we consider these
matters, we are aware of the considerable turbulence
in international
affairs at this time. The successful
conclusion of the decolonization process in Zimbabwe
would be a most welcome positive achievement in a
troubled world.

146. Interpreting
the obligation of the international
community
precisely in that manner, my delegation,
at the Extraordinary
Ministerial
Meeting of the COordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries held
at Maputo from 26 January to 2 February 1979, proposed that the Patriotic Front, as the sole authentic
representative
of the aspirations of the people of
Zimbabwe to freedom and independence,
should be
admitted to the non-aligned
movement
as a fully
fledged member. In admitting the Patriotic Front to
their ranks, the non-aligned countries committed themselves to lend all-out support to the liberation struggle
of the people of Zimbabwe, which has made tremendous sacrifices in order to become a member of the
community of free peoples.

141. The PRESIDENT
(i/~te/p,‘ett/ti(I/l j?oI~I F/*et?ch):
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
142. Mr. KOMATINA
(Yugoslavia): I wish to thank
the members of the Security Council for having given
me this opportunity to explain the views of my country
on this important
moment in the struggle for the
freedom and independence
of Zimbabwe,
whose
People and liberation movement have replaced the
certitude of victory in armed national liberation
struggle by a constructive, responsible and dignified
testing of strengths in elections, on equal terms,

147. The non-aligned countries have approved the
peaceful settlement of the problem of Zimbabwe on
the basis of the principles
of self-determination,
believing that such a solution wiIl lead to the realiza15

of former Prime Minister Muzorewa into regular
Southern Rhodesian military units and its use for
occupying areas which the units of the Patriotic Front
had -evacuated under the Agreement. We are atso
strongly opposed to the policy of enactment of laws
on ‘the basis of the state of emergency, which is
purposely directed against the African population of
Zimbabwe. The introduction of courts martial by the
British Governor during the electoral process, far From
guaranteeing free and honest elections in that country.
jeopardizes
the most elementary conditions for the
holding of elections. Any form of unequal treatment
of the two sides, the continued holding in gaol of
hundreds of political prisoners who are sympathizers
of the Patriotic Front, and the ever more frequent
attacks against and assassinations of its members
should also be condemned in the strongest terms.

tion of the objectives enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. In this connection, we wish to pay a
special tribute to the front-line States, which have
contributed
to the creation of conditions for a substantively new situation in Southern Rhodesia, one
which, in our estimation,
offers prospects and is
positive. For we cannot ignore the fact that today,
instead of confrontation,
a peaceful testing of strength
is taking place on yesterday’s battlefield.
148. As in the case of every other agreement, the
Lancaster House Agreement also is valid only to the
extent to which its provisions are observed and implemented impartially.
However, great responsibility
is
borne by the British side in its capacity as the colonial
administering
Power upon whose conduct will depend
whether the trust placed by the people of Zimbabwe
in the Agreement will be justified. Consequently, the
Agreement should be implemented
in good faith, and
only such an implementation
of the provisions of the
Agreement can ensure the recognition of its results.
Failure to implement
the obligations assumed under
the Agreement will have unforeseeable consequences
for peace and security in southern Africa.

153. The creation of customs, border or any other
difficulties for returnees and refugees sympathizers of
the Patriotic Front can only further raise doubts as to
the intentions of those who are holding power.
154. The positions I have set forth are those held by
almost the entire international community. They have
been repeatedly reaffirmed in the United Nations.
They are, above all, the positions of the non-aligned
countries.
Yugoslavia has always supported
the
struggle of national liberation movements for complete
political and economic independence and for majority
rule. For that reason, we insist on a consistent implementation of the Lancaster House Agreement in order
to secure the genuine independence of Zimbabwe, to
enable the people of that country freely to choose
the road of its political and economic development
and to ensure the holding of elections in which the
Patriotic Front, recognized by the United Nations ns
the sole legitimate representative of the people of
Zimbabwe, will be able to take part freely and without
hindrance under the same conditions and on an equttl
footing with all the other parties concerned.

149. Unfortunately,
we are witnessing a situation in
which it is becoming ever clearer that the letter of the
Agreement
is not being observed precisely by the
party which has assumed the obligation to ensure its
implementation.
1.50. According to the letter of the Agreement, the
British Government
committed
itself not to allow
South African troops to remain on the soil of Southern
Rhodesia. However, they are still present there in
various capacities and under various disguises and, it
seems, in no small numbers. Adopting an even more
brazen stand and encouraged by the tolerant attitude
towards it, the South African Government has issued
statements to the effect that it will withdraw its troops
as soon as so-called satisfactory arrangements are
made with the Rhodesian security forces concerning
the security of Beit Bridge. That regime behaves as
if it were the master of the situation, behaviour that
is fully in accord with its aggressive nature as manifested by its constant aggressive actions against the
front-line States. It would be irresponsible to allow
the will of the entire world Organization,
which
demands the unconditional
and immediate withdrawal
of all South African troops from Zimbabwe, to be
circumvented.
Every manoeuvre in that sense, as well
as any violation of the Agreement,
should be condemned most emphatically.

155. We support the peaceful settlement of this as
well as any other problem, provided such a settlement
is not used as a screen for circumventing the genuine
aspirations of oppressed peoples. In that sense we
also supported the Lancaster House Agreement,
proceeding from the assumption that it would ensure the
total liquidation of the colonialist and racist regime in
Zimbabwe and that the achievements of the national
liberation struggle would be preserved for the people
of Zimbabwe. If that is not ensured, the “solution”
likely to emerge will be null and void and without any
prospects. The attitude of the world towards the
peaceful settlement of colonial problems so strongly
advocated by the Western countries will also depend
on the way in which the Agreement is implemented.

15 1. There is no need to argue that no free and honest
elections can be held in the presence of the troops of
the racist regime and that, unless the elections are free
and honest, there can be no international
recognition
of the newly elected Government,

156. We feel that these meetings of the Security
Council have offered us the opportunity
to draw
attention
to the dangers inherent in attempts
at
arbitrary and one-sided interpretations of the Lancaster
House Agreement or violation of its clauses.

152. Also completely at variance with the Lancaster
House Agreement is the integration of the private army
16

157, The question of Zimbabwe, like the problem of
Namibia or any other colonial Territory, is a component part of the general struggle against imperialism,
colonialism and racism and all forms of domination,
subjugation and hegemony and cannot be separated
from the struggle for the universal affirmation of the
principles of non-alignment and of the right of peoples
to decide their own destiny, That right should become
universa1, and the United Nations should protect and
defend it in equal manner throughout the world.
Those who violate or who turn a deaf ear to that are
actuaIly helping to intensify the use of force in international relations and global confrontation, threatening
the general process of dktente and impeding
the
struggle for peace and security in the world.

ensure that no South African or other external forces,
regular or mercenary, will remain in or enter Southern
Rhodesia, except those forces provided for under the
Lancaster House Agreement.
162. Since the signing of the Agreement, the Patriotic
Front has strictly adhered to the provisions of the
cease-fire agreement and its guerrilla forces have
regrouped one after another at the designated assembly
points. Up to now, South African police and armed
forces and a large number of mercenary troops have
still not been completely withdrawn from Rhodesia.
Furthermore,
with the tacit consent of the administering authorities, the security forces of Rhodesia and
its so-called auxiliary forces have been allowed to
leave the assembly points for free activities on the
pretext of assisting the Rhodesian police to maintain
law and order, and by harassing, encircling or even
flagrantly killing those forces of the Patriotic Front
that are on their way to the assembly points, these
Rhodesian forces have constantly
created serious
bloody incidents. These are, obviously, in violation of
the Lancaster House Agreement and have naturally
aroused the resentment and apprehension
of the
Zimbabwe
Patriotic
Front, the African front-line
countries and a large number of States Members of
the United Nations.

158. My delegation is convinced that the warning
sounded in this forum will be heeded by those to
whom it is addressed. The United Nations is the
proper place not only for drawing attention to the
problem, but also for taking indispensable steps to
prevent the violation of the Lancaster House Agreement and secure the equal treatment of all of its
signatories. We should constantly endeavour to contribute to the realization of the right of Zimbabwe,
as well as that of Namibia,
to independence and
sovereignty, which will have a lasting and positive
effect not only in Africa but also in the world at large.

163. The Chinese delegation already pointed out
during the consideration and adoption of resolution 460
(1979) of the Security Council that “the signing of the
London agreement marks the beginning of a new
stage in the struggle of the Zimbabwean
people”
[218Ist II~PC~~IZR,pn1.a. 1471 for national independence.
We pointed out that any agreement is merely something on paper. Acute and complex struggles have to
be waged in order to translate something on paper into
reality. The racist forces of Rhodesia will never step
down from the stage of history of their own accord.
The South African racist rkgime has all along had
designs of placing southern Africa under its long-term
control. The South African racist rCgime and the
Rhodesian racist forces are jackals of the same lair,
and they are bound to collaborate with each other,
work hand in glove and resort to various schemes and
carry out sabotage and disturbances in a death-bed
struggle. In view of the recent developments,
our
anxiety is not unwarranted. These developments have
also shown that only by relying on the continuous
strengthening of the unity of the Zimbabwean people
and African front-line countries and all other justiceupholding countries and peoples, and by heightening
vigilance and persevering in the struggle, can the
complete
and unreserved
implementation
of the
Lancaster House Agreement be ensured.

159. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (interpretation
from
Chinese): The Chinese delegation has listened to the
statements made by the respected Ministers of Liberia,
the United Republic of Tanzania and Mozambique and
by the representatives of African and other countries
on the present situation in Southern Rhodesia. NOW
I should like to state the following views on this
question.
160. Over a month has passed since the parties
concerned signed in London the Lancaster House
Agreement’ on the solution of the question of Southern
Rhodesia. The African countries and peoples and the
international
community
have been concerned with
strict adherence to and implementation
of that Agreement so that the people of Zimbabwe will be able to
realize majority rule and national independence at an
early date. However, the recent development of the
situation in Southern Rhodesia shows that the Agreement is facing a new test as to whether it can be
implemented or not.
161. The Lancaster House Agreement provided for
the complete withdrawal of the police and armed forces
sent by the South African authorities to be stationed
in Zimbabwe and has formulated the principle
of
treating the forces of Muzorewa and the Patriotic
Front equally. In paragraphs 6 and 7 of its resolution 460 (1979), the Security Council once again
explicitly calls for strict adherence to the agreements
reached, and for their full and faithful implementation
by the administering
Power and all the parties concerned, and calls upon the administering
Power to

164. The significance of the early peaceful solution
of the Rhodesian question and the realization of the
genuine independence
of the Zimbabwean
people
goes well beyond the confines of one country. It will
be a major event that concerns peace and stability in
southern Africa. We have taken note of the fact that,
17

L

with the support of the African States of the Commonwealth, the parties concerned have made great efforts
and positive contributions
to the peaceful solution of
the question. We have given full appraisal of this.
However, if the Agreement reached cannot be strictly
and fairly implemented,
and the United Kingdom fails
to take immediate and effective measures to stop the
deterioration
of the state of affairs, the situation in
Zimbabwe and southern Africa will continue to be
turbulent
and unstable and even lead to greater
relapses.
165. At present, hegemonists fromoutside are casting
a covetous eye and are seeking every opportunity
to
carry out infiltration and expansion in this area. Should
the aforementioned
situation occur, the results of the
Lancaster House Conference would be destroyed and
hegemonists
from outside would intensify
their
meddling. This woutd be detrimental to all the signatories of the Lancaster House Agreement.

170. The Republic of Zaire attaches great importance
to Zimbabwe’s future because of the direct influence
that the situation in that country and that part of
Africa has on peace, security and stability in central
Africa. During the thirty-fourth session of the General
,Assembty, we had an opportunity to emphasize that
point and to recall that, just as Zambia needs real
independence
in Zimbabwe and Angola needs real
independence in Namibia, Zaire needs stability and
security in Angola and in the other neighbouring countries. In its march towards progress and development,
Africa requires peace and stability in central Africa
and its periphery.
171. For its part, the Republic of Zaire has always
believed that the final harmonious settlement of the
problem of Zimbabwe essentially requires a dialogue
among all the sons of Zimbabwe. The Republic of
Zaire therefore supports the African action calling for
these meetings of the Security Council. That action
expresses justified concern and a true desire to contribute. We are concerned, first of all, because in our
devotion to peace, we wish to establish conditions for
understanding,
cohesion and harmony in Zimbabwe.
.Now that peace is at hand, we wish it to be achieved.
We do not want our hopes to be dashed. We want all
parties to refrain from anything that might bring back
mistrust and war and cause useless frustration. Next,
we have a true desire to contribute, because we wish
to help to bring about a successful outcome to the
great efforts that have been undertaken by the United
Kingdom to ensure that Zimbabwe achieves independence in a climate of understanding,
peace and
harmony in accordance with the stipulations of the
Declaration
on the Granting of Independence
to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.

166. .Since the British Governor has already taken
over full power in Rhodesia, the British side should
discharge its responsibilities and deal with the situation
in Rhodesia in strict adherence to the provisions of the
Agreement.
This is not only in the interests of the
parties directty concerned, but also conducive to the
maintenance of peace and stability in southern Africa.
167. The Chinese delegation is in favour of the views
and various correct proposals put forward by the
representatives of the African countries. The Security
Council should give serious consideration
to them.
In our view, the Council should strongly condemn the
South African racist regime for its interference in the
internal affairs of Southern Rhodesia and call upon
the administering
authorities to urge the immediate
and complete withdrawal of South African forces and
all other mercenaries from Southern Rhodesia and
to implement
the Agreement comprehensively
and
fairly in every respect. We sincerely hope that the
Agreement will be speedily and strictly implemented
so as to facilitate the fair and peaceful solution of the
question of Southern Rhodesia and the realization
of national independence of the Zimbabwean people.
168. The PRESIDENT
(inter.pretatiorlfr.om
The next speaker is the representative
I invite him to take a place at the Council
to make a statement.

172. The United Kingdom should therefore understand Africa’s action as constituting a positive and
productive contribution to the real fulfilment of the
wishes expressed in the Lancaster House Agreement;’
several heads working on a good cause are always
better than only one.
173. Over the past 14 years Africa’s approach, shared
by the international community as a whole, has been
to help the people of Zimbabwe, organized within
its national liberation movement, to resist the brutality
of all kinds perpetrated by the rebel Salisbury Administration and to regain its rights to self-determination,
to unrestrained development of its own individuality
and to independence-rights
that have been ignoredand also to draw the attention of the United Kingdom
to its responsibilities
as administering Power.

French):

of Zaire.
table and

169. Mr. KAMANDA
wa KAMANDA
(Zaire)(inrerpretcrfio,7j?om French): Mr. President, it is a particular
pleasure for me to have an opportunity
to speak
once again during your term of office as President of
the Security Council. I am familiar with your country’s
devotion and your own devotion to the defence of
just causes, and I am convinced that, with your lucid
and able guidance, the Council wilt respond appropriately to the questions raised in this debate on
Zimbabwe.

174. After much hesitation and the failure of attempts,
the hesitancy of which I assume results from the
complexity
of the problem, the United Kingdom has
finally responded to the appeal of OAU, the national
liberation
movements
and the international
community and has promised fully to meet its responsibilities as administering Power.
18

‘,,
,.‘,.

175. The signing of the Lancaster House Agreement
on 21 December
1979 in London by the parties
concerned, Zimbabwe and the United Kingdom, was a
great relief, and the restoration of legality in Zimbabwe
with the arrival of the new British Governor caused
deep emotion among all of us who have been concerned with this problem for many years. We paid a
well deserved tribute not only to the United Kingdom
and Mrs. Thatcher’s Government,
but also to the
Patriotic Front and to all the leaders of Zimbabwe for
the courage and inaturity they had demonstrated.

Lancaster House Agreement in a climate of order and
mutual trust. We are convinced that the British Government will in good faith continue to implement
the
Agreement in letter as well as in spirit, in the interests
not only of friendship and co-operation between independent Zimbabwe and the United Kingdom but also
of world peace and security.
181. No other continent has been subjugated for
so long as Africa, or so mistreated and humiliated
by the colonial situation and cgpartheid. No other
continent has lost so many human lives as has Africa
because of the colonial situation, No other contin’ent
has been so impoverished or been so much the victim
of the plunder of its resources as has Africa because
of the colonial situation. We wish to believe that all
that belongs to the past.

176. Information
concerning the violation of the
Lancaster House Agreement,
and particularly
the
maintenance of South African troops and mercenaries,
causes us deep concern. The maintenance of South
African troops and the presence of mercenaries
certainly are not factors for stabilization in that country and in the region. It is a serious cause for concern,
because we do not want time bombs that will explode
in the hands of the sons of Zimbabwe just after independence has been achieved and the British Governor has left. So many efforts have been undertaken in
patient, arduous negotiations to solve the crisis of
Zimbabwe; they surely do not deserve such an outcome.

182. The accession to independence of a new nation
is a time for all who love freedom, peace and justice
to rejoice, but it is also a moment for reflection on
respect for the rights of peoples and for human dignity
in the interests of friendship and indispensable cooperation among peoples and States.
183. The courageous people of Zimbabwe has long
been the victim of an unjust fate-illegal
occupation
by a racist and intransigent minority. The courageous
people of Zimbabwe has experienced
too much
deprivation
and too many wars and it has shed too
much blood.

177. We should therefore like to make a friendly
request of the United Kingdom and all the other States
of the world first to help the sons of Zimbabwe to
understand one another, to unite, to overcome their
divergences, since the latter can so easily be exploited
to the detriment of the people and their future, and to
learn from the examples of the past; while, on the
other hand, they refrain from adopting any position
that might fan the flames of discord among the
children of Zimbabwe and create useless frustration.
We wish to ensure that, free from all hindrances, the
peopie of Zimbabwe may choose their future leaders
without pressure from any source.

184. From north to south, from east to west, let us
once and for all set aside selfish designs and speculation and promise to restore peace to Zimbabwe, to
give it a breathing space. I am convinced that it will
then be able to demonstrate to the world what it is
capable of doing, if it can work in a climate of freedom
and dignity, its independence regained.
185. We must demonstrate an exalted sense of responsibility.
This means that we must draw up a
balance sheet of what we have achieved together
after difficult work in which all have paid a price.‘This
means also that we must build on the basis of those
achievements.

178.’ In Zimbabwe in particular, and in southern
Africa in general, we wish to warn against any errors
of assessment and judgement that might be exploited
to counteract Ihe will and determination of the States
of our region to pursue a policy of true independence
and to work for peace, progress and the development
of their peoples in a climate of friendship, understanding and co-operation with all the nations of the
world. There are, indeed, errors of assessment and
judgement that might eventually give rise to serious
threats to international
peace and security in the
region.

186. When I measure the distance that we have
travelled since we began, I tell myself that we have
gone a long way, and I can understand, on the one
hand, the justified indignation
and emotion of the
representative
of the Patriotic Front and, on the
other hand, the frustrations of Great Britain, whose
self-esteem and national pride have been wounded
because it is inclined to believe that the efforts that it
has undertaken so far are not even being recognized.

179. We are convinced that the children of Zimbabwe
will be equal to their historic responsibilities,
and we
must all help them. A situation of confusion in Zimbabwe will serve neither the interests of Africa nor
those of the United Kingdom and its partners.

187. It is not in the mind nor in the intention of
anyone- certainly not of the delegation of Zaire-to
disrupt the Lancaster House Agreement.
We must
therefore all, both in word and in deed, avoid
excesses that would have a negative impact and invite

180. The interests of all reside in the implementation
without any distortion or ulterior motives of the
19

all parties directly involved to demonstrate moderation
and mutua1 understanding,
since, over and above
excesses on one side and radical responses on the
other side that all bear the stamp of injured selfesteem and national pride, we must return to reality.
That is to say, that we must remember, first, that
Zimbabwe is still a British colony; secondly, that the
process of achieving independence and holding free
and democratic elections must go on; thirdly, that the
Lancaster House Agreement is a valid one and must
not collapse; fourthly, that after this Security Council
debate, it will be necessary to continue on the spot in
Zimbabwe to solve the specific problems that arise by
peaceful means rather than by convulsive means; and,
finally, that we must all work to create the optimum
conditions for the return of peace and freedom to that
country. Taking into account all I have said, a compromise is possible between the various positions that
would support the dynamics of peace and spare all
parties paralysing frustrations and humiliations.

takes place in conformity with the Lancaster House
Agreement; that would call for the withdrawal of the
South African troops, the withdrawal of mercenary
forces, the confinement to base of all troops or military
forces, and treatment on an equal footing of all parties
involved in the elections so as to guarantee that they
will all have the same opportunity to accede to power
-this
would eloquently express the concern of all
of us.
189. We hope that everyone will be mature enough to
meet the challenge and that the decisions adopted by
the Security Council will promote, rather than delay or
forestall the achievement of a just and lasting solution
of the crisis of Zimbabwe.
The meeting rose at 7.25 p.m.

188. In the view of the delegation of Zaire, once we
have heard all the relevant and nobly inspired statements in the Security Council, a resolution or an
appeal from the Council that would call upon the
United Kingdom, the administering
Power, to ensure
that the process leading to the accession of Zimbabwe
to independence
and free and democratic elections

NOTES
’ See Sorrthertt
Rhodc.sicr,
Report
of /he Consti/w’otwI
Confcrencw,
Loncrtsccr
House,
Londot~,
S~~ptut,lher-Decetlrher
1979,
Cmnd. 7802 (London,
Her Majesty’s
Stationery
Office, 1980).
2 OfJicicrl
Records
of the Gcttcrd
Assembly,
Thirty-fuwlh
Sc.ssiort, Pharv
Maclings,
31st meeting,
para. 18.
3 A/34/542,
annex, Political Declaration,
para. 78.

20

HOW

I

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publicntions
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLfCATlONS

nu~y be obbined
your bookntorc

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
book&ores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Lea publications
des Nations
Unies
son; en vents
dans les fibrairies
et les agencea
d&oeitairea
du mondo entier. Inlormez-vow
nuprk
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
a : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenCve.

H3AaHHR
OpIWIHsauHH
OCizeAwfel:m.rx
HaunI1
YO~HO xynxrb
B KHH~RblX
Yarasnxax
II aremcmax
80 mex pafronnx
nnpa.
Hanonmrs
cnpaexx
06 nsxamiax
I)
aamen xnn~rrorr
nraraznde
HUH nrnurfre
no anpccy:
Oprarrrf3aurfn
OtlzeflxHembrx
Haunt&
Carqm
no npo&a%e nanawntt,
Hbro-EopK
1tnK Xemaa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONRS

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Wnidns estdn en vente en librerias
y cases diatribuidoras
en todaa
partes del mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirljase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00400

83-61462-December

1985-2,425
