UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/737
30 June 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 28 JUNE 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to refer to the mandate of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS), as agreed following my
consultations with the Council last March (see S/1999/232 and S/1999/233 of
3 March 1999).
Members of the Council will recall that following the events of 7 May in
Guinea-Bissau, which resulted in President Vieira’s ouster from office, I
indicated in my statement of 11 May 1999 that the Secretariat, in view of the
changed circumstances on the ground, would review options available to the
United Nations with regard to the peace process in that country.
As part of the review process, the Department of Political Affairs
dispatched an assessment mission to Guinea-Bissau from 10 to 12 June 1999 to
take stock of the situation in the country and to make recommendations as to the
appropriate role the United Nations should now play in response to the new
situation on the ground. The mission reported that despite the changed
circumstances, the overall mandate of UNOGBIS remained valid although some of
its aspects may need to be revised to adapt to the new realities. Accordingly,
the revised mandate would read as follows:
(a) Help create an enabling environment for restoring, maintaining and
consolidating peace, democracy and the rule of law and for the organization of
free and transparent elections (same as in the original mandate except the word
"maintaining", which is new);
(b) Actively support national efforts, including those of civil society
towards national reconciliation, tolerance and peaceful management of
differences, particularly during the transitional period (new);
(c) Encourage initiatives aimed at building confidence and maintaining
friendly relations between Guinea-Bissau, its neighbours and its international
partners (new);
(d) Seek the commitment of the Government and other parties to adopt a
programme of voluntary arms collection, disposal and destruction (original
mandate);
99-19382 (E)

300699

/...

S/1999/737
English
Page 2

(e) Provide the political framework and leadership for harmonizing and
integrating the activities of the United Nations system in the country,
particularly during the transitional period leading up to general and
presidential elections (original mandate).
The above revised mandate takes into account the new realities on the
ground and would enable UNOGBIS to contribute meaningfully to efforts aimed at
restoring durable peace and sustainable development in the country. Meanwhile,
I instructed my Representative to travel to Guinea-Bissau on 22 June for
consultations with the authorities and to begin the task of acting in motion the
operations of UNOGBIS.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention
of members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
