General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

142

item, as well as the observations and documents submitted by the Chilean authorities, 44
Commending the Chairman and the members of the
Ad Hoe Working Group for the thorough and objective
manner in which the report was prepared, in spite of
the difficulties arising from the persistent refusal of
the Chilean authorities to permit the Group to visit the
country in accordance with its mandate,
Deeply deploring the destruction of the democratic
institutions and constitutional safeguards formerly enjoyed by the Chilean people,
Gravely concerned by the fact that, in spite of the
appeals by the General Assembly, the Secretary-General, private institutions and citizens of Chile, the
Chilean authorities have consistently failed to give a
satisfactory account for missing persons,
Concluding that constant and flagrant violations of
human rights and fundamental freedoms continue to
take place in Chile, notwithstanding recent developments, mainly due to the continuous efforts of the
Chilean people and the international community, which,
according to the report of the Ad Hoe Working Group,
indicate a decrease in the number of political prisoners
and in the number of detainees under the state of siege,
l. Reiterates its profound indignation that the
Chilean people continue to be subjected to constant and
flagrant violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, to lack adequate constitutional and judicial
safeguards of their rights and liberties and to suffer assaults on the freedom and integrity of their persons,
in particular by methods of systematic intimidation,
including torture, disappearance of persons for political
reasons, arbitrary arrest, detention, exile and deprivation of Chilean nationality;
2. Expresses its particular concern and indignation
at the continuing disappearance of persons, which is
shown by the available evidence to be attributable to
political reasons, and the refusal of the Chilean authorities to accept responsibility or to account for the large
number of such persons, or even to undertake an adequate investigation of cases drawn to their attention;
3. Deplores, in this connexion, the unsatisfactory
way in which the Chilean authorities have sought to
fulfil their undertakings to the Secretary-General, acting
under the mandate of General Assembly resolution
3 l I I 24, and relating to the disappeared relatives of the
Chileans who drew attention to their plight by engaging
in a hunger strike at the headquarters of the Economic
Commission for Latin America at Santiago;
4. Further deplores the failure of the Chilean authorities to comply with their own repeated assurances
to allow the Ad Hoe Working Group on the Situation
of Human Rights in Chile to visit the country in accordance with its mandate;
5. Calls once more upon the Chilean authorities
to restore and safeguard, without delay, basic human
rights and fundamental freedoms and fully to respect the
provisions of the relevant international instruments to
which Chile is a party and, to this end, to implement
paragraph 2 of General Assembly resolution 31/124;
6. Demands that the Chilean authorities put an immediate end to practices of inadmissible secret arrests
and subsequent disappearance of persons whose de44 A/C.3/32/6

and Corr. I.

tention is systematically denied or never acknowledged,
and clarify forthwith the status of such persons;
7. Reiterates its invitation to Member States.
United Nations agencies and other international organizations to inform the Secretary-General of steps taken
to implement paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 31 / 124 in order to allow him to submit further
reports to the Commission on Human Rights at its
thirty-fourth session and the Assembly at its thirtythird session;
8. Invites the Commission on Human Rights:
(a) To extend the mandate of the Ad Hoe Working Group, as presently constituted, so as to enable it
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session and to the Commission at its thirty-fifth session,
with such additional information as may be necessary;
(b) To submit to the General Assembly at its
thirty-third session, through the Economic and Social
Council, specific recommendations on possible humanitarian, legal and financial aid to those arbitrarily arrested or imprisoned, to those forced to leave the
country and to their relatives;
( c) To submit to the General Assembly at its
thirty-third session, through the Economic and Social
Council, a progress report on action taken in compliance with paragraph 5 (c) of Assembly resolution 31/124;
9. Requests the President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General
to assist in any way they may consider appropriate in
the re-establishment of basic human rights and fundamental freedoms in Chile.
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
32/119.

Assistance to
refugees

South

African

student

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/126 of 16 December
1976, in which it requested the Secretary-General to
take immediate steps to organize and provide emergency financial and other appropriate forms of assistance for the care, subsistence and education of South
African student refugees,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 417 (1977)
of 31 October 1977, in which the Council, inter alia,
requested all Governments and organizations to contribute generously for assistance to the victims of
violence and repression, including educational assistance
to South African student refugees,
Noting the appointment by the Secretary-General of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
as co-ordinator of assistance within the United Nations
system to South African student refugees,
Expressing deep concern that the Government of
South Africa continues to take more and more repressive measures against students in that country,
Noting with concern the continuing influx of South
African refugees, including in particular students into
neighbouring countries,
'
Concerned over the pressure on the educational systems of the three host countries-Botswana, Lesotho

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and Swaziland-as a result of the continued influx of
children from South Africa seeking freedom from repression and also an opportunity to further their studies,
Having examined the reports of the Secretary-Gen·eral45 on the progress achieved in regard to the assistance required by and provided to these refugees in
Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland,
Recognizing that the needs of South African student
refugees are also imposing serious pressures on Zambia,
1. Endorses the measures taken by the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees for the mobilization of a programme of
assistance to South African student refugees in Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland;
2. Notes with appreciation the generous contributions of the Governments of Botswana, Lesotho and
Swaziland in providing asylum and making available
educational facilities for student refugees;
3. Notes with satisfaction the contributions so far
made by Member States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations and United Nations
agencies;
4. Expresses concern, however, that the total assistance received to date falls short of the needs;
5. Urges all Governments, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations and United Nations
agencies to contribute generously towards the assistance
programmes for these student refugees, both through
financial support and by offering the necessary opportunities for their care and subsistence, education and
vocational training;
6. Requests all agencies and programmes of the
United Nations system, including in particular the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa and the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa, to assist the High
Commissioner in carrying out the humanitarian task
entrusted to him;
7. Requests the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner to strengthen their efforts for the mobilization of emergency financial and other appropriate
forms of assistance for these student refugees in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To undertake a similar programme of assistance for South African student refugees in Zambia;
(b) To arrange for a review of the matter in time
for it to be considered by the Economic and Social
Council at its sixty-fifth session;
(c) To report to the General Assembly at its thirtythird session.
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
32/120.

Measures to improve the situation and
ensure the human rights and dignity of
all migrant workers

The General Assembly,
Recalling the terms of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights 46 and of the International Convention
41i A/32/65

and Add. l.
217 A (lll).

46 Resolution

143

on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,47
Co!lsidering the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 196 l 4~ and the Vienna Convention on
Consular Relations of 1963,rn
Considering also the Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975,"0 and the Recommendation concerning Migrant Workers, 1975/• 1
adopted by the General Conference of the International
Labour Organisation,
Recalling its resolutions concerning migrant workers
in particular resolutions 3449 (XXX) of 9 Decem~
ber 1975 and 31/127 of 16 December 1976 and
Economic and Social Council resolutions 1749 (LlV)
?f 16_ May 1973 a~d 1926 (LVlll) of 6 May 1975,
m which the Council affirmed the need for the United
Nation3 to consider the situation of migrant workers in
an interrelated manner and in relation to general fai.:tors which have a bearing on human rights and human
dignity,
Aware that the problem of migrant workers continues
to be of major importance to many countries, that it is
becoming increasingly serious in certain regions and
that the Commission on Human Rights and other relevant organs of the United Nations should take immediate measures to ensure the human rights and dignity of all migrant workers,
Emphasizing its serious concern at the de facto discrimination suffered by alien workers in some countries
despite the legislative and other efforts exerted to
prevent and punish it,
. Believi~g further th~t the problem of migrant workers
beco~1~g more senous in certain regions for transient political and economic reasons and for social and
cultural reasons,
1~

Recalling that the family is the natural and funda~ental gro~p unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the State, and that in that context
the families of migrant workers are entitled to the same
protection as the migrant workers themselves,
A ware. of the wo~k . done in t~e field of migrant
workers_ by the specialize~ a~encies, particularly the
lnte_rnational Labour Orgamsat10n, and by some United
Nations organs, such as the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities
Appreciating, in particular, the efforts which th;
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization continues to exert in the field of migrant
workers,
Convinced, in particular, that an effort at close co~peration betwe~n the ~nternational Labour Organisat10n and the Umted Nat10ns Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization will contribute to the improvement of the situation of migrant workers,
A w'.1~e of the efforts mad~ by countries of origin
to facilitate the return of migrant workers and their
reintegration into the economic and social life of their
country,
Having regard to Economic and Social Council resolution 2083 (LXII) of 13 May 1977,
H Resolution
48

2106 A (XX), annex.
United Nations, Trealy Series, vol. 500, No. 7310, p. 95.
·l!l /hid., vol. 596, No. 8638, p. 261.
50
Inter!lational Labour Office, Official Bulletin, vol. LVIII,
1975, Senes A, No. 1, Convention No. 143.
01 Ibid., Recommendation No. 151.
