S/2012/395

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 June 2012
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
In paragraph 2 of resolution 1984 (2011), the Security Council requested the
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010) to provide a final
report to the Council with its findings and recommendations.
Accordingly, the President hereby circulates the report dated 4 June 2012
received from the Panel of Experts (see annex).

12-37171 (E) 270612

*1237171*

S/2012/395

Annex
Letter dated 4 June 2012 from the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010) addressed to the President of
the Security Council
On behalf of the Panel of Experts established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1929 (2010), I have the honour to transmit herewith, in accordance with
paragraph 2 of resolution 1984 (2011), the final report on its work.
(Signed) Salomé Zourabichvili
Coordinator
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010)
(Signed) Jonathan Brewer
Expert
(Signed) Kenichiro Matsubayashi
Expert
(Signed) Thomas Mazet
Expert
(Signed) Jacqueline Shire
Expert
(Signed) Elena Vodopolova
Expert
(Signed) Olasehinde Ishola Williams
Expert
(Signed) Wenlei Xu
Expert

2

12-37171

S/2012/395

Final report of the Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 1929 (2010)
Summary
The present final report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution
1984 (2011) and in accordance with the mandate set forth in paragraph 29 of
resolution 1929 (2010). It contains the analysis, conclusions and recommendations of
the Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010) regarding
compliance by the Islamic Republic of Iran with the provisions of that and related
resolutions, in addition to information provided by Member States regarding their
implementation. The Panel draws on consultations with Member States and experts,
inspections of reported incidents of non-compliance and assessments of
implementation reports submitted by Member States under resolution 1929 (2010).
The report also contains a discussion of other work undertaken by the Panel relevant
to its mandate, including outreach activities to Member States, regional groups and
the private sector and, where appropriate, the provision of technical advice.
The sanctions measures specified in resolution 1929 (2010) and previous
resolutions are part of a coordinated and intensive effort by the international
community to persuade the Islamic Republic of Iran to resolve outstanding questions
about the nature of its nuclear programme and demonstrate that it is for purely
peaceful purposes. Sanctions remain one element of a dual-track approach to the
country, which includes diplomatic efforts by China, France, Germany, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America. These sanctions are targeted at specific activities,
institutions, entities and individuals related to the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
prohibited proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities and development of a nuclear
weapon delivery system, in addition to transfers of conventional weapons.
Sanctions are slowing the procurement by the Islamic Republic of Iran of some
critical items required for its prohibited nuclear programme. At the same time,
prohibited activities, including uranium enrichment, are continuing. The Islamic
Republic of Iran has still not complied with the requests of the International Atomic
Energy Agency for information to clarify the possible military dimensions of its
programme. In the present report, the Panel identifies the acquisition of high-grade
carbon fibre as one of a number of critical items that the Islamic Republic of Iran
requires for the development of more advanced centrifuges. The report also contains an
analysis of the country’s requirements for uranium ore in the context of its current and
future planned activities, while noting that no procurement attempts have been reported
to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).
The Iranian ballistic missile programme continues to develop, as demonstrated
by additional launches, their prohibition under resolution 1929 (2010) notwithstanding.
In the present report, the Panel provides the conclusions of its investigation into the
June 2011 launch of the Rasad satellite, which was reported to the Committee.
The Panel takes note of the recent designations by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) concerning the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea of two Democratic People’s Republic of Korea entities
and their links to the Iranian ballistic missile programme.

12-37171

3

S/2012/395

The Islamic Republic of Iran has continued to defy the international community
through illegal arms shipments. Three interdictions of conventional arms or related
materiel are identified in the present report. Two of these involve the Syrian Arab
Republic, as did most of the cases inspected by the Panel during its previous
mandate, underscoring that the Syrian Arab Republic continues to be the central
party to illicit Iranian arms transfers. The Panel recommends the designation of two
entities related to these interdictions.
The Panel also takes note of information received concerning arms shipments
by the Islamic Republic of Iran to other destinations.
The Panel highlights the challenges in identifying specific transactions or
businesses involving Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps entities that could contribute
to the country’s proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities or the development of nuclear
weapon delivery systems. It also describes the involvement of an Islamic
Revolutionary Guards Corps entity in a transfer of conventional arms reported to the
Committee.
The transportation sector offers unique challenges for sanctions implementation.
The report details the complex structure of the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping
Lines, with its frequent changes in ownership, names or national flags of vessels, and
whose activities are subject to vigilance under paragraph 22 of resolution 1929
(2010). This is illustrated in the case of the Irano Hind Shipping Company, an
Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines entity, which was designated under
resolution 1929 (2010) and whose vessels continue to operate.
The Panel concludes that financial sanctions have been implemented by many
Member States with rigour and welcomes the new Financial Action Task Force
standard on financing of proliferation.
The Panel underscores the growing level of awareness among Member States of
the importance of strong export controls in the implementation of sanctions. The
Panel identified small and medium-sized enterprises as an attractive target of Iranian
illicit procurement attempts, and highlighted the importance of outreach to such
enterprises for effective implementation of export controls.
Interdictions of prohibited shipments are vital for slowing the Islamic Republic
of Iran’s proliferation-sensitive nuclear and ballistic missile activities and preventing
arms transfers from the country. The Panel recognizes the value of sharing
intelligence and cooperation among Member States in successful interdictions.
The Panel is aware of interdictions, of which only a few have been reported to
the Committee. The Panel wishes to underline that this reporting is central to its ability
to analyse patterns of procurement and illicit activity and develop recommendations.
Information regarding denials of export licences for sensitive items, or attempted
transfers identified by vigilant Customs authorities, is equally important.
During consultations with Member States, those that were not members of the
Security Council raised the issue of the availability of the Panel’s 2011 final report,
which they suggested would be useful in having a better understanding of sanctions
implementation and improving national measures.
Although there remain examples of Member States who have yet to implement
United Nations sanctions fully, the Panel is encouraged by the high level of
commitment among most of its interlocutors to the effective implementation of the
sanctions contained in Security Council resolution 1929 (2010).

4

12-37171

S/2012/395

I. Introduction
1.
The present report has been prepared in accordance with the Panel’s mandate
as set forth in paragraph 29 of resolution 1929 (2010), and renewed in resolution
1984 (2011) on 9 June 2011. It contains a summary of the Panel’s work over the past
11 months in the areas of inspections of reported sanctions violations, consultations
with Member States, outreach to Member States and the private sector, and
discussions with outside experts. These activities are described in further detail in
paragraphs 16 to 42.
2.
The Panel consists of eight members, who were reappointed by the SecretaryGeneral on 30 June 2011 (S/2011/405). The Panel’s composition is as follows:
Salomé Zourabichvili (France), Coordinator; Jonathan Brewer (United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland); Kenichiro Matsubayashi (Japan); Thomas
Mazet (Germany); Jacqueline Shire (United States of America); Elena Vodopolova
(Russian Federation); Olasehinde Ishola Williams (Nigeria); and Wenlei Xu (China).
3.
The Panel operates under the direction of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). The mandate of the Panel, as set
forth in paragraph 29 of resolution 1929 (2010), is:
(a) To assist the Committee in carrying out its mandate as specified in
paragraph 18 of resolution 1737 (2006) and paragraph 28 of resolution 1929 (2010);
(b) To gather, examine and analyse information from Member States,
relevant United Nations bodies and other interested parties regarding the
implementation of the measures decided in resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007),
1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010), in particular incidents of non-compliance;
(c) To make recommendations on actions the Council, or the Committee or
the State, may consider to improve implementation of the relevant measures;
(d) To provide a final report to the Council no later than 30 days prior to the
termination of its mandate, with its findings and recommendations.
In its resolution 1984 (2011), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
Panel until 9 June 2012.
4.
In its resolution 1929 (2010), the Security Council sought to strengthen and
build upon the measures contained in resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and
1803 (2008), with a view to persuading the Islamic Republic of Iran to comply with
its Security Council obligations. Measures imposed by the Security Council on the
Islamic Republic of Iran include:
(a) An embargo on proliferation-sensitive nuclear and ballistic missile
activities (resolution 1737 (2006), paras. 3-7 and 9; resolution 1803 (2008), para. 8;
and resolution 1929 (2010), paras. 7, 9 and 13);
(b) An arms embargo (resolution 1747 (2007), para. 5; and resolution 1929
(2010), para. 8);
(c)

A travel ban (resolution 1929 (2010), para. 10);

(d) An asset freeze (resolution 1737 (2006), paras. 12-15; resolution 1747
(2007), para. 4; resolution 1803 (2008), para. 7; and resolution 1929 (2010),
paras. 11, 12 and 19);

12-37171

5

S/2012/395

(e)

Other business restrictions (resolution 1929 (2010), para. 22);

(f) The seizure and disposal of proscribed items, following inspections of
cargo (resolution 1929 (2010), paras. 14-17);
(g) A ban on the provision of bunkering services (resolution 1929 (2010),
para. 18);
(h) Financial-related measures (resolution 1747 (2007), para. 7; resolution
1803 (2008), paras. 9 and 10; and resolution 1929 (2010), paras. 21, 23 and 24; in
addition to the sixteenth preambular paragraph of resolution 1929 (2010));
(i) Other requests and calls to Member States (resolution 1737 (2006),
para. 17; and resolution 1929 (2010), para. 20).

A.

Methodology
5.
The Panel carried out its tasks on the basis of the mandate stipulated in
paragraph 29 of resolution 1929 (2010) and the directions given by the Committee,
mindful of the methodological standards contained in the report of the Informal
Working Group of the Security Council on General Issues of Sanctions (S/2006/997)
and further described in the publication Best Practices and Recommendations for
Improving the Effectiveness of United Nations Sanctions, which is based on that
report.
6.
In fulfilling its mandate, the Panel, as an independent expert body, sought to
meet the required high evidentiary methodological standards. The Panel endeavoured
to ensure that its findings were substantiated, and that the information contained in its
reports derived from credible sources, was as transparent and verifiable as possible
and, in the case of reported violations of sanctions, included wherever possible firsthand, on-site observations by the experts themselves. The Panel was also mindful of
the importance of maintaining the confidentiality of sources of information, when
requested. The Panel’s decisions were arrived at by consensus and, where there were
differences in conclusions, the majority carried and dissenting views were reflected.

B.

Background
7.
The political and economic environment in which the international community
is implementing its obligations under resolution 1929 (2010) has undergone
significant changes over the past year. Economies are struggling to overcome
economic downturns amid rising energy prices. The Panel’s focus was to assess the
implementation of targeted Security Council sanctions and understand their impact
against that shifting background.
8.
Over the same period, significant questions remained regarding the peaceful
nature of the Iranian nuclear programme. In its most recent reports, the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) highlighted concerns regarding possible military
dimensions of the programmes (see GOV/2011/65, para. 53).
9.
Although provocative statements and actions have at times affected the
international climate and increased tensions over the past year, there has been progress
in recent months in finding a negotiated solution to the Iranian nuclear issue.

6

12-37171

S/2012/395

10. Negotiations between the Islamic Republic of Iran and the “E3 + 3” group of
countries (China, France, Germany, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom
and the United States) have restarted. In a letter dated 19 October 2011, Catherine
Ashton, High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy, welcomed the Islamic Republic of Iran’s suggestion to resume talks.
The country responded positively on 15 February 2012 and talks were held in
Istanbul, Turkey, on 14 April 2012. Ms. Ashton described the talks as constructive
and useful. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Aliakbar Salehi, said that Istanbul was the beginning for ending the nuclear
dispute. 1 A second round of talks took place on 23 May 2012 in Baghdad.
11. Security Council resolutions are targeted at specific activities, institutions,
entities and individuals related to the Islamic Republic of Iran’s prohibited nuclear
and missile activities, and conventional arms imports and exports. It is difficult to
assess their impact, in particular measured against stronger and more comprehensive
sanctions imposed by Member States unilaterally.
12. Unilateral sanctions are an issue that Member States raise regularly with the
Panel in the context of their implementation of targeted Security Council sanctions.
A number of Member States, which implement only these sanctions, have expressed
concern to the Panel that unilateral sanctions have a negative impact on legitimate
economic activities allowed under United Nations sanctions.
13. The impact of sanctions on the Iranian economy is sometimes difficult to
distinguish from the impact of domestic economic policies, in particular the effects
of cuts to long-standing consumer subsidies initiated in 2010. There are growing
signs, however, that sanctions are having an impact, including through rising prices
and a devaluing currency. According to an announcement by the Central Bank of
Iran on 4 March 2012, the Iranian inflation rate stood at 21.5 per cent. 2
14. Statements by senior Iranian officials on the impact of sanctions have shifted
over the past 12 months. Although such statements in 2011 downplayed their impact,
the Supreme Leader of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, was
quoted in February 2012 as calling sanctions “painful and crippling”. 3

C.

Acknowledgments
15. The Panel wishes to acknowledge the high degree of cooperation received
from many Member States during the course of its work. It also acknowledges the
excellent and sometimes proactive engagement of many private-sector entities.

II. Activities of the Panel
16. The Panel’s activities were developed and carried out in conformity with its
programme of work for the period 9 June 2011-8 June 2012, as required under
__________________
1 “Several steps forward will be taken in Iran-5+1 talks in Baghdad: Salehi”, Tehran Times,

29 April 2012.
2 “Iran’s inflation rate hits 21.5 per cent”, Tehran Times, 8 April 2012.
3 Robert F. Worth and David E. Sanger, “U.N. nuclear inspectors’ visit to Iran is a failure, West

says”, New York Times, 3 February 2012.

12-37171

7

S/2012/395

paragraph 3 of resolution 1984 (2011). The Panel submitted to the Committee its
midterm report on 9 November 2011, in addition to four inspection and investigation
reports and four quarterly assessments of Member State implementation reports as
required under paragraph 31 of resolution 1929 (2010) (see annex I). During its
current mandate, the Panel held consultations with 26 Member States and investigated
four reported incidents of non-compliance. A full list of the countries visited can be
found in annex II to the present report. The Panel attended informal consultations of
the Committee on 16 June 2011, 7 December 2011 and 29 February 2012.

A.

Consultations
17. The Panel’s plan of visits reflected its priorities to consult members of the
Security Council, Member States involved in the diplomatic process, bordering or
regional Member States and those Member States hosting relevant international
organizations. The Panel expanded the geographic breadth of its consultations
during the current mandate to reflect the global extent of Iranian interests and
activities related to sanctions.
18. A positive development observed by the Panel in the course of its
consultations with Member States over the past year was a marked increase in
awareness regarding sanctions implementation and the need for strengthened export
controls and for vigilance over specific sectors of business activity. Although some
Member States remain without sufficient capacity to implement United Nations
sanctions fully, the Panel is encouraged by the high level of commitment among
most of its interlocutors to the effective implementation of the sanctions contained
in resolution 1929 (2010).
19. During some consultations, the Panel had the opportunity to visit major ports
and receive briefings from Customs and port authorities directly involved in the
enforcement of measures under the relevant Security Council resolutions. Such
visits included the maritime ports of Antwerp (Belgium), Constanta (Romania), Hai
Phong (Viet Nam), Jebel Ali (United Arab Emirates), Klang (Malaysia), Odessa
(Ukraine) and Singapore, and the airports of Madrid (Spain), Oslo (Norway) and
Sofia (Bulgaria). These visits deepened the Panel’s understanding of enforcement
and implementation issues related to export controls, Customs and transportation.
20. The Panel carried out its tasks in consultation with United Nations experts
belonging to the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, the United Nations
Institute for Disarmament Research, the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Economic
Commission for Europe, the United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs, the
International Civil Aviation Organization and, as appropriate, experts and panels of
experts working under other Security Council resolutions, including resolutions
1540 (2004) and 1874 (2009).
21. The Panel also met representatives from other international organizations to
obtain information concerning implementation measures under the relevant Security
Council resolutions and related issues. These included the European Union, the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the International Criminal Police Organization,
the World Customs Organization and the International Organization for Migration.

8

12-37171

S/2012/395

B.

Outreach and related activities
22. From the beginning of its mandate, the Panel identified outreach as a priority.
Consistent with the Committee’s direction and encouragement of such activities, the
Panel proactively contacted Member States and organizations in the private sector
relevant to sanctions implementation, in addition to individual experts and
non-governmental organizations.
23. The Panel worked with local and international think tanks to organize regional
seminars bringing together practitioners and experts to discuss the implementation
of United Nations resolutions and the challenges that they pose. Four such seminars,
supported by Norway, Switzerland and the United Kingdom, were held during the
Panel’s current mandate. They took place as follows:
(a) In Istanbul, on 17 and 18 November 2011, organized in collaboration
with the International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS);
(b) In Geneva, on 15 and 16 March 2012, with the support of the Geneva
Centre for Security Policy;
(c)

In Singapore, on 12 and 13 April 2012, with IISS;

(d) In Nairobi, on 22 and 23 May 2012, organized by IISS and the Institute
for Security Studies, focusing on conventional arms transfer issues in the Horn of
Africa.
24. The Panel was also invited to participate in conferences and seminars relevant
to its mandate, including the Asian Senior-level Talks on Non-Proliferation; the
Asian Export Control Seminar; plenary meetings of the Financial Action Task Force
and meetings of some of its working groups; a seminar on conventional weapons
transfers organized by the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute; a seminar
at the Australian National University; an export control seminar in Belarus; and a
conference on combating the financing of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, hosted by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Republic of
Korea. It was also invited to participate in events organized by the Stimson Center,
Chatham House, Wilton Park, the EU Non-Proliferation Consortium, the Group of
Eight Non-proliferation Directors Group and the British Bankers’ Association.
25. The Panel held discussions with experts affiliated to governmental and
non-governmental think tanks and universities. These included IISS, the Institute for
Science and International Security, the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace, Columbia University in the City of New York, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Princeton University, RAND Corporation, King’s College London, the
Brazilian Center for International Relations, the BRICS Policy Center, the
Stockholm International Security and Peace Research Institute and the Geneva
Centre for Security Policy.
26. The Panel also met representatives of many private companies and entities in
Europe, Asia and the United States involved in the implementation of sanctions on
the Islamic Republic of Iran. These included Bluestar Fibres Company Limited,
Citigroup, Oerlikon Leybold, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer, JP Morgan Chase &
Co., Zurich Insurance Group, Axa Group, INFICON Holding, Kelvin Hughes, TNT
Express, the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication

12-37171

9

S/2012/395

(SWIFT), the International Group of P&I Clubs, the International Air Transport
Association and Maersk.

C.

Assessment of implementation reports
27. As requested by the Committee in its programme of work, the Panel submitted
four quarterly assessments of implementation reports: on 29 July 2011, 31 October
2011, 31 January 2012 and 30 April 2012. These assessments showed that
approximately 60 per cent of Member States had not reported under resolution 1929
(2010). The Panel concluded that the reports would be more informative and
relevant to its work if they contained details regarding implementation in practice,
albeit on a voluntary basis.
28. The Panel stands ready to assist the Committee to hold a planned open briefing
to inform Member States of the activities of the Panel and the Committee, as agreed
by the Committee on 4 March 2011 and 7 December 2011.

D.

Inspections of reported incidents
29. The Panel investigated four reported incidents of non-compliance during its
current mandate, two of which were reported to the Committee during the Panel’s
previous mandate. The Panel completed three physical inspections and one
investigation. 4 Three of four reported cases concerned violations of paragraph 5 of
resolution 1747 (2007), pertaining to arms and related materiel exports from the
Islamic Republic of Iran, and one of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010). The
following provides background to and summarizes the Panel’s key findings in each
case.
30. The Panel wishes to highlight the strong cooperation that it has received from
all reporting Member States, in particular Turkey, which has reported several
violations. The Panel wishes to emphasize the positive example set by reporting
Member States.

1.

International Security Assistance Force (Afghanistan)
31. The seizure of a shipment of rockets, fuses and ammunition in southern
Afghanistan on 5 February 2011 was reported to the Committee by the United
Kingdom on 21 April 2011. Following the seizure, the bulk of the shipment was
destroyed. Samples of the rockets and fuses were shipped to the United Kingdom for
forensic examination and, on 26 September 2011, made available to the Panel for
inspection.
32. This inspection was unusual because the Panel was unable to visit the site of
the seizure, only a small part of the original shipment was available for inspection
and no documents were available. The Panel concluded, on the basis of its
investigation and the information provided by the United Kingdom, that there was a

__________________
4 Inspection teams generally consist of from two to four Panel experts. In the present report,

references are to “the Panel” and not “members of the Panel”, as all inspections and the
subsequent reports engage the Panel as a whole. References are made to “members of the Panel”
only in cases of dissenting views.

10

12-37171

S/2012/395

high probability that the shipment of the 122-mm rockets constituted a violation by
the Islamic Republic of Iran of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007). To
substantiate this conclusion, the Panel continues to investigate this incident and
invites Member States to supply further relevant information.
2.

Yas Air (Turkey)
33. On 19 March 2011, the Turkish authorities seized 19 crates containing assault
rifles, machine guns, ammunition and mortar shells from an Ilyushin-76 cargo
aircraft operated by an Iranian cargo airline, Yas Air. The flight originated in the
Islamic Republic of Iran and was bound for the Syrian Arab Republic. This
interdiction was reported by Turkey to the Committee on 28 March 2011 and was
supplemented by a detailed inventory of the cargo transmitted to the Committee on
7 July 2011.
34. The Panel travelled to Diyarbakir on 19 November 2011 to inspect the
shipment. It concluded that the items seized constituted a violation of paragraph 5 of
resolution 1747 (2007).

3.

Safir/Rasad launch
35. Following a communication by four Member States on 15 July 2011, the Panel
investigated a launch by the Islamic Republic of Iran of the Rasad satellite on
15 June 2011 to determine whether the launch constituted a violation of paragraph 9
of resolution 1929 (2010).
36. The Panel noted that the Safir space launch vehicle itself was not designed to
carry a nuclear weapon. The majority of the Panel concluded that the satellite launch
was related to ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons, based on the
space launch vehicle’s derivation from two nuclear-capable missiles (the Shahab-3
and the R-27 submarine-launched ballistic missile in its second stage). Three
members of the Panel concluded that the launch was not an activity related to a
ballistic missile capable of delivering nuclear weapons. The majority of the Panel
also concluded that the Safir space launch vehicle made use of ballistic missile
technology, and therefore constituted a violation of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929
(2010). Two members of the Panel believed that it was difficult to reach such a firm
conclusion.

4.

Kilis (Turkey)
37. On 15 February 2011, the Turkish authorities seized a truck carrying explosives
originating in the Islamic Republic of Iran and bound for the Syrian Arab Republic.
The seizure was reported to the Committee on 12 January 2012. From 4 to 7 March
2012, the Panel physically inspected the seized materials and accompanying
documents at an ammunition depot in Osmaniye Province, southern Turkey.
38. The Panel concluded that the shipment constituted a violation by the Islamic
Republic of Iran of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007).

E.

Challenges
39. The Panel recalls the need to report promptly to the Committee incidents of
non-compliance. Some Member States have reported that domestic legal proceedings

12-37171

11

S/2012/395

conflict with their United Nations reporting obligations. Such conflicts should be
reconciled by Member States, including by sending initial confidential reports of
non-compliance to the Committee without delay.
40. The Panel is also aware of incidents, reported in the media and acknowledged
by Government officials in public statements, which may be violations. The Panel
reiterates its readiness to investigate such cases.
41. There are several reasons why interdictions may not be reported, including the
disclosure of sensitive intelligence sources and methods and requirements of local
law enforcement processes. The Panel appreciates the importance of such
considerations, while also noting that reports to the Committee provide valuable
information in support of the Panel’s mandate. They also send a strong signal to
Member States that the Islamic Republic of Iran continues to violate sanctions and
that Member States are taking preventative action accordingly.
42. The issue of safe storage and disposal of interdicted items came to the
forefront during the Panel’s current mandate with the explosion of materiel stored
by a Member State following its removal from the M/V Monchegorsk. This tragic
event underscores the need for safe storage and a prompt invitation to the Panel to
carry out an inspection, thereby allowing for expeditious disposal of the interdicted
items.

III. Analysis
A.

Nuclear materials and technology

1.

Introduction
43. In its resolution 1929 (2010), the Security Council barred the supply, sale or
transfer to the Islamic Republic of Iran of sensitive nuclear materials and
technology, including all items listed in INFCIRC/254/Rev.9/Part 1, in addition to
the dual-use items contained in INFCIRC/254/Rev.7/Part 2, with the exception of
those items specified in paragraph 5 of resolution 1737 (2006) and any further items
if the State determined that they could contribute to enrichment-related, reprocessing
or heavy water-related activities or to the development of nuclear weapon delivery
systems. 5 The Council also decided that the Islamic Republic of Iran was not to
acquire an interest in any commercial activity in another State involving uranium
mining, production or use of nuclear materials or ballistic missiles.
44. In addition, the Security Council affirmed that the Islamic Republic of Iran
should take the steps required by the Board of Governors of IAEA, among other
things, to build confidence in the exclusively peaceful purpose of its nuclear
programme, and should cooperate fully with IAEA on all outstanding issues,
particularly those which gave rise to concerns about the possible military dimensions
of the Iranian nuclear programme, including by providing access without delay to

__________________
5 In paragraph 13 of resolution 1929 (2010), the Security Council updates the provisions of earlier

resolutions with regard to INFCIRC/254/Rev.9/Part 1 and INFCIRC/254/Rev.7/Part 2. The
resolution states that, for the purposes of the measures specified in paragraphs 3 to 7 of
resolution 1737 (2006), the list of items in document S/2006/814 shall be superseded by the list
of items in INFCIRC/254/Rev.9/Part 1 and INFCIRC/254/Rev.7/Part 2.

12

12-37171

S/2012/395

all sites, equipment, persons and documents requested by IAEA. It further required
that the Islamic Republic of Iran should comply with the application of the modified
Code 3.1 of the subsidiary arrangement to its safeguards agreement, and act in
accordance with the provisions of the Additional Protocol to its safeguards agreement.
The Council called upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to ratify the Additional Protocol,
and reaffirmed that the safeguards agreement and its subsidiary arrangement could
not be amended or changed unilaterally by the Islamic Republic of Iran.
2.

Background
45. The continuing refusal of the Islamic Republic of Iran to suspend enrichment
and heavy water-related activities and to cooperate fully with IAEA in resolving
outstanding questions, in particular those related to research and development
activities with potential military applications dimensions, has been comprehensively
documented by IAEA (see GOV/2011/65 and GOV/2011/7, among others). In brief,
these allegations are described as coming from a wide variety of independent
sources, including from a number of Member States, from the Agency’s own efforts
and from information provided by the Islamic Republic of Iran itself. The information
is consistent in terms of technical content, individuals and organizations involved,
and time frames. IAEA notes further that information that it obtained regarding such
activities indicates that the Islamic Republic of Iran has carried out the following
activities that are relevant to the development of a nuclear explosive device:
(a) Efforts, some successful, to procure nuclear-related and dual-use
equipment and materials by military-related individuals and entities;
(b) Efforts to develop undeclared pathways for the production of nuclear
material;
(c) The acquisition of nuclear weapons development information and
documentation from a clandestine nuclear supply network;
(d) Work on the development of an indigenous design of a nuclear weapon
including the testing of components (GOV/2011/65, paras. 42 and 43).
46. The Panel’s objective in the present section is to examine the impact of
sanctions on the ability of the Islamic Republic of Iran to maintain and expand its
uranium enrichment activities. It addresses specific challenges, in particular with
regard to Iranian efforts to procure items necessary for its nuclear programme,
which cannot be produced indigenously in sufficient quantities or quality to sustain
some Iranian nuclear activities.

3.

Analysis

(a)

Uranium ore production
47. The Islamic Republic of Iran is believed by a number of Member States to be
seeking new sources of uranium ore to supply its enrichment efforts, even as efforts
are under way to develop further its indigenous production of uranium ore. The
country is prohibited from importing uranium ore under paragraph 13 of resolution
1929 (2010).

12-37171

13

S/2012/395

Uranium mining and processing in the Islamic Republic of Iran
48. The status of indigenous uranium mining activity in the Islamic Republic of
Iran remains opaque. The country has declared to IAEA two uranium mines: one,
Saghand, located in Yazd Province in the centre of the country, and the other, Gchine,
in the south, near Bandar Abbas. Only the Gchine mine is currently operating. The
country is constructing a yellowcake production plant in Ardakan, which will
eventually process the ore from the Saghand mine into uranium ore concentrate.
Both the Saghand mine and Ardakan facility are designed to have the capacity to
process 50 tons of uranium annually. The Gchine mine also has a co-located
yellowcake production plant with a reported annual processing capacity of 21 tons
of uranium. The combined output of these mines is inadequate for the fuelling of a
single 1,000 MW reactor, which on average requires approximately 25 tons of lowenriched uranium per year or the equivalent of at least 220 tons of natural uranium. 6
49. These facilities are not subject to IAEA safeguards inspections, although
activity at the sites can be monitored by satellite imagery. Imagery analysis indicates
that the Gchine mine and co-located yellowcake production plant are operational.
Annex III to the present report contains images of these facilities marking their
changes over recent years.
Current stocks and level of consumption of uranium ore
50. To understand the future requirements of the Islamic Republic of Iran in terms
of uranium ore, it is useful to understand its current stocks and level of consumption.
The country has produced 371 tons of uranium hexafluoride since beginning operation
of its uranium conversion facility in Esfahan in March 2004. According to IAEA,
this uranium hexafluoride was converted from a store of approximately 530 tons of
uranium ore concentrate acquired by the Islamic Republic of Iran in the early 1980s
(GOV/2004/83). No uranium hexafluoride has been produced at the Esfahan facility
since 10 August 2009, according to IAEA (GOV/2010/62, para. 24).
51. As at October 2011, the Islamic Republic of Iran had introduced almost
55.7 tons of uranium hexafluoride into its centrifuges since enrichment began in
February 2007, amounting to some 15 per cent of its stockpile (GOV/2012/9,
para. 14). The country therefore has an ample supply of uranium hexafluoride to
maintain current levels of enrichment for the foreseeable future.
52. The Islamic Republic of Iran is, however, likely to require additional sources
of uranium if enrichment is to expand along the lines that it has described. 7 It will
__________________
6 A 1,000 MW reactor requires approximately 25 tons of low-enriched uranium annually to

maintain regular operation. Although at least 220 tons of natural uranium would be required to
produce 25 tons of 4 per cent low-enriched uranium, this number can be considerably higher if
the enrichment process produces a high quantity of enriched uranium in what are known as the
“tails”, as appears to be the case in the Iranian enrichment operations.
7 “Iran produces fuel for 20 power plants under construction, MP”, IRNA, 14 August 2010, and
“Iran to increase centrifuges to 50,000: Aqazadeh”, IRNA, 25 February 2009. In addition,
according to IAEA reports, the Islamic Republic of Iran maintains two cascade halls at the
Natanz fuel enrichment plant. One, for which design information has been submitted, contains
eight units, each to contain 18 cascades. Cascades have typically consisted of 164 centrifuges.
Once completed, Cascade Hall A would consist of approximately 23,600 centrifuges. No
detailed design information has yet been provided for Production Hall B (see GOV/2011/65,
para. 8).

14

12-37171

S/2012/395

also eventually require additional stocks of natural uranium for the Arak heavy
water reactor. Member States have informed the Panel that emerging suppliers are
potential targets for attempted acquisition by the Islamic Republic of Iran. Although
the Panel is not aware of any confirmed cases of actual transfers, it has sought
consultations with a number of Member States regarding reported agreements with
the country for the supply of uranium ore.
Other sources of uranium ore concentrate
53. While the Islamic Republic of Iran has experimented with the extraction of
uranium from phosphates, which are commonly used in fertilizers, the Panel has no
evidence that it has gone beyond laboratory-scale research into this area
(GOV/2004/83, para. 5).
(b)

Procurement related to uranium enrichment
54. Sanctions targeting Iranian procurement of critical components for the country’s
gas centrifuge programme notwithstanding, it has succeeded in manufacturing,
installing and operating more than 9,500 IR-1 centrifuges since February 2007,
when installation and operation of centrifuges at the Natanz fuel enrichment plant
began (GOV/2012/9, paras. 11-26). This figure includes 8,828 IR-1 centrifuges
operating at the Natanz fuel enrichment plant, 328 at the pilot fuel enrichment plant
and 348 at the Fordow fuel enrichment plant. An additional 6,177 empty centrifuge
casings have been placed at the Natanz fuel enrichment plant, and 2,088 at the
Fordow facility. The IR-1 centrifuges, however, have a well-documented, limited
capacity for enrichment and the Islamic Republic of Iran has been eager to develop
a more advanced enrichment capacity. 8 Although the Iranian enrichment programme
has experienced a measure of success using IR-1 or first-generation centrifuges, its
ability to advance its enrichment efforts has encountered difficulties, some of which
may be the result of sanctions limiting its ability to procure items necessary for its
centrifuge programme.
Reports of attempted procurement
55. During its current mandate, the Panel received information from several
Member States regarding goods and materials that the Islamic Republic of Iran
sought to procure for its nuclear programme. Examples included:
(a)

Nuclear-grade graphite;

(b)

High-strength aluminium;

(c)

Aluminium powder;

(d)

Specialized alloys (such as chrome and nickel);

(e)

Maraging steel;

(f)

Carbon fibre;

(g)

Lubricants;

__________________
8 David Albright and others, “Preventing Iran from Getting Nuclear Weapons; Constraining its

Future Nuclear Options”, Institute for Science and International Security, March 2012, pp. 12-13.
Available from http://isis-online.org/uploads/isis-reports/documents/
USIP_Template_5March2012-1.pdf.

12-37171

15

S/2012/395

(h)

Magnets;

(i)

Control valves;

(j)

Heat exchangers;

(k)

Pressure transducers;

(l)

Vacuum pumps;

(m) Gauges;
(n)

Inverters;

(o)

Turbines;

(p)

Electrical switchboards;

(q)

Helium gas detectors;

(r)

Sodium perchlorate.

56. One Member State provided the Panel with detailed information regarding
Iranian attempts to procure items for sanctioned nuclear facilities through
intermediaries linked to the Iranian nuclear programme, although not necessarily
limited to the centrifuge programme. These included high-frequency converters,
electrical switchboards and related equipment needed for the operation of the
Iranian nuclear facilities. Other items identified by the Member State as sought by
the Islamic Republic of Iran in specific cases included detection equipment for
helium gas leaks, gauges, specialized valves and aluminium tubes and sheets.
(c)

Role of carbon fibre in gas centrifuges
57. A number of Member States shared information on the role of carbon fibre in
the Iranian nuclear programme and as a target for procurement. The Panel explores
this issue below in greater detail. This analysis in no way suggests that the items
described above merit less vigilance by Member States with regard to procurement.
58. Carbon fibre has many properties that make it ideal for use in gas centrifuges:
it is stronger and lighter than aluminium, corrosion resistant and especially high in
tensile strength and modulus, or stiffness. Carbon fibre will resist distortion under
high centrifugal forces. 9 Among the highest grades of carbon fibre, and those that
are best suited for use in centrifuge rotors and bellows (a cylindrical-shaped
connector between two segments of rotor tubes), are fibres designated as ultra-high
strength or intermediate modulus fibres.

__________________
9 Carbon fibres are extremely thin in diameter, a fraction of the size of a human hair. They are

typically wound together to form a type of “tow” (or strand), which is then moulded with resins
to form carbon fibre composites. Carbon fibre is classified according to the tensile modulus of
the fibre, measured in pounds of force per square inch (on the vertical axis) and its modulus or
stiffness (on the horizontal axis). Carbon fibre has applications in numerous industries, including
aerospace, automotive and high-end sporting goods. The Nuclear Suppliers Group controls all
carbon fibre with a modulus greater than 12.7 and tensile strength greater than 23.5. See
annex VII to the present report for more details.

16

12-37171

S/2012/395

Carbon fibre components in Iranian centrifuges
59. The rotors of the Iranian IR-1 centrifuges are manufactured with aluminium
7075. 10 The Islamic Republic of Iran also requires maraging steel for the IR-1 bellows.
The table in annex IV to the present report, taken from a nuclear engineering textbook,
illustrates the limitations of aluminium relative to carbon fibre in centrifuges.
60. The Islamic Republic of Iran has experimented with several models of postIR-1 centrifuges, in particular the IR-2m and IR-4, both of which require carbon
fibre rotors. In addition to those models, the Islamic Republic of Iran informed
IAEA in a letter dated 1 February 2012 that it intended to develop additional
models, including the IR-5, 6 and 6s (GOV/2012/9, para. 20).
61. The Iranian IR-4 centrifuge is believed by experts to be manufactured with a
carbon fibre rotor and a carbon fibre bellows (see figure I). The IR-2m is believed to
be made with a carbon fibre rotor and maraging steel bellows. Both the IR-2m and
IR-4 centrifuges are the same height and assessed to have similar enrichment capacity.
Figure I
Carbon fibre centrifuge components

Source: Office of the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

62. It is important to note that the development by the Islamic Republic of Iran of
its next-generation centrifuges dates to an early stage of its overall gas centrifuge
programme. According to IAEA, the country acquired design documents for the P-2
from a clandestine supply network in 1994 (GOV/2004/83, para. 23). Its decision to
develop carbon fibre components appears to date to 2002 when a subcontractor
__________________
10 One of the limitations of aluminium 7075 for centrifuge enrichment is its maximum speed of

approximately 350 metres per second. This, along with other design limitations in the IR-1, may
be a factor in the machine’s relatively high failure rate. Centrifuges made from carbon fibre can
achieve much higher speeds depending on the quality of the material and other potentially
limiting factors (see Manson Benedict and others, Nuclear Chemical Engineering, 2nd ed. (New
York, McGraw-Hill, 1981), p. 855).

12-37171

17

S/2012/395

decided that, since in his view the Islamic Republic of Iran was not capable of
manufacturing maraging steel cylinders with bellows, work should proceed with a
shorter, sub-critical carbon composite rotor (GOV/2004/83, para. 44).
63. The figures in annex V to the present report illustrate the relatively slow
development of the Iranian next-generation centrifuges, especially when compared
to the far more rapid pace of installation for the IR-1 centrifuge. In 2008, the very
first IR-2 centrifuges were installed at the Natanz pilot fuel enrichment plant. That
model was phased out in 2009 in favour of the IR-2m and IR-4. Although installation
of the IR-2m recently increased, installation of the IR-4 remains at a relatively low
level. This may indicate difficulties with the operation of a centrifuge containing two
critical components made from carbon fibre (as noted above, the IR-2m centrifuge is
made using a carbon fibre rotor and maraging steel bellows). Other variables,
including design and manufacturing limitations, or a shortage of other necessary
materials, may also explain delays in the deployment of advanced centrifuges.
Indigenous production
64. The Panel’s analysis of the deployment by the Islamic Republic of Iran of
centrifuges to date, in addition to discussions with experts and Member States,
indicates that the country lacks the technology and equipment to produce high-grade
carbon fibre indigenously. The Panel’s analysis is described in more detail in
annex VI to the present report. In brief, the carbon fibre produced in an Iranian
facility, which can be viewed in an online video clip, is not assessed by experts in
carbon fibre production and manufacturing to be suitable for use in Iranian
centrifuges. The country is therefore likely to continue to rely on foreign
procurement to support its next-generation centrifuge development efforts.
Procurement of carbon fibre from abroad
65. One report received by the Panel from a regional multilateral organization
highlighted the continued interest of the Islamic Republic of Iran in the procurement
of high-grade carbon fibre. According to another Member State, the Islamic Republic
of Iran is continuing its attempts to procure high-grade carbon fibre necessary for
the development of its more advanced centrifuges. This State had knowledge of an
attempted procurement of two tons of high-grade carbon fibre. The Panel is also
aware of one incident of carbon fibre interdicted by a Member State en route to the
Islamic Republic of Iran in the past year. The Panel has no information regarding
the potential use of this material in prohibited nuclear activities, or its technical
specifications, and is in contact with the State to obtain additional information.
66. The Panel has also seen high-grade carbon fibre made available for sale on
Internet trading platforms. In the report referenced in paragraph 65, the accessibility
of such fibre was highlighted and it was noted that such websites were likely to be
used by Iranian procurers to contact prospective intermediaries to procure carbon
fibre supplies. Experts familiar with developments in the industry observe that the
significant growth in demand in recent years for higher grades of carbon fibre,
brought on in part by expansion in the aerospace and automotive sectors, has led to
surpluses in the supply chain. Some Member States that the Panel consulted
described outreach programmes to industry to ensure that surplus carbon fibre did
not find its way into a secondary market for possible procurement by the Islamic
Republic of Iran.

18

12-37171

S/2012/395

Ensuring control of carbon fibre under existing sanctions
67. The Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System maintained by
the World Customs Organization provides an internationally recognized and
standardized system for classifying goods. The Panel notes that the classification
number 681510 does not distinguish carbon fibres of different specifications. This
raises the question of whether carbon fibre falling at or above thresholds established
by export control regimes could be assigned a different number or whether an
alternative categorization system could be applied.
(d)

Implementation of sanctions and procurement relevant to a nuclear
explosive device
68. The Panel takes note of information reported by IAEA regarding procurement
and attempted procurement by the Islamic Republic of Iran of equipment, materials
and services that, although having other civilian applications, would be useful in the
development of a nuclear explosive device. These include high-speed electronic
switches and spark gaps (useful for triggering and firing detonators); high-speed
cameras (useful in experimental diagnostics); neutron sources (useful for calibrating
neutron-measuring equipment); radiation detection and measuring equipment
(useful in a nuclear material production environment); and training courses on
topics relevant to nuclear explosives development (such as neutron cross-section
calculations and shock wave interactions/hydrodynamics) (GOV/2011/65, annex,
paras. 25 and 26). No incidents of such procurement or training courses were
reported to the Panel during its mandate.

4.

Conclusions
69. On the basis of the Panel’s consultations with Member States, outside experts
and analysis of IAEA findings, the Panel continues to find evidence to suggest that
sanctions are slowing the ability of the Islamic Republic of Iran to expand some
aspects of its fuel cycle activities.
70. The country’s reported current and projected domestic production of uranium
ore is insufficient to support the fuel requirements of a nuclear power programme.
Although the existing Iranian stockpile of uranium hexafluoride is adequate for its
current level of enrichment activity, this may change with expanded enrichment, as
envisaged by the country, or with the completion of a reactor using natural uranium
as fuel.
71. Member States, in particular those with significant phosphate exports, should
be alert to the potential risk of diversion of such exports should the Islamic Republic
of Iran decide to develop further its resources in this area.
72. While no reports were received by the Panel of interdictions of dual-use items
for use in a nuclear programme with military dimensions, vigilance by Member
States to guard against possible procurement of such items by the Islamic Republic
of Iran continues to be important.

12-37171

19

S/2012/395

B.

Ballistic missiles

1.

Introduction
73. In paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010), the Security Council decided that the
Islamic Republic of Iran was not to undertake any activity related to ballistic
missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons, including launches using ballistic
missile technology, and that Member States were to take all measures necessary to
prevent the transfer of technology or technical assistance to the Islamic Republic of
Iran related to such activities. In paragraph 7 of that resolution, the Council decided
that the Islamic Republic of Iran was not to acquire an interest in any commercial
activity in another State involving, among other things, technology related to
ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons.
74. Pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution 1737 (2006), Member States are obliged
to take the necessary measures to prevent the supply, sale or transfer directly or
indirectly of all items, materials, equipment, goods and technology, referred to in
document S/2006/815 that could contribute to the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
development of nuclear weapon delivery systems. In paragraph 13 of resolution
1929 (2010), the Security Council decided that the list of items contained in
document S/2006/815 was to be superseded by the list of items contained in
document S/2010/263.
75. In the present section, the Panel provides a brief summary of recent
developments related to ballistic missile activity over the past year. These include
information reported by IAEA regarding the potential military dimensions of the
Iranian nuclear programme, including a nuclear payload for a missile, a series of test
launches of ballistic missiles, the introduction of the Qiam missile, the disclosure of
missile silos and the launch by the Islamic Republic of Iran of two satellites using the
Safir space launch vehicle. The Panel also addresses information provided by Member
States concerning continuing procurement efforts related to ballistic missiles.

2.

Background
76. The Iranian arsenal of ballistic missiles is widely recognized as one of the
largest in the region. The table in annex VIII to the present report provides an
overview of the number and type of ballistic missiles. Two in particular are judged
to be potentially nuclear capable: the liquid propelled Shahab-3 and the solid-fuelpropelled Sejil (also referred to as the Sajjil or the Ashura). The Islamic Republic of
Iran is not judged to have an operational intercontinental ballistic missile.
77. While the Islamic Republic of Iran is actively producing its own missiles, it
remains reliant on foreign suppliers for components, materials and equipment.
According to some experts, there is no evidence that the Islamic Republic of Iran
possesses the technology necessary to manufacture the large-diameter, flow-formed
pressure tanks and large, composite pressure vessels necessary to construct larger,
long-range missiles. It also appears that the Islamic Republic of Iran continues to
import whole engines, or at least critical engine components, for its liquid-fuelled
missiles, and requires components for guidance systems. 11

__________________
11 Miles A. Pomper and Cole J. Harvey, “Beyond missile defense: alternative means to address

Iran’s ballistic missile threat”, Arms Control Today, October 2010, citing “Iran’s Ballistic Missile
Capabilities: A Net Assessment”, International Institute for Strategic Studies, 7 May 2010.

20

12-37171

S/2012/395

78. In November 2011, IAEA stated that, since 2002, it had become increasingly
concerned about the possible existence in the Islamic Republic of Iran of
undisclosed nuclear-related activities involving military-related organizations,
including activities related to the development of a nuclear payload for a missile,
about which it had regularly received new information (see GOV/2011/65, para. 38,
and previous reports).
79. IAEA describes work that took place before 2004 as a structured and
comprehensive programme of engineering studies to examine how to integrate a
new spherical payload into the existing payload chamber which would be mounted
in the re-entry vehicle of the Shahab-3 missile. In addition, according to
documentation provided by a Member State, the Islamic Republic of Iran conducted
computer modelling studies of at least 14 progressive design iterations of the
payload chamber and its contents to examine how they would stand up to the
various stresses that would be encountered on being launched and travelling on a
ballistic trajectory to a target (GOV/2011/65, annex, paras. 59 and 60).
80. IAEA has described the information on which its assessments are based as
coming from a wide variety of independent sources, including from a number of
Member States, from its own efforts and from information provided by the Islamic
Republic of Iran itself (GOV/2011/65, para. 42).
3.

Recent developments
81. Missile launches. In late June 2011, the Islamic Republic of Iran held a
military exercise known as “Great Prophet Six”. On 28 June 2011, the commander
of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps Aerospace Force, Amir Ali Hajizadeh,
announced on Iranian State television that, on the second day of the exercise, the
country had fired Zelzal rockets, the Shahab-1 and -2 and the Ghadr (a modified
version of the Shahab-3 medium-range ballistic missile). 12
82. Qiam missile. The only test of this missile reported in the media took place in
August 2010. The Iranian Minister of Defence, Ahmad Vahidi, highlighted the
missile’s lack of stabilizer fins, which he claimed would increase the missile’s speed
and allow it to be launched from a silo. 13 He also claimed that the liquid-fuelled
ballistic missile was entirely indigenously produced. In May 2011, he announced the
delivery of the missile to the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (see figure II).
One Member State assessed the Qiam to be based on the Shahab-2, with a range of
between 500 and 1,000 km. Some experts have raised questions about the missile’s
lack of apparent testing. Missiles are known to require extensive flight-test
programmes before they can be fully operational.

__________________
12 Farhad Pouladi, “Iran fires medium range missile in war game”, Agence France Presse, 28 June

2011. Jonathan’s Space Report No. 643, 5 July 2011, SpaceRef International Group. Available
from www.spaceref.com/news/viewsr.html?pid=37608.
13 “New ballistic missile delivered to IRGC”, Day.AZ, 23 May 2011.

12-37171

21

S/2012/395

Figure II
Qiam missile

83. Underground silos. On 27 June 2011, as part of the “Great Prophet Six”
exercises, the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps also unveiled an underground
missile silo from which ballistic missiles would be able to be launched. The Iranian
spokesperson for the exercises, Asghar Ghelichkhani, claimed that the technology
for building the silos was completely indigenous. 14 Iranian officials have been
quoted publicly claiming that the silos provide a swift reaction unit and the ability
to confront unequal enemies and defend the Islamic Republic of Iran.14 The Iranian
missile silos, which have been reported for a number of years, are not confirmed to
be operational.
(a)

Reported satellite launch
84. Over the course of the Panel’s current mandate, the Islamic Republic of Iran
launched two satellites: the Rasad-1, on 15 June 2011, and the Navid, on 3 February
2012. These launches followed its first successful launch of a satellite, the Omid, in
February 2009. Both launches were reported to the Committee by France, Germany,
the United Kingdom and the United States; the first in a communication dated
15 July 2011 and the second on 28 February 2012.
85. On the basis of those reports to the Committee, the Panel investigated the
Rasad-1 launch and reported to the Committee on 6 November 2011. On the basis of
the provisions of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010), the Panel sought to
ascertain whether the launch could be considered an activity related to ballistic
missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons, and whether the launch was using
ballistic missile technology.

__________________
14 William Broad, “Iran unveils missile silos as it begins war games”, New York Times, 27 June

2011.

22

12-37171

S/2012/395

86. According to information shared with the Panel and widely circulated
photographic images of the launch vehicle published by Iranian news agencies, the
satellite was launched by a two-stage liquid-fuelled Safir launch vehicle. 15 The two
engines in the upper stage of the Safir are assessed by Member States and experts
consulted by the Panel to most closely resemble the vernier engines found on the
R-27 submarine-launched ballistic missile, also known as the SS-N-6. These provide
low thrust to the second stage, and their steerable nozzles allow adjustments to the
flight path through thrust vector controls (see figure III).
87. The Panel reached a consensus that both ballistic missile and space launch
programmes shared a great deal of similar materials and technology, including
systems for propulsion, control and navigation. The Panel also noted that, although
some examples existed of ballistic missiles programmes developed from space
launch programmes, in general there were more examples of the reverse — space
launch programmes developed on the basis of ballistic missile programmes.
88. The Panel agreed that the Safir space launch vehicle was not designed to carry
nuclear weapons.
89. Five members of the Panel concluded that the launch was clearly related to
missiles capable of delivering such weapons based on their established relationship
to two nuclear-capable ballistic missiles. Three members of the Panel concluded that
the launch of the Rasad-1 was not an activity related to ballistic missiles capable of
delivering nuclear weapons. With regard to the question of whether the launch was
using ballistic missile technology, six members of the Panel concluded that the
launch did use such technology, while two members believed that it was difficult to
reach such a firm conclusion.
Figure III
Safir space launch vehicle and the Shahab-3

Safir space launch vehicle first stage

Shahab-3 medium-range ballistic missile

__________________
15 The Safir reportedly has a length of 22 m, a core diameter of 1.25 m and a launch weight of

26,000 kg. The first stage of the Safir is derived from the Ghadr-1 missile, a variant of the
Shahab-3 medium-range ballistic missile. It is believed to be 13.5 m long, with a mass of
18,000 kg. The Safir’s second stage is estimated to be 8.5 m in length with a mass of 8,000 kg.

12-37171

23

S/2012/395

Safir second stage

Safir second stage
(vernier engines more visible)

90. The Navid satellite launch was not the subject of a separate investigation by
the Panel. It was reported to weigh approximately 50 kg and was reportedly built by
Iranian students at the Sharif University of Technology as a weather satellite, which
would remain in orbit for 18 months. It was launched by a modified Safir space
launch vehicle, including a modified Shahab-3 ballistic missile comprising the first
stage. 16
(b)

Procurement related to ballistic missiles
91. The Panel received no reports of alleged procurement attempts related to
ballistic missiles during its current mandate. A number of Member States, however,
shared information concerning procurement priorities and items meriting extra
vigilance. Among those were production equipment for missile purposes (including
metal processing machines), precise inertial gauges, testing equipment (including
vibration testing equipment), fuel-related material (aluminium powder), valves,
turbines and frequency converters. Gyroscopes and related technology for guidance
systems were also highlighted as one of the procurement priorities of the Islamic
Republic of Iran and for which it was especially dependent on foreign suppliers.
92. One Member State informed the Panel that it was implementing sanctions by
working to strengthen controls over various types of steel and construction material
that could be used for manufacturing nuclear-capable ballistic missiles. A special
commission had been established to evaluate specific types of steel that could be
used in the production of ballistic missiles and thereby contribute to proliferation
risks.
93. The Panel notes the designations announced on 2 May 2012 of two Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea entities, the Korea Heungjin Trading Company (which
the Committee suspects has been involved in supplying missile-related goods to the
Shahid Hemmat Industrial Group of the Islamic Republic of Iran) and Amroggang
Development Banking Corporation (which has been involved in ballistic missile
transactions from the Korea Mining Development Trading Corporation to the Shahid
Hemmat Industrial Group) (S/2012/287). The Security Council designated the

__________________
16 Stephen Clark, “Observing satellite launched by modified Iranian missile”, Spaceflight Now,

3 February 2012.

24

12-37171

S/2012/395

Shahid Hemmat Industrial Group in resolution 1737 (2006) as an entity involved in
the Iranian ballistic missile programme.
94. According to a report by Yonhap News Agency, a delegation of 12 Iranian
officials from the Shahid Hemmat Industrial Group travelled to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to observe the 13 April launch. 17
4.

Conclusions
95. With the exception of the Rasad and Navid satellite launches, the Panel
received no reports of alleged violations related to ballistic missile launches.
96. Its growing manufacturing and technical competence notwithstanding, the
Islamic Republic of Iran continues its attempts to procure essential technology and
components. Preventing the supply of crucial missile components is an important
aspect of successful implementation of sanctions.

C.

Conventional arms and related materiel

1.

Introduction
97. In paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007), the Security Council decided that the
Islamic Republic of Iran was not to supply, sell or transfer directly or indirectly
from its territory or by its nationals or using its flag vessels or aircraft any arms or
related materiel, and that all Member States were to prohibit the procurement of
such items from the Islamic Republic of Iran by their nationals, or using their flag
vessels or aircraft, and whether or not originating in the territory of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
98. Member States are required under paragraph 8 of resolution 1929 (2010) to
prevent the direct or indirect supply, sale or transfer to the Islamic Republic of Iran
any battle tanks, armoured combat vehicles, large-calibre artillery systems, combat
aircraft, attack helicopters, warships, missiles or missile systems as defined for the
purpose of the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms, or related materiel,
including spare parts, or items as determined by the Security Council or the
Committee. Member States are to prevent the provision to the Islamic Republic of
Iran of relevant training and financing, and are called upon to exercise vigilance and
restraint over the supply of all arms and related materiel.
99. In the present section, the Panel provides its analysis on the basis of three
inspections of reported incidents of conventional arms interdictions and emerging
connections among these and previous reported interdictions investigated by the
Panel with the aim of identifying trends in the illegal transfer of conventional arms
by the Islamic Republic of Iran.

2.

Recent inspections
100. During its current mandate, the Panel inspected three reported incidents of
non-compliance as reported by Member States to the Committee and submitted
reports as required.

__________________
17 Danielle Demetriou, “Iranian officials ‘observed North Korean rocket launch’”, Telegraph,

16 April 2012.

12-37171

25

S/2012/395

101. The Panel notes the continuation of a trend reported previously in which most
of the incidents referred to the Panel for inspection involved conventional arms and
related materiel. The table in annex IX to the present report contains a complete
accounting of the arms and related materiel inspected by the Panel, in addition to
information derived from documents, in particular shipment consignor and
consignee information. These inspections are summarized below.
(a)

Yas Air (Turkey)
102. On 19 March 2011, the Turkish authorities seized 19 crates containing assault
rifles, machine guns, ammunition and mortar shells from an Ilyushin cargo aircraft
operated by the cargo airline Yas Air (formerly known as Pars Aviation Services
Company, as described in para. 231). It was found to be carrying 60 AK-47 assault
rifles, 14 BKC/Bixi machine guns, 560 60-mm mortar shells and 1,288 120-mm
mortar shells from the Islamic Republic of Iran to the Syrian Arab Republic.
103. In a 19 November 2011 inspection, the Panel examined and confirmed the
arms and ammunition as inventoried by the Turkish authorities, in addition to
documents provided establishing the origin and destination of the shipment. The
Panel concluded that that shipment constituted a violation by the Islamic Republic
of Iran of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007).

(b)

Kilis (Turkey)
104. On 15 February 2011, the Turkish authorities seized a truck carrying
explosives originating in the Islamic Republic of Iran en route to the Syrian Arab
Republic. The interdiction took place at Turkey’s border with the Syrian Arab
Republic. The contents of the truck were clearly described on shipping documents
and are summarized as follows:
(a)

Two boxes of gunpowder M9, for a total weight of 890 kg;

(b)

Two boxes of propelling charge;

(c)

Two boxes of slow-burning material, for a total weight of 40 kg;

(d)

One box of sensitive materials (detonators);

(e)

Six pallets of solid rockets;

(f)

Two pallets of RDX explosives for a total weight of 1,700 kg.

105. The Panel inspected the items and found them to be materials for military
purposes, while noting that the detonators and RDX explosive had both military and
non-military applications. Documents examined by the Panel, including an invoice
issued by the consignor of the shipment, SAD Import Export Company, and the TIR
carnet, further established the nature, origin and destination of the cargo.
106. Parchin Chemical Industries and 7th of Tir Industries, both entities designated
by United Nations sanctions as subordinates of the Iranian Defence Industries
Organization, were identified in documents found with the shipment. The contract
referenced in the invoice had been concluded in 2006 for a series of 20 shipments.
The Panel concluded that that shipment constituted a violation by the Islamic
Republic of Iran of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007).

26

12-37171

S/2012/395

(c)

International Security Assistance Force (Afghanistan)
107. The United Kingdom authorities reported on 21 April 2011 a seizure by the
International Security Assistance Force on 5 February 2011 of a shipment of rockets
and ammunition near Afghanistan’s border with Pakistan. The shipment was reported
to include 48 122-mm rockets, 49 fuses and 1,000 7.62-mm ammunition rounds.
108. Following the seizure, much of the shipment was destroyed in situ and the rest
transferred to the United Kingdom for forensic analysis to provide additional
evidence of its origin. Tests included X-ray examination, metallurgy sampling, and
chemical and comparative analysis. The United Kingdom also possessed
intelligence suggesting that the shipment of rockets originated in the Islamic
Republic of Iran. Many of the characteristics of the rockets matched Iranian rockets
found elsewhere.
109. The Panel inspected some of the remains of the rockets in the United Kingdom
on 26 September 2011. The Panel carried out its investigation on the basis of
evidence provided by the United Kingdom authorities, independent research and
consultations with experts.
110. The Panel concluded that there was a high probability that the rockets had
originated in the Islamic Republic of Iran. The Panel invited relevant Member States
to provide further evidence that would enable confirmation of that finding, and
consulted experts from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in Brussels in search of
relevant evidence. The Panel continues its investigation and seeks further information.

3.

Analysis
Nature of the transfers
111. Whereas in previous inspections the Panel had found only ammunition and no
arms, the current cases include a greater diversity of items. In the Yas Air case, arms
and ammunitions were both present; in the Kilis case, detonators and explosives
were identified. The Panel also observed that, previously, systematic attempts had
been made to conceal shipments physically through erased markings or packaging,
but the current cases reflected no such attempts. This may reflect confidence on the
part of the Islamic Republic of Iran that the transfers might proceed undetected, a
greater time pressure for the shipments or operational errors on the part of the
Iranian authorities.
Transportation
112. Although the current cases inspected by the Panel include examples of arms
transfers using ground and air transport, it cannot be excluded that the Islamic
Republic of Iran continues to use maritime avenues to transport shipments of arms and
related materiel. This issue is discussed further in paragraphs 150 to 181. One
Member State alerted the Panel that the Islamic Republic of Iran might be using mixed
passenger-cargo flights to transfer arms illicitly. The Panel has not further
corroborated this information.
Iranian origin of items
113. The Panel found documentary evidence in two of the three cases linking the
shipments to the Islamic Republic of Iran as the sender. Documents found with the

12-37171

27

S/2012/395

shipment of high explosives (Kilis case) connect the items to Parchin Chemical
Industries and 7th of Tir Industries. Both are subsidiaries of the Iranian Defence
Industries Organization and all three entities are designated under Security Council
resolutions: the Defence Industries Organization and 7th of Tir Industries are
designated under annex I to resolution 1737 (2006), while Parchin Chemical
Industries is designated under annex I to resolution 1747 (2007). The Yas Air case
raises the issue of an existing designation under a previous name and the need for a
new designation based on the interdiction. This matter is discussed further in
paragraph 231.
Syrian destination of items
114. The Panel found documentary evidence in two of the three cases linking the
shipments to the Syrian Arab Republic as the recipient. The shipments contained
information pointing to specific consignees in the country for a series of 20
shipments dating from 2006, including a commercial invoice with a reference to the
Central Bank in the letter of credit.
Common elements among interdictions
115. The Panel has identified connections linking current and previous
interdictions. The Panel notes that the labels on wooden boxes containing mortar
shells found in the Francop (Israel) case appeared identical to those found in the Yas
Air (Turkey) interdiction. In both cases, the label read “Ministry of Sepah”, while in
the Yas Air case, a crude attempt had been made to cross off the word “Sepah”.
116. The Panel also identified connections between the recent Kilis (Turkey) case
and two earlier cases: the M/V Monchegorsk (Cyprus) and Hansa India (Malta)
interdictions. The consignor and consignee in both the Kilis and M/V Monchegorsk
cases were identical, and both shipments included increment charges for 120-mm
mortar shells and black powder. The invoice issued by the consignor of the shipment
seized in the Kilis (Turkey) case, SAD Import Export Company, indicates that the
consignment was related to prior maritime shipments to “Lattakia or Tartous Ports”.
Some of the contents of the M/V Monchegorsk shipment, as described in a letter to
the Committee dated 3 February 2009, appeared to be identical to those found in the
Hansa India interdiction, including bronze brass plates and bullet casings packed in
blue metallic barrels. Papers found on the blue metallic barrels on the Hansa India
identified Lattakia or Tartous ports as destinations.
Additional information from Member States
117. Alleged arms transfers from the Islamic Republic of Iran to Member States
have been reported in the media. 18 One Member State reported that in 2011 the
Islamic Republic of Iran delivered military equipment and spare parts to the Sudan,
in addition to providing military technical assistance. Another Member State
informed the Panel of arms transfers to Yemen. The Panel is following up, as
appropriate, to encourage the necessary reporting to the Committee. The Panel
stands ready to receive from Member States additional information regarding these
reported transfers.
__________________
18 Eric Schmitt and Robert Worth, “With arms for Yemen rebels, Iran seeks wider Mideast role”,

New York Times, 15 March 2012.

28

12-37171

S/2012/395

4.

Conclusions
118. During the Panel’s current mandate, there were no violations involving
transfers of conventional arms and related materiel to the Islamic Republic of Iran
reported to the Committee.
119. Inspections indicate that the Islamic Republic of Iran continues to transfer
arms, ammunition and dual-use items necessary for the production of explosive
ordnance. Such transfers occur by all available means of transportation: air, land and
sea.
120. The Syrian Arab Republic continues to be the central party to illicit Iranian
arms transfers, as demonstrated by the two additional cases inspected by the Panel
to date.

D.

Export control

1.

Introduction
121. In resolution 1737 (2006), the Security Council decided that all States were to
take the necessary measures to prevent the supply, sale or transfer of all items,
materials, equipment, goods and technology (listed in documents S/2006/814 and
S/2006/815) that could contribute to the Islamic Republic of Iran’s enrichmentrelated, reprocessing or heavy water-related activities, or to the development of
nuclear weapon delivery systems. In resolution 1929 (2010), the Council decided
that the list of items in document S/2006/814 was to be superseded by the list of
items in INFCIRC/254/Rev.9/Part 1 and INFCIRC/254/Rev.7/Part 2, and the list of
items contained in document S/2006/815 by the list of items contained in document
S/2010/263.
122. In resolution 1737 (2006), the Council decided that States were to take
measures to prevent the provision to the Islamic Republic of Iran of any technical
assistance or training, and called upon all States to exercise vigilance and prevent
specialized teaching or training of disciplines which would contribute to the Islamic
Republic of Iran’s proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities and to the development
of nuclear weapon delivery systems.
123. In the present section, the Panel addresses the role played by export controls in
preventing procurement by both Government authorities and the private sector of
the items described above. It also describes some challenges and makes conclusions.

2.

Analysis
124. Many Member States attach great importance to implementing their Security
Council obligations concerning the Islamic Republic of Iran in the area of export
controls. At the same time, the continuing prohibited nuclear and ballistic missile
procurement efforts by the Islamic Republic of Iran pose challenges for all Member
States, in particular those with less-developed export control systems, in terms of
identifying dual-use items and implementing catch-all provisions.

(a)

Implementation measures by Governments
125. Member States consulted by the Panel provided detailed descriptions of export
licensing procedures and requirements, in addition to policies to ensure the

12-37171

29

S/2012/395

extension of export controls to catch-all items not included on the control lists
referenced in the relevant Security Council resolutions. The Panel was impressed by
the high level of attention to detail shown by many Member States to both the spirit
and letter of sanctions provisions regarding export controls.
126. Most Member States provided information regarding their internal procedure
for incorporating Security Council resolutions into national legislation, relevant
institutions and export control procedures. Many described special interministerial
or inter-agency coordinating mechanisms established explicitly for the purpose of
implementing the export controls related to the Islamic Republic of Iran contained
in the relevant resolutions.
127. It remains that the export controls of some Member States with regard to the
Islamic Republic of Iran need further strengthening, especially where legislation,
institutions or enforcement mechanisms are deficient. Reasons for less effective
export controls in this context may include: lack of awareness of export control
obligations because of the absence of relevant industries or production; limited trade
with the Islamic Republic of Iran; geographic remoteness; and lack of resources,
experience and expertise to exercise effective export controls.
Information sharing
128. Information regarding export denials and suspicious enquiries would help the
Panel better to understand patterns of procurement or attempted procurement of
sensitive items. The Panel has received such information on an ad hoc basis from
some Member States and encourages other Member States also to submit
information.
129. The United Kingdom shared with the Panel information regarding denials of
export licences in the context of its membership of the Nuclear Suppliers Group.
These denials, pertaining to dual-use equipment and technology sought by the
Islamic Republic of Iran, were based on catch-all provisions. This information is
valuable to the Panel, as it provides insight into Iranian procurement priorities. The
Panel would welcome similar sharing of information by other Member States.
(b)

Customs authorities and control
130. Customs authorities play a key role in enforcing sanctions. The Panel held
discussions with relevant officials during consultations with Member States and
inspections of reported violations, and visited Customs facilities, ports and airports.
131. The Panel noted a high standard of technical equipment, in particular
automatic systems enabling electronic processing of data, electronic profiling and
risk management. The Panel observed the operation of such equipment, including
radiation monitoring and X-ray scanning. Many Customs services had testing
centres or laboratories to carry out technical testing for verification of specific
items, or could call upon such facilities.
132. The Panel was informed that, while the overall policy of Customs authorities
was to facilitate trade, if officials determined that a consignment was suspicious, the
general practice was not to clear the shipment until there was proper identification
of the goods in question, proof of purpose, origin, destination and relevant parties
involved.

30

12-37171

S/2012/395

133. Customs administrations cooperate at the bilateral and multilateral levels. Such
cooperation, including information exchange, is facilitated by the World Customs
Organization through its global network of regional intelligence liaison offices,
although this is not used specifically for sanctions implementation.
(c)

Implementation by the private sector
Outreach to industry
134. The private sector is at the forefront of effective export control
implementation, and outreach to industry by Member States plays a critically
important role in helping to achieve this objective. It raises awareness of national
and international obligations, provides current information regarding changes in
regulations, promotes internal compliance, reduces the incidence of inadvertent
transfers and encourages industry to exercise due diligence over customers.
135. While most Member States consulted by the Panel maintain some level of
outreach to local industry, other countries are only just beginning to implement such
practices. The Panel continues to emphasize the importance of outreach to the
private sector in its consultations.
136. Outreach methods include seminars, training courses, Government
publications, websites, press releases, social media, industry-specific briefings and
field visits by export control officials.
137. Outreach efforts organized by non-governmental organizations can
complement those of Governments. In some Member States, non-governmental
organizations play an important role in assisting Governments to raise private-sector
awareness of the importance of effective export controls.
Internal compliance programmes
138. Suspicious enquiries point to the need for heightened awareness and vigilance
by suppliers. Firms consulted by the Panel routinely require due diligence on the
part of sales agents to screen enquiries against sanctions lists, check on end users,
exercise caution when dealing with middlemen and consult Government authorities
when questions arise. Member States consulted by the Panel report that companies,
especially large established firms, are wary of the reputational risk involved with
transactions with the Islamic Republic of Iran and regularly avoid them, even in the
case of permissible, non-sanctions-related trade.
139. Internal compliance programmes help producers and traders to exercise
discipline and vigilance over sensitive dual-use exports. Many Member States
promote the establishment of such procedures, in addition to certifying and even
monitoring them. Several private-sector producers of sensitive dual-use goods
shared with the Panel possible indicators for identifying suspicious enquiries. These
included:
(a) Reluctance by the purchasing agent to provide information about the end
use and end users;
(b)
sought;
(c)

12-37171

Inability to answer commercial or technical questions regarding the item
Unconvincing explanation as to why the item is required;

31

S/2012/395

(d)

Unusually favourable terms of payment offered;

(e)

Requests for unusual shipping, packaging or labelling arrangements;

(f) Requirements for confidentiality regarding final destinations, customers
or specifications of items;
(g)

Requests for excessive quantities;

(h)

Similar enquiries received from multiple agents;

(i) Enquiries
misspellings;

received

based

on

common

lists

with

characteristic

(j) Request for post-sale modifications to uncontrolled items that would
result in the item falling within controls if exported as such;
(k)

Changes of consignee address shortly before shipment.

Controls on teaching or training
140. The Panel has raised with Member States the issue of specialized teaching or
training in sensitive areas, and observed that a wide range of practices existed to
implement those provisions. Some Member States have established working groups
with universities to ensure that advanced graduate work by Iranian students is
monitored in accordance with Security Council obligations; other Member States are
beginning to establish such procedures. Many Member States have a policy to deny
student visa requests from the Islamic Republic of Iran for advanced graduate study
in sensitive areas, and monitor closely any changes in courses of study.
(d)

Iranian procurement efforts
141. The Panel was informed by a number of Member States and one regional
multilateral organization that the Islamic Republic of Iran continued to seek items
through illicit procurement to support prohibited nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes. Among the items cited most frequently were vacuum pumps,
perfluoropolyether lubricants and carbon fibre (see paras. 57-67 for greater detail
regarding the last-mentioned issue). As noted above, one State provided the Panel
with information regarding denials of licences for export issued under catch-all
requirements. Examples included process controllers, heat exchangers, flow meters
and accessories, and carbon steel tubes.
142. According to the same regional multilateral organization, the Islamic Republic
of Iran undertakes this procurement directly and indirectly. Its procurement methods
include making direct bids to foreign commercial partners to procure materials with
technical documentation, acquiring foreign licences and patents, copying material,
conducting mergers of or absorbing foreign companies or purchasing company
securities allowing access to technologies, and sending technicians to foreign
suppliers for training.
143. The Islamic Republic of Iran is also believed to use indirect strategies for
procurement, including:

32

(a)

Making use of front companies;

(b)

Concealing the end use or end user and final destination;

12-37171

S/2012/395

3.

(c)

Falsifying technical documentation for materials ordered;

(d)

Reaching out to multiple suppliers for the same item;

(e)

Making use of the Iranian diaspora to facilitate procurement.

Challenges
144. Small and medium-sized enterprises. Small and medium-sized enterprises
are more vulnerable than their larger counterparts to weaknesses in export control
systems. They may lack resources, expertise, experience and knowledge of their
national and international obligations. Investment in internal compliance
programmes can be costly for small firms or seen as excessively burdensome. Small
and medium-sized enterprises may also be wary of export controls, which are
perceived to hamper business opportunities. Such firms may not have the same
aversion to reputational risk as larger firms. Internal compliance programmes are
more difficult to implement for small and medium-sized enterprises than for larger
firms. Outreach initiatives targeting small and medium-sized enterprises should
make it a priority to help such firms to establish internal compliance programmes.
145. Identification difficulties. Special expertise is necessary to identify
proliferation-sensitive dual-use exports at two stages of the export control process.
The first stage is at the time of licensing, when exporters, in particular those who
are unfamiliar with their national export control legislation and procedures, may
export items without understanding licence requirements. The second stage is at the
border, where such expertise is necessary for identifying sensitive exports.
146. Control lists. Several Member States consulted by the Panel noted that the
lists identified in paragraph 122 had been modified since the adoption of resolution
1929 (2010), and requested that the Panel should recommend the updating of those
lists. The current versions of these lists are contained in INFCIRC/254/Rev.8/Part 2,
INFCIRC/254/Rev.10/Part 1 and document S/2012/235.

4.

Conclusions
147. Member States are implementing export controls with greater awareness of
their obligations under United Nations sanctions. While most have well-established
mechanisms to coordinate and implement the export licensing process, including of
catch-all items falling below established thresholds, some may need assistance to
strengthen such programmes and their implementation.
148. Small and medium-sized enterprises are an attractive target for illicit
procurement. Outreach to small and medium-sized enterprises engaged in the
production and export of sensitive items is critical to the effective implementation
of sanctions and, more generally, export controls.
149. Internal compliance programmes have proved an effective tool to help the
private sector to implement export controls, although not all companies have such
programmes in place.

12-37171

33

S/2012/395

E.

Shipping and transportation

1.

Introduction
150. In resolution 1929 (2010), the Security Council called upon all States to
inspect all cargo to and from the Islamic Republic of Iran and to cooperate in
inspections on the high seas with the consent of the flag State, if there was
information that provided reasonable grounds to believe that the vessel was carrying
items, the supply, sale, transfer or export of which was prohibited. The Council also
decided that States were to prohibit the provision of bunkering services to Iranianowned or -contracted vessels if they had information that provided reasonable
grounds to believe that they were carrying prohibited items.
151. Three Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines entities are designated under
resolution 1929 (2010): Irano Hind Shipping Company, IRISL Benelux NV and
South Shipping Line Iran (SSL), together with persons or entities acting on their
behalf or at their direction and entities owned or controlled by them.
152. In paragraph 20 of resolution 1929 (2010), the Security Council requested all
Member States to inform the Committee of transfers of business and activity by the
Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines to other companies, including renaming or
re-registering of vessels or ships. The same information is requested from Member
States in connection with Iran Air’s cargo division.

2.

Background
153. According to Iranian official statements over the past year, international trade
has increased, the sanctions notwithstanding. 19 By contrast, many Member States
reported to the Panel significant decreases in trade with the Islamic Republic of
Iran, citing such factors as difficulties completing financial transactions, finding
carriers and freight forwarders for transporting Iranian-related cargo and obtaining
marine insurance coverage. Unilateral sanctions may be a factor in these
developments.
154. The Panel was also informed that some shipping companies and freight
forwarders had adopted policies to refrain from business with the Islamic Republic
of Iran, including transporting cargo to Iranian ports. 20 A number of large cargo
transportation firms announced over the past year a suspension or limitation in
shipments involving Iranian ports. These include CMA CGM (September 2011),
Hapag-Lloyd (November 2011) and Maersk (February 2012). 21 According to an
international maritime insurance association consulted by the Panel, marine
insurance, including third-party liability insurance, connected with business with the
Islamic Republic of Iran is difficult to obtain. 22 The International Air Transport
Association suspended the access of two Iranian airlines, including Iran Air, to its

__________________
19 “UAE official: trade ties with Iran unaffected by sanctions”, Fars News Agency, 21 August 2011.

“Dubai-Iran trade grows in goods exempt from sanctions”, Tehran Times, 22 August 2011.
“Iran: minister dismisses effectiveness of sanctions against Iran”, Thai News Service, 31 August
2011.
20 “Sanctions blowback crippling Iran’s shipping trade”, Reuters, 1 December 2011.
21 “Maersk suspends oil tanker trade deals with Iran”, Reuters News, 8 February 2012.
“French shipper CMA CGM stops exporting from Iran”, Reuters News, 30 November 2011.
22 Some of the issues relevant to protection and indemnity cover are discussed in www.igpandi.org/
downloadables/news/news/Iran%20FAQs%208%2002%202012.pdf.

34

12-37171

S/2012/395

payment settlement system for member airlines and travel agents. Two bordering
Member States announced limitations in air cargo overflights or the grounding and
inspection of all such flights.
3.

Analysis
155. The Panel inspected three incidents of non-compliance reported by Member
States, two of which involved transport by road and one transport by air. The details
of these inspections can be found in paragraphs 100 to 110.

(a)

Air transport
156. The Yas Air (Turkey) interdiction was undertaken following a technical stopover
imposed by Turkey in response to a series of flight plans submitted by Yas Air and
information provided by another State. The incident illustrates the importance of
effective, timely and tested inter-agency coordination mechanisms in carrying out
successful interdictions of air shipments. These are particularly important because
information on overflights with suspicious cargoes may be available with limited
notice and decisions may need to be taken by the authorities at the last minute.
157. Yas Air’s corporate registration history and the issue of its proposed
designation under United Nations sanctions are discussed in more detail in
paragraph 231. One of the patterns of circumvention by the Islamic Republic of Iran
illustrated in this case involves the renaming of a cargo airline.

(b)

Overland transport
158. In the case of the International Security Assistance Force (Afghanistan), in
which arms and related materiel were interdicted close to the border in southern
Afghanistan, the methods and route used for transporting the prohibited goods
resembled smuggling or illicit trafficking of contraband. Experts in border security
in this region have noted that the capacity of Customs is limited on both sides of the
border and the volume of cross-border trade very high, making it more vulnerable to
smuggling. 23
159. The case of Kilis (Turkey) consisted of arms-related materiel carried by a
truck that was legally registered for international road transport. No attempt had
been made to physically conceal the shipment or to falsify the documents. The Panel
notes that a related shipping document stated that the shipment was part of a
contract including 20 such shipments.

(c)

Maritime transport
160. No State reported violations involving marine transport during the Panel’s
current mandate.
161. The Panel visited seven ports during its current mandate to gather relevant
information about the implementation of sanctions. Practices vary by State as to the
precise role played by port authorities. The Panel notes that there is significant value
in coordinating the responsibilities of port authorities with those tasked with the
detection of prohibited commodities for the purpose of sanctions implementation or

__________________
23 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, The Global Afghan Opium Trade: A Threat

Assessment (Vienna, July 2011).

12-37171

35

S/2012/395

export controls. For example, information held by port authorities on vessels
entering ports, such as International Maritime Organization numbers, could be
shared with the authorities in charge of implementing relevant Security Council
resolutions. Inspection tools used by port authorities, even though not designed to
detect suspicious cargo, could help relevant authorities to detect suspicious ship
operations, including carriage of banned goods. 24
(d)

Measures taken by the private sector
162. The Panel notes that many transport companies are sensitive to the need to
comply with sanctions on the Islamic Republic of Iran and have adopted additional
measures to reduce the risk of violating relevant Security Council resolutions. These
include creation of internal compliance units; enhanced internal compliance
procedures, including senior management responsibility for decisions over business
with an Iranian connection; advanced risk profiling systems; specialized training of
employees; development of internal blacklists of suspicious or risky customers;
scanning of all cargo bound for the Islamic Republic of Iran; and mandatory
confirmation from business counterparts that their contract is not connected to
Iranian prohibited activities. By contrast, some entities have withdrawn from the
Iranian market altogether.

4.

Transfer, renaming and reflagging of vessels related to the Islamic Republic of
Iran Shipping Lines 25
163. The measures concerning the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines
contained in the relevant resolutions go beyond the designations of the three entities
related to the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines in paragraph 19 of resolution
1929 (2010). States are also called upon to be vigilant over the activities of the
Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines in resolutions 1803 (2008) and
1929 (2010). They are obliged under paragraph 22 of resolution 1929 (2010) to
require their nationals, persons subject to their jurisdiction and firms incorporated in
their territory or subject to their jurisdiction, to exercise vigilance when doing
business with entities of the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines, if they have
information that provides reasonable grounds to believe that such business could
contribute to the Islamic Republic of Iran’s proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities
or the development of nuclear weapons delivery systems.
164. These measures are difficult to implement because of actions by the Islamic
Republic of Iran Shipping Lines, following the adoption of resolution 1803 (2008),
to modify regularly its corporate ownership structure and the names and flags of its
vessels. Currently, over 130 vessels related to the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping
Lines are operated by approximately 75 companies, most of which operate just one
or only a few vessels. The Panel understands from discussions with shipping
industry representatives that such operating practices are uncommon, especially
among major shipping lines.

__________________
24 Hugh Griffiths and Michael Jenks, “Marine transport and destabilizing commodity flows”,

Stockholm International Security and Peace Research Institute Policy Paper, No. 32 (Solna,
2012). Available from books.sipri.org/files/PP/SIPRIPP32.pdf.
25 The assessment in the present subsection is based on information from States and the Panel’s
own research using commercial sources (Lloyd’s List’s Seasearcher and IHS Fairplay).

36

12-37171

S/2012/395

165. These activities, although not in themselves illegal, have introduced a complex
and amorphous structure to the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines that serves
to obscure its activities as a whole and the identities of individual vessels. 26 The
more complex the overall structure of the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines,
the more difficult and time-consuming the identification of ships related to it.
166. The following is a preliminary assessment of trends. It is intended to provide
basic information regarding the activities of the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping
Lines to assist the Security Council and the Committee. It is also intended to assist
Member States in exercising effective vigilance over the activities of the Islamic
Republic of Iran Shipping Lines in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Pertinent information from Member States would assist the Panel to
develop further its analysis of this issue.
Transfers of vessel ownership
167. At the time of the adoption of resolution 1803 (2008), the first reference to the
Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines in a Security Council resolution, the
company was the beneficial owner of more than 110 vessels. Following resolution
1803 (2008), it began transferring vessels to two related companies: the Hafiz Darya
Shipping Company and the Sapid Shipping Company (see figure IV).
Figure IV
Ownership structure of vessels related to the Islamic Republic of Iran
Shipping Lines

Source: Lloyd’s List’s Seasearcher.
__________________
26 For an analysis of corporate and financial structures that could be used for hiding corrupt

transactions, see Emile van der Does de Willebois and others, The Puppet Masters (Washington,
D.C., World Bank, 2011).

12-37171

37

S/2012/395

168. From 2008 until the adoption of resolution 1929 (2010), the Islamic Republic
of Iran Shipping Lines and its related companies carried out more than 110 changes
to the beneficial and registered owners of their vessels. Following the adoption of
resolution 1929 (2010), a further more than 110 changes took place.
169. As at 28 April 2012, the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines was the
beneficial owner of 50 vessels, of which 14 were registered as directly owned by it
and another 36 by 14 different companies owned in turn by it. In addition, from 35 to
40 vessels are registered to the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines, although they
are either under construction, on construction orders or pending operation.
170. Very few vessels were directly registered to the Hafiz Darya Shipping
Company or the Sapid Shipping Company as at 28 April 2012. The eight vessels of
the former were registered to seven different companies that it owned. The
47 vessels of the latter were registered to 39 different companies that it owned. Only
two vessels were registered to the Sapid Shipping Company itself. Approximately
20 other vessels were related to the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines, the
Hafiz Darya Shipping Company or the Sapid Shipping Company, bringing to more
than 130 the number of vessels related to the three companies (including vessels
related to the Irano Hind Shipping Company). In many cases, companies under
ownership of the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines, the Hafiz Darya Shipping
Company or the Sapid Shipping Company possessed only one or two vessels.
171. More than 60 of the approximately 130 vessels are currently operated by a
single Iranian third party operator, the Rahbaran Omid Darya Ship Management
Company. In addition, more than 50 vessels are managed by a single Iranian
technical manager, the Soroush Sarzamin Asatir Ship Management Company.
Renaming of vessels
172. Vessels under the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines and its related
companies change names frequently, in most cases from those easily identified as
Iranian-related to those not indicating any Iranian origin. When resolution 1803
(2008) was adopted, most vessels owned by the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping
Lines carried a name containing “Iran”. As at 28 April 2012, however, the name
“Iran” was found in fewer than 10 of more than 130 vessels related to the Islamic
Republic of Iran Shipping Lines, the Hafiz Darya Shipping Company and the Sapid
Shipping Company. Since the adoption of resolution 1803 (2008), more than 150
name changes of vessels owned or controlled by the three companies have taken
place.
Reflagging of vessels
173. Following the adoption of resolution 1803 (2008), the flag States of more than
90 vessels related to the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines, the Hafiz Darya
Shipping Company and the Sapid Shipping Company have been changed.
174. Approximately 25 per cent of these changes happened recently. Since February
2012, 12 vessels belonging to the Sapid Shipping Company or the Irano Hind
Shipping Company have changed their flags to a Latin American State. Since March
2012, eight vessels belonging to the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines or the
Hafiz Darya Shipping Company have shifted their flag to an African State and three
vessels belonging to the Hafiz Darya Shipping Company or the Sapid Shipping

38

12-37171

S/2012/395

Company have changed flags to another African State. The beneficial and registered
owners of some of these vessels are unconfirmed.
175. Some of these flag changes were also accompanied by vessel name changes.
Vessels with relatively large container capacity changed their names, flags and
owners at the same time.
Related services providers
176. Changes in ownership, names and flags can be carried out only by third parties
with expertise in legal and procedural issues, such as registration brokerage
companies, law firms or corporate services providers. One State informed the Panel
that transfers of vessel ownership were apparently obscured by the use of bearer
shares provided by such a third party.
5.

Conclusions
177. The frequent changes of ownership, name and flag of vessels by the Islamic
Republic of Iran Shipping Lines go beyond standard business practice and are suited
to obscuring the identity of vessels. Vigilance over the company’s activities, in
particular monitoring vessels’ International Maritime Organization numbers,
continues to be important.
178. Vigilance by providers of related services, including ship registration and
corporate formation, is also needed.
179. The absence of reported incidents notwithstanding, it is likely that maritime
shipments of prohibited items are continuing.
180. Border States are potential targets for illicit transfers or transit of arms and
related materiel from the Islamic Republic of Iran.
181. Coordination among port, airport and air traffic control authorities with
enforcement agencies enhances the effectiveness of sanctions implementation and
their enforcement. In maritime ports and airports, coordination of technical
inspections with border control and Customs authorities can enhance
implementation of sanctions. Sharing of information routinely obtained by all
relevant authorities, including vessels’ International Maritime Organization numbers
and flight plans of aircraft, is important.

F.

Financial and business restrictions

1.

Introduction
182. The relevant Security Council resolutions contain two categories of financial
restrictions. The first, targeted financial sanctions, require freezing of funds and other
assets of designated entities and individuals (resolution 1737 (2006), paras. 12-15;
resolution 1747 (2007), para. 6; resolution 1803 (2008), para. 7; and resolution 1929
(2010), paras. 11, 12 and 19). The designated individuals and entities are listed in the
annex to resolution 1737 (2006), annex I to resolution 1747 (2007), annexes I and III
to resolution 1803 (2008) and annexes I to III of resolution 1929 (2010). Two Iranian
financial institutions are designated: Bank Sepah and Bank Sepah International
(resolution 1747 (2007)) and First East Export Bank (resolution 1929 (2010)).

12-37171

39

S/2012/395

183. The second category of restriction is activity-based sanctions, which impose
restrictions on financial or business dealings with the Islamic Republic of Iran under
specific conditions. The restrictions are as follows:
(a) Preventing the transfer of financial resources or services related to the
supply, sale, transfer, manufacture or use of the prohibited items (resolution 1737
(2006), para. 6; and resolution 1929 (2010), paras. 8 and 13);
(b) Preventing the provision of financial services and transfer of financial
assets or resources that could contribute to the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities or the development of nuclear weapon
delivery systems (resolution 1929 (2010), para. 21);
(c) Prohibiting Iranian banks from initiating new business activities in
Member States if related to the Islamic Republic of Iran’s proliferation-sensitive
nuclear activities or the development of nuclear weapon delivery systems
(resolution 1929 (2010), para. 23);
(d) Prohibiting financial institutions of Member States from initiating new
business in the Islamic Republic of Iran if related to the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities, or the development of nuclear weapon
delivery systems (resolution 1929 (2010), para. 24).
184. The activity-based sanctions of resolution 1929 (2010) build on those set out
in resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1803 (2008). Two Iranian financial institutions are
named in paragraph 10 of resolution 1803 (2008), in which the Security Council
calls upon States to exercise vigilance over the activities of financial institutions in
their territories with all banks domiciled in the Islamic Republic of Iran, in
particular with Bank Melli and Bank Saderat, and their branches and subsidiaries
abroad. Vigilance over transactions involving Iranian banks, including the Central
Bank of Iran, was also called for in the sixteenth preambular paragraph of resolution
1929 (2010).
185. Member States are also obliged to require their nationals, persons subject to
their jurisdiction and firms incorporated in their territory or subject to their
jurisdiction to exercise vigilance when doing business with entities in the Islamic
Republic of Iran, including those of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps and the
Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines (resolution 1929 (2010), para. 22).
186. In the present section, the Panel discusses the implementation by Member
States of United Nations financial sanctions, responses to financial sanctions,
practices of entities in response to sanctions requirements and challenges arising
from the implementation of financial sanctions.
2.

Analysis

(a)

Implementation of financial sanctions
187. The Panel consulted Member States to learn about how implementation was
carried out in practice and to receive information on sanctions circumvention by the
Islamic Republic of Iran. The Panel participated in outreach seminars for
Governments and the private sector and sought views from private-sector entities
during meetings.

40

12-37171

S/2012/395

188. To implement financial sanctions, Member States require mechanisms to
identify and freeze assets of designated entities and individuals, and to monitor and
regulate financial and business transactions with the Islamic Republic of Iran. A
high standard of communication and coordination between regulatory authorities
and the private sector is needed.
189. While many Member States noted that they had such systems in place, only a
few shared information regarding suspicious transaction reports, violations or
attempted violations. For example:
(a) One State bordering the Islamic Republic of Iran said that it had revoked
the licence of a money transfer company in 2008;
(b) One State informed the Panel that its financial intelligence unit had
received and investigated several suspicious transaction reports in connection with
transactions involving Bank Saderat during the period 2006-2007. It could not be
ascertained that those were relevant to United Nations resolutions. The financial
intelligence unit had also carried out checks on the basis of information received
from other Member States during 2007, but no information had been found related
to United Nations sanctions;
(c) One State said that on-site inspections of Bank Mellat had identified two
examples of failure to follow proper procedures;
(d) One State noted that transactions from banks in one Middle Eastern State
with Iranian shareholders had been blocked based on intelligence received from
foreign sources.
190. There is no general understanding of the definition of “vigilance” in the
context of paragraph 22 of resolution 1929 (2010). Member States reported various
mechanisms to comply with this requirement, such as:
(a) Some regulatory authorities closely supervised business with the Islamic
Republic of Iran;
(b) Some authorities required notification or authorization in advance for
transfers of funds involving an Iranian person or entity over specific thresholds. One
State reported a requirement for non-personal financial transactions to be licensed
on a case-by-case basis. Other Member States had systems in place to license
individual financial transactions, or to license a class of financial transactions;
(c) Some Member States reported that they simply generally supervised
business to ensure that no prohibited activities took place.
191. The Panel received no reports that the Islamic Republic of Iran had
successfully developed significant new channels for transactions following the
adoption of resolution 1929 (2010), although some Member States shared
information that it remained interested in doing so. One State noted that monitoring
Iranian-related transactions through banks in some third countries was difficult. One
State bordering the Islamic Republic of Iran informed the Panel of Iranian requests
to open new financial institutions. Those requests were not pursued, apparently
because of that State’s burdensome legislation. Another State, on another continent,
disclosed similar requests. Another State said that the Islamic Republic of Iran had
requested information about procedures for opening financial institutions using
Iranian or mixed capital. In most cases, the Islamic Republic of Iran did not pursue
these enquiries.

12-37171

41

S/2012/395

192. The compliance department of one large international financial institution
stated that the Islamic Republic of Iran was known to be seeking to develop covert
relationships with existing institutions, and new relationships in jurisdictions with
weak regulations. A representative of another large international financial entity also
noted that Iranian banks were creative in seeking to circumvent sanctions, including
by opening new branches.
193. The Financial Action Task Force issued revised standards in February 2012,
including a new standard on implementation of targeted financial sanctions related
to proliferation. Member States may need to put in place mechanisms to meet this
standard. The inclusion of this standard in future mutual evaluation reviews could
provide the Panel with useful information regarding the implementation of United
Nations targeted financial sanctions.
(b)

Responses to financial sanctions
194. Member States informed the Panel that Iranian entities and citizens not
designated under sanctions were deploying measures to deal with the effects of
sanctions, in particular unilateral ones, some of which might be intended only to
protect legitimate transactions, such as:
(a) An increasing number of Iranian-related financial transactions involved
non-sanctioned Iranian banks with correspondent accounts with foreign banks, or
money transfer businesses based in the Islamic Republic of Iran with access to
foreign banks. Some of those transactions might have been initiated by sanctioned
banks; 27
(b) An increase in cash transfers between Iranians resident overseas and their
friends and relatives inside the Islamic Republic of Iran, which was notable in
Member States with many Iranian residents. One State, which monitors all crossborder financial transactions, reported a several-fold increase over the past two
years in cash transfers to the Islamic Republic of Iran. The State suggested that
sanctions had made electronic transfers more difficult. Another factor was the
increasing regulation of money transfer businesses, which were now required to
register as financial institutions. The media also reported an increase in cash
transactions; 28
(c) One State said that hawala transactions had increased in recent years in
inverse proportion to the reduction of bank transactions with the Islamic Republic of
Iran;
(d) One border State reported that barter transactions were a growing
component of trade with the Islamic Republic of Iran. Barter arrangements were
also reported by the media; 29

__________________
27 See also media reports, such as Benoît Faucon and Margaret Coker, “Willing banks find profits

in legal trade with Iran”, Wall Street Journal, 8 April 2012.
28 Michael Lipin, “Western sanctions on Iran’s banks make trade harder”, Voice of America News,

3 April 2012.
29 Valerie Parent and Parisa Hafezi, “Iran turns to barter for food as sanctions cripple imports”,

Reuters, 9 February 2012. Indira Lakshmanan and Pratish Narayanan, “India and China skirt
Iran sanctions with ‘junk for oil’”, Bloomberg, 30 March 2012.
“Pakistan, Iran holding talks on barter trade”, Tehran Times, 22 April 2012.

42

12-37171

S/2012/395

(e) Some Member States reported cases of companies set up for the purpose
of transferring funds to or from the Islamic Republic of Iran. For example, the Panel
was informed of the case of a small non-financial firm led by an expatriate Iranian
that had transformed itself into a company involved in transferring funds received
from a non-sanctioned Iranian bank to recipients throughout the world. Some
$11 billion had been processed over 18 months.
195. Understanding whether and how the above-described methods could be used
for financing procurement for sanctioned nuclear and ballistic programmes is
challenging. These programmes are industrial in scale and require sources of
financing for procurement that are large and reliable.
(c)

Practices of financial entities
196. The Panel held discussions with representatives of several international
financial institutions, insurers, banking associations and legal entities in Europe,
Asia and North America.
197. For the purposes of implementing United Nations targeted sanctions, many
large financial institutions said that they relied on commercial software providers
for systems to screen transactions. Screening against individuals designated by the
United Nations was often complicated by a lack of sufficient identifying detail.
Most institutions required screening to be able to identify possible non-compliance
under all relevant jurisdictions in which they operated. Some providers offered
screening services against additional, proprietary criteria. Most institutions said that
they deployed many staff and expended significant resources to ensure that adequate
due diligence was carried out.
198. The Panel was informed by many institutions and regulatory authorities that
they took a highly risk-averse approach to compliance with sanctions on the Islamic
Republic of Iran. Many regarded possible penalties for violating unilateral sanctions
(in addition to negative publicity and reputational damage) as of greater concern
than possible violations of United Nations sanctions, and formulated corporate
compliance procedures accordingly. Some entities reported that they had decided
that resources needed for adequate compliance with all relevant sanctions regimes
were too costly where business was connected with the Islamic Republic of Iran and
had decided to do no such business at all.
199. Channels for transactions with some Iranian banks have been blocked
following the termination of financial messaging services to these banks in response
to unilateral financial sanctions. 30
200. The Panel observed that the practices of many financial institutions were
widening the scope of United Nations financial sanctions. For example, two large
insurance entities informed the Panel that company policy was to turn down almost
all business connected with the Islamic Republic of Iran because of the burdensome
nature of necessary due diligence and potential complexities should a claim arise.
Many protection and indemnity clubs have terminated third-party liability cover for
Iranian vessels because of unilateral sanctions. The Panel was informed that Iranian
insurance companies might provide alternative cover. It is unclear whether the
compliance policies of international banks would allow transactions to be processed
should Iranian insurance companies pay out against a claim.

__________________
30 Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication, www.swift.com/news/

press_releases/SWIFT_disconnect_Iranian_banks (accessed 7 May 2012).

12-37171

43

S/2012/395

3.

Challenges

(a)

Asset freezes
201. Only a few Member States reported that assets had been frozen in response to
Security Council resolutions. Most Member States informed the Panel that no assets
had been frozen because no relevant assets had been present. Two said that business
related to the Islamic Republic of Iran had already scaled back significantly by the
time that United Nations asset freezes were put in place.
202. There are several possible reasons for the lack of reports of assets frozen under
the relevant United Nations resolutions. Some Member States may lack mechanisms
to freeze assets in connection with the resolutions, or may have failed to take action
swiftly to ensure that no funds were removed from their jurisdiction before such
freezes took effect. Some Member States may require assistance or advice in the
implementation of asset freezes. For example, one State enquired about procedures
followed elsewhere with regard to property subject to asset freezes.
203. A banking association reported to the Panel in writing that its members were
concerned about the ability of the competent authorities to respond to enquiries and
licensing requests in a timely manner. Many competent authorities struggled with
the lack of precision in the language of United Nations resolutions (such as the
definition of “acting on their behalf”).

(b)

Unilateral sanctions
204. The issue of unilateral financial sanctions is not within the Panel’s mandate.
The issue is, however, raised often by Member States in the course of the Panel’s
consultations regarding United Nations financial sanctions. In addition to United
Nations sanctions on the Islamic Republic of Iran, a number of jurisdictions have
imposed their own financial sanctions regimes (referred to here as “unilateral
sanctions regimes”). Such regimes and sanctions have increased over the past year.
Some Member States reported that they sought to comply with both United Nations
sanctions and unilateral regimes, and others that they complied only with United
Nations sanctions.
205. One example of the difficulties imposed by unilateral sanctions on legitimate
transactions is illustrated by an enquiry from an international humanitarian
organization to the United Nations regarding the transfer of funds from the Islamic
Republic of Iran. The Committee, assisted by the Panel, subsequently recommended
that the humanitarian organization should seek advice from Member States that had
jurisdiction over their activities regarding restrictions imposed by sanctions regimes,
and, where necessary, request such Member States to seek an exemption from the
Committee in connection with the transfer of items, financial resources or assets to
or from the Islamic Republic of Iran.
206. One State reported that it had been approached by an international
humanitarian organization for advice on transferring funds to the Islamic Republic
of Iran following the imposition of unilateral sanctions. The State responded that it
could not influence the policies of individual banks.
207. The media also reported difficulties with humanitarian transactions. 31

__________________
31 Arshad Maohammed, “Of diapers and drugs, Iran’s trouble paying bills”, Reuters, 21 March 2012.

44

12-37171

S/2012/395

4.

Conclusions
208. The Panel finds a high level of awareness among Member States and the
private sector of United Nations financial sanctions. Many Member States are
implementing sanctions through their financial regulatory bodies with rigour.
209. Understanding whether and how Iranian circumvention of United Nations
financial sanctions could be used for financing procurement for sanctioned nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes is challenging. These programmes are industrial in
scale and require sources of procurement financing that are large and reliable.
210. Legitimate trade may be hindered by the practices for financial transactions
followed by some entities in response to unilateral sanctions.

G.

Designation of entities and individuals

1.

Introduction
211. Designated entities and individuals are subjected to asset freezes set forth in
paragraphs 11, 12 and 19 of resolution 1929 (2010) and previous resolutions. They
are also subject to travel ban measures under paragraph 10 of resolution
1929 (2010). The travel ban is discussed further in paragraphs 232 to 247 of the
present report.
212. Consolidated lists of designated individuals and entities can be found on the
Committee’s website. 32 The current list falls into three categories: those concerning
other individuals and entities involved in the Islamic Republic of Iran’s nuclear or
ballistic missile activities; designations related to the Islamic Revolutionary Guards
Corps (also known as “Army of the Guardians of the Islamic Revolution”); and
those related to the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines.
213. In the present section, the Panel discusses the Islamic Revolutionary Guards
Corps, the Irano Hind Shipping Company and the entities and individuals that have
come to the Panel’s attention as a result of inspections carried out of reported
violations.

2.

Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps
214. Although the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps as a whole is not designated
under the relevant resolutions, a number of key figures have been identified by the
Security Council as involved in nuclear and ballistic missile programmes and are
subject to asset freeze measures. Officers, including the Corps’ Commander-inChief and Joint Chief of Staff, in addition to the commanders of the air force,
ground force and navy, are all designated. Furthermore, three entities identified in
annex I to resolution 1747 (2007) and Khatam al-Anbiya Construction Headquarters
and 14 entities related thereto are designated in annex II to resolution 1929 (2010).
215. Activities related to the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps are also made
subject to vigilance exercised by States and their nationals, persons and firms if they
have information that provides reasonable grounds to believe that such business
could contribute to the Islamic Republic of Iran’s proliferation-sensitive nuclear
activities or the development of nuclear weapons delivery systems. Such vigilance

__________________
32 See www.un.org/sc/committees/1737/pdf/1737ConsolidatedList.pdf.

12-37171

45

S/2012/395

over business activities extends to entities and individuals acting on behalf of the
Corps or at its direction, and entities owned or controlled by it, including through
illicit means.
216. The consultations with many Member States showed the difficulty of
identifying specific transactions or businesses involving the Islamic Revolutionary
Guards Corps that could contribute to Iranian proliferation-sensitive nuclear
activities or the development of nuclear weapons delivery systems. Part of the
problem lies in the lack of information regarding the structure of the Corps and its
activities, both inside the Islamic Republic of Iran and abroad.
217. This lack of information means that foreign entities seeking to carry out
legitimate trade with the Islamic Republic of Iran run the risk of becoming
unwittingly involved in the above-mentioned prohibited activities of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guards Corps, and thus violating relevant Security Council
resolutions. To avoid such risks, which could result in significant legal penalties and
reputational damage, many entities decide to withdraw from any business that might
be connected with the Islamic Republic of Iran or Iranian elements, regardless of the
legitimate nature of such business.
(a)

Economic activities by the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps
218. The Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps is an overwhelmingly important
actor in the Iranian economy and has expanded into various sectors, mainly through
its civilian arms. Although experts find it difficult to determine the extent of its
influence on the economy, conservative estimates suggest that it exercises control of
between 25 and 40 per cent of the Iranian gross domestic product. 33
219. For example, the construction wing of the Corps, Khatam al-Anbiya
Construction Headquarters, which is designated under resolution 1929 (2010), is
engaged in numerous projects, including dams, buildings, roads, tunnels and
underground structures, ports, oil installations, telecommunications, transportation,
energy and transmission lines for oil, gas, water and sewage. It has dozens of
subsidiaries and partners. One estimate even suggests that it has more than 800
subsidiaries 34 and, according to the entity itself, it has completed hundreds of
projects. 35 The position of its Director is traditionally occupied by influential
officers of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps. The current Minister of Oil,
Rostam Qasemi, is a former Director. 36 Other major projects, such as airport
operations, are carried out by other construction entities under the control of the
Corps.
220. Some Member States have informed the Panel that the Corps also controls
informal economic channels. In particular, some Iranian charitable organizations
(foundations) controlled by the Corps are believed to support the Corps’ economic
activities, including provision of informal channels for business transactions. Such
foundations include the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps Cooperative

__________________
33 Elliot Hen-Tov and Nathan Gonzalez, “The militarization of post-Khomeini Iran: Praetrorianism

2.0”, The Washington Quarterly, winter 2011.
34 “New Iran sanction target Revolutionary Guards”, Time Magazine, 10 June 2010.
35 See Khatam al-Anbiya Construction Headquarters website, “Ghorb at a glance” (http://khatam.com/

?part=menu&inc=menu&id=98) (accessed 22 April 2012).
36 The Director was reportedly replaced by Abolqasem Mozaffari Shams in August 2011, after his

predecessor was appointed and confirmed as Minister of Oil.

46

12-37171

S/2012/395

Foundation (Bonyad-e Taavon-e Sepah) and the Foundation of the Oppressed
(Bonyad-e Mostazafan), both of which include incumbent and/or former officers of
the Corps as board members. Both foundations operate extensive businesses; for
example, the Foundation of the Oppressed recently announced that 20 holding
companies and 173 companies were operating under it, in a range of industries,
including the agriculture, shipping, finance and beverages industries. 37
(b)

Leadership of the Corps
221. Although it appears that individuals were designated by the Security Council
according to the leadership positions that they occupied within the Corps,
subsequent personnel changes have taken place in the leadership of the Corps. These
are not reflected in the list of designated individuals on the Committee website. The
changes are reflected in the table below.
Changes in Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps leadership
Designated individual

Position

Current commanders

MG Yahya Rahim Safavi

Commander of the Corps

MG Mohammad Ali Jafari

BG Morteza Rezaie

Deputy Commander of
the Corps

BG Hossein Salami38

BG Mohammad Reza Zahedi Commander of the
Ground Force

BG Mohammad Pakpour

BG Hossein Salami

Commander of the Air
Force39

BG Amir Ali Hajizadeh

RA Morteza Safari

Commander of the Navy

RA Ali Fadavi

BG Mohammad Hejazi

Commander of the Basij
Resistance Force

BG Mohammad Reza
Naqdi40

BG Qasem Soleimani

Commander of the Qods
Force

(Promoted to MG)

Abbreviations: MG, Major General; BG, Brigadier General; RA, Rear Admiral. 383940

222. Some designated individuals who have moved from the positions that they
occupied when they were originally designated continue to hold influential
positions. These include Major General Yahya Rahim Safavi (currently a military
adviser to the Supreme Leader) and Brigadier General Mohammad Hejazi (Head of
Logistics and Industrial Research in the Joint Staff of the armed forces).

__________________
37 See the website of the Foundation of the Oppressed: economic activities (www.irmf.ir/activity/

Introduce/economic.aspx) (accessed 22 April 2012).
38 Designated as Air Force Commander under resolution 1737 (2006).
39 The air force was renamed as the “aerospace force” as a result of restructuring in late 2009.
40 Designated as a former Deputy Chief of Armed Forces General Staff for Logistics and Industrial

Research under resolution 1803 (2008).

12-37171

47

S/2012/395

3.

Designated entity related to the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines: the
Irano Hind Shipping Company
223. The Irano Hind Shipping Company is designated in accordance with
paragraph 19 of resolution 1929 (2010), and its funds, assets and economic
resources are to be frozen by Member States. The Panel received information that
assets of the Irano Hind Shipping Company in one Member State were frozen.
224. On the basis of the Panel’s analysis, which is based on information from
Member States and the Panel’s own research using commercial sources (Lloyd’s
List’s Seasearcher and IHS Fairplay), it appears that the company’s vessels continue
to operate. The Panel has identified at least seven vessels — three crude oil tankers
and four bulk carriers — that have been controlled by the Irano Hind Shipping
Company since the time of its designation. There may also be an additional crude oil
tanker registered by the Irano Hind Shipping Company but not yet in operation.
These seven vessels are registered and operated by seven separate companies, each
owning and operating just one vessel. These companies, and an additional five
companies that do not appear to operate any vessels, are owned by the Irano Hind
Shipping Company and share the same address. An official website of a State also
suggests that all these companies are subject to United Nations/European Union
sanctions. 41
225. In April 2012, companies controlled by the Irano Hind Shipping Company
changed the flags of all three crude oil tankers belonging to the Company’s fleet,
from that of Malta to that of the Plurinational State of Bolivia. The Director of the
Bolivian International Ship Registry stated on 18 April that, if any of the ships were
in breach of sanctions imposed by the United Nations, or other group of countries,
its registration would be cancelled. 42 This reflagging coincides with other
reflagging activities described in paragraphs 174 to 176.
226. The Irano Hind Shipping Company fleet currently includes no container
carriers. The fleet previously included two container carriers, the registrations of
each of which were transferred, before the adoption of resolution 1929 (2010), to
different owners in one State. The beneficial ownership of both was transferred to an
owner in a third State. These two container carriers appear to be in operation mainly
in Europe and South America. A list of the above-mentioned companies and vessels
can be found in annex X to the present report.
227. The continued operation of the Irano Hind Shipping Company vessels may
reflect several factors:
(a) Some Member States may not interpret the resolutions as requiring them
to detain vessels owned or controlled by the designated entities;
(b) There may not be a common understanding of terms such as “acting on
behalf of Irano Hind and at its direction” or “owned or controlled” by the Irano
Hind Shipping Company;
(c)
action;

Member States may lack sufficient legal grounds to enable or justify

__________________
41 See http://rocsupport.mfsa.com.mt/pages/default.aspx.
42 Daniel Fineren, “Bolivia poised to de-flag Iranian ships”, Reuters, 18 April 2012.

48

12-37171

S/2012/395

(d) Member States may be unable to identify vessels operating in their
territorial waters as being controlled by the Irano Hind Shipping Company.
4.

Entities involved in violations: proposed additional designations
228. The Panel notes that the Committee’s recent decision to add two individuals
and one entity to the list of designations will send a strong message that the
resolutions are subject to updating as circumstances dictate.
229. The Panel proposes that the following entities be brought to the Committee’s
attention:
(a) Yas Air. The airline was found by the Panel to be in violation of
paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007) for transporting prohibited arms and related
materiel from the Islamic Republic of Iran to the Syrian Arab Republic. One
Member State provided the Panel with information that Yas Air was an Islamic
Revolutionary Guards Corps entity and a successor to Pars Aviation Services
Company, which was designated under resolution 1747 (2007). Open-source
information shows that Yas Air is a civilian arm of the Islamic Revolutionary
Guards Corps and that two of the four cargo aircraft that it possesses were
transferred from the Corps; 43
(b) SAD Import Export Company. The company was found by the Panel to
be in violation of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007) for its role as a trading
agent of prohibited arms and related materiel. Documentary evidence showed that
the entity was found to have attempted to transport prohibited items connected with
two entities designated under the relevant Security Council resolutions (7th of Tir
Industries and Parchin Chemical Industries). Documentary evidence found during
the inspection suggests that transport of similar items might continue in the future;
(c) Chemical Industries and Development of Materials Group. The group
was identified on papers found in a crate seized in the Kilis (Turkey) case. It is a
parent entity of Parchin Chemical Industries, which is a designated entity under
resolution 1747 (2007), and was identified as the producer of increment charges
seized by the Turkish authorities in the Kilis case. The Defence Industries
Organization website suggests that the Chemical Industries and Development of
Materials Group is producing a range of explosive materials, including propellants
and strong explosives for military use, such as RDX and HMX. 44 The Panel notes
that in many of the prior violation cases that it inspected the Defence Industries
Organization was found to be engaged in the export of arms and related materiel in
violation of the relevant resolutions.

5.

Conclusions
230. Further sharing of information among Member States regarding the structure,
affiliates and cooperatives of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps would help to
understand which of their economic activities could contribute to activities
prohibited under the relevant Security Council resolutions.

__________________
43 See AeroTransport Data Bank (www.aerotransport.org).
44 See www.diomil.ir/en/cidmg.aspx.

12-37171

49

S/2012/395

231. The designation of the Irano Hind Shipping Company notwithstanding, its
vessels are continuing to operate, which raises questions regarding the practical
impact of this designation.

H.

Travel ban

1.

Introduction
232. The Security Council designates individuals and entities for being directly
involved with or providing support for the Islamic Republic of Iran’s proliferationsensitive nuclear activities and for the development of nuclear weapon delivery
systems in resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010). In
paragraph 10 of resolution 1929 (2010), the Security Council decided that all States
were to take the measures necessary to prevent the entry into or transit through their
territories of individuals designated in the relevant Security Council resolutions or
by the Security Council or the Committee in accordance with paragraph 10 of
resolution 1737 (2006), with the exceptions stipulated in paragraph 6 of resolution
1803 (2008) and paragraph 10 of resolution 1929 (2010).
233. In the present section, the Panel focuses on challenges reported by Member
States in the implementation of the travel ban and developments that may affect the
efficacy of travel ban measures.

2.

Background
234. The Islamic Republic of Iran issues passports in accordance with international
guidelines on machine-readable travel documents. In July 2007, it announced that it
had begun issuing diplomatic and service passports containing biometric
information, extending that to ordinary passports in February 2011.
235. According to a public database on visa restrictions, the number of countries
and territories that can be entered by an Iranian citizen without a visa, usually for
relatively short visits, increased from 25 (in September 2008) to 36 (in August
2011). 45
236. Significant progress has been made over the past decade in the implementation
of immigration controls, such as deployment of advanced passenger information
systems and biometric data. Only four Member States have yet to begin issuing
machine-readable travel documents to their citizens. Such systems and instruments
are effective tools in the implementation of the travel ban.

3.

Analysis
Implementation by Member States
237. The legal frameworks within which Member States implement travel ban
obligations vary considerably. Many Member States implement the travel ban
through administrative measures based on existing laws, in effect relying on

__________________
45 Henley & Partners Visa Restrictions Index — Global Ranking, available on its website

(www.henleyglobal.com/citizenship/visa-restrictions/). The International Air Transport
Association explains in its website that the global ranking is produced in collaboration with the
Association, i.e. the methodology developed by Henley & Partners for the global ranking is
applied to data provided by the Association’s visa information database.

50

12-37171

S/2012/395

agencies responsible for visa or entry/transit screening to incorporate new
information about designated individuals into existing databases. Some make
amendments to existing immigration laws, while others implement the travel ban
through specific sanctions legislation.
238. Member States implement the travel ban by means of both visa restrictions and
border or immigration control measures. The Panel notes that Member States rely on
various databases for visa and entry/transit screening. These may include national
databases or those common to a regional body, such as the Schengen Information
System among European Union States.
239. No reported violations of the travel ban were submitted to the Committee
during the Panel’s current mandate.
240. The Panel was informed by a State that members of the Qods Force of the
Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, including its commander Qasem Soleimani
(who is designated in resolution 1747 (2007)), recently visited the Syrian Arab
Republic. The Panel is seeking to confirm this information. Another State informed
the Panel of one case of a designated Iranian individual being denied entry.
241. There may be several reasons for the lack of reports to the Committee
regarding travel ban violations. Member States may lack sufficient capacity to
implement, monitor and report violations of the travel ban, or it is possible that
designated Iranians may not travel outside the country, or may travel with
documents issued under other names.
4.

Challenges
242. Insufficient identifying information. Many Member States, in particular
those that deployed computerized screening, reported that their visa, entry and
transit procedures required more information than is typically contained in
resolutions (which include in most cases only names, places of work and/or job
titles).
243. Difficulties with names. The Panel notes the following difficulties in
identifying designated individuals:
(a) Naming practices in the Islamic Republic of Iran and its surrounding
region may involve frequent and repeated use of very common names and surnames;
(b)

Variable transliterations of Farsi names into English; 46

(c)

Use of aliases.

244. Use of additional passports. One State recently consulted by the Panel
suggested that some Iranian nationals have obtained passports from another Member
State. The Panel is aware that some Member States legally offer a second citizenship
and passport to nationals of a third country, including Iranians who are residing
outside their territories, usually in return for a certain amount of investment.
Following enquiries from the Panel, information provided by a State showed a fourfold increase in applications from Iranian nationals for passports during the period
2010-2011. The State also reported that it was suspending the acceptance of
__________________
46 In this regard, the Panel notes that names indicated on Iranian passports are not based on a

uniform transliteration rule, as indicated by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on its website (see www.mfa.gov.ir/NewsShow.aspx?id=817&menu=199&lang=en).

12-37171

51

S/2012/395

applications from Iranian nationals residing in the Islamic Republic of Iran to
prevent potential misuses.
245. Host nation obligations. One State reported potential challenges in
connection with its obligations to host international organizations. In accordance
with host country agreements with international organizations, such Member States
are obliged to facilitate the entry into their territory, and to place no impediment in
the way of the departure from it, of persons, including representatives of States
members of the international organizations that they are hosting. The State noted
that it might encounter a situation in which a bilateral agreement with an
international organization obliged it to accept the entry of designated Iranian
individuals, even if the Security Council did not approve an exemption to the travel
ban imposed on such individuals.
5.

Conclusions
246. Additional biographical information, such as place and date of birth, passport
numbers and parents’ names, are necessary for the effective enforcement of travel
ban provisions. Additional useful information could include alternative spellings of
names, noms de guerre, known addresses, photographs and biometric data.
247. One State reported a four-fold increase in applications for second passports by
Iranian citizens. This practice is common to several countries and should be brought
to the attention of Member States.

IV. Recommendations
248. The Panel recommends to the Security Council and the Committee, in
accordance with existing practice, the designation of the following two entities
found to be in violation of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747: Yas Air, for the
transport of prohibited arms and materiel from the Islamic Republic of Iran as
described in the Yas Air (Turkey) case, and SAD Import Export Company, for
its role as a trading agent of prohibited arms and related materiel as described
in the Kilis (Turkey) case. Both recommended designations are supported by
strong documentary and factual evidence.
249. In addition, the Panel draws the attention of the Security Council and the
Committee to the Chemical Industries and Development of Materials Group.
250. The Panel recommends that the Security Council and the Committee
remind Member States of their duty to report incidents of non-compliance and
interdictions. The Panel further recommends that Member States be requested
to share information, as appropriate, regarding attempts to circumvent
sanctions. The Panel welcomes information, in particular regarding designated
Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps and Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping
Lines entities, including information from flag States accepting Islamic
Republic of Iran Shipping Lines registrations.
251. The Panel recommends that the Committee encourage Member States
hosting industrial facilities producing dual-use items necessary for prohibited
nuclear and ballistic missile programmes, such as high grades of carbon fibre,
to undertake an organized outreach effort to the manufacturing industry to
alert its member companies of possible avenues for procurement by the Islamic

52

12-37171

S/2012/395

Republic of Iran. Information regarding such outreach efforts should be shared
with the Panel, as appropriate.
252. The Panel recommends that the Committee encourage Member States to
undertake outreach initiatives targeting in particular small and medium-sized
enterprises, with the aim of establishing appropriate compliance procedures in
order to meet obligations under Security Council resolutions.
253. The Panel recommends that the Committee remind Member States of the
need to maintain a high degree of vigilance over goods transported to and from
the Islamic Republic of Iran, whether by sea, air or overland, including rail and
road transport. Such vigilance could include requesting technical stopovers for
the purpose of inspecting suspicious cargoes when granting overflight rights to
and from the Islamic Republic of Iran. This vigilance should not be restricted
to zones geographically adjacent to the Islamic Republic of Iran given the
global reach of Iranian activities.
254. The Panel recommends that the Committee draw the attention of Member
States to the new Financial Action Task Force standard on financing of
proliferation, in particular when implementing targeted financial sanctions on
the Islamic Republic of Iran.
255. The Panel recommends that the Committee clarify the measures expected
of Member States in implementing sanctions against designated Islamic
Republic of Iran Shipping Lines entities, in particular with regard to “financial
assets and economic resources”, and whether this includes the obligation to
seize vessels.
256. The Panel recommends that the Committee address discrepancies between
the lists of individuals designated under resolution 1929 (2010) and previous
resolutions, and those who now hold the positions identified in these
designations.
257. The Panel recommends that the Committee seek from Member States, on
a voluntary basis, additional identifying information regarding designated
individuals in order to allow more accurate identification of such individuals
and to eliminate false matches.
258. The Panel requests that the Committee consider updating the lists
referred to in paragraph 13 of resolution 1929 (2010).

12-37171

53

S/2012/395

Annex I
Reports submitted to the Committee
Midterm report: S/AC.50/2011/COMM.87
Inspection and investigation reports:
Space launch vehicle: S/AC.50/2011/NOTE.43
International Security Assistance Force: S/AC.50/2011/NOTE.44
Yas Air (Turkey): S/AC.50/2011/NOTE.47
Kilis (Turkey): S/AC.50/2012/NOTE.10
Quarterly assessments of national implementation reports:
July 2011: S/AC.50/2011/COMM.7/Add.2
October 2011: S/AC.50/2011/COMM.7/Add.3
January 2012: S/AC.50/2012/COMM.8
April 2012: S/AC.50/2012/COMM.36

54

12-37171

S/2012/395

Annex II
List of countries visited
Armenia
Australia
Bahrain
Belarus
Belgium
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
India
Israel
Kenya
Malaysia
Morocco
Norway
Oman
Romania
Singapore
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Viet Nam

12-37171

55

Uranium mining and processing in the Islamic Republic of Iran
Gchine Mine and Mill — 2009

Source: GeoEye via Google Earth.

Gchine Mine and Mill — 2012

Source: DigitalGlobe — Institute for Science and
International Security.

S/2012/395

56

Annex III

12-37171

12-37171

Saghand Mine — October 2009

Saghand Mine — March 2012

Source: DigitalGlobe — Institute for Science and International Security.
Source: GeoEye via Google Earth.

Indications of some tunnelling activity, but no evidence of open
stockpiling of ore. There are more buildings and paved roads
compared to 2009.

S/2012/395

57

Ardakan Yellowcake
Production Plant — May 2009

(not operational)

(not operational)

Source: GeoEye via Google Earth.

Source: DigitalGlobe — Institute for Science and
International Security.

S/2012/395

58

Ardakan Yellowcake
Production Plant — 2012

12-37171

S/2012/395

Annex IV
Physical properties and operating limits of possible
centrifuge materials

Source: Manson Benedict and others, Nuclear Chemical Engineering, 2nd ed. (New York,
McGraw-Hill, 1981), p. 855.

12-37171

59

S/2012/395

Annex V
Advanced centrifuges

IR-1 centrifuges

Source: GOV/2012/9 and previous IAEA reports.

60

12-37171

S/2012/395

Annex VI
Iranian carbon fibre production
The Panel’s insight into indigenous carbon fibre production capacity of the
Islamic Republic of Iran is limited to a single media report including a severalminute-long video tour of its production facilities, including the operation of its
oxidation oven, furnace and spool-winders. a In the report, it is noted that the
Iranian-produced carbon fibre is intended for the country’s aerospace and energy
sectors. The following describes the multi-step process of producing carbon fibre in
the context of the Islamic Republic of Iran’s facilities reviewed in the present report.
The Panel consulted two independent industry experts in the production of carbon
fibre in its assessment of the media report.
In the first stage of the production process, carbon fibre consists of palecoloured or white, fine, fibrous strands on rolls known as creels; the fibres are
unspooled as they feed into an oxidation oven where they turn progressively darker
shades of amber and eventually black. Problems can occur at this stage if the fibres
twist or become uneven and broken, as they appear to in the video of the Iranian
production line. According to one of the experts consulted by the Panel, the oven
appears to run more slowly than a more modern oxidation oven, but is judged to be
in reasonable condition. The Panel notes that oxidation ovens can be purchased
without licences from many suppliers. It is also not known whether the Islamic
Republic of Iran has access to the precursor chemical, polyacrylonitrile, for the
production of high-grade carbon fibre.
In the second stage of the production process, the now black fibres go through
the process of carbonization, in which they are processed through a series of
furnaces, from low to high temperature, to 2,000° C (in more sophisticated carbon
fibre production, there would be a third, ultra-high-temperature furnace, which is
subject to stringent export controls). The Iranian furnaces appear to be some 30
years old. This step in the process produces hydrogen cyanide, a dangerous chemical
for which monitors or detectors are needed.
In the third step of the process, the surface of the fibres is treated with a
chemical abrasion process to make it rough and more receptive to a coating applied
in the next stage. The Iranian chemical abrasion equipment was judged not to be
modern but capable of doing the job.
A glue-like treatment, referred to sizing, is applied to the surface of the fibres
in the next stage, after which the fibres are dried and rewound on spool-winders.
The Islamic Republic of Iran’s spool-winders appear to be used and not of recent
vintage.
The carbon fibre produced in the facility viewed in this clip is assessed by
experts in carbon fibre production and manufacturing not to be suitable for use in
Iranian centrifuges.

__________________
a See www.youtube.com/watch?v=tP_2HakdKCA.

12-37171

61

S/2012/395

Annex VII
Export controls and carbon fibre
In its resolution 1929 (2010), the Security Council barred the transfer to the
Islamic Republic of Iran of items contained in document INFCIRC/254/Rev.7/Part 2.
With regard to carbon fibre, this document defines as sensitive:
“Fibrous or filamentary materials” and prepregs, as follows: a
a.

b.

c.

Carbon or aramid “fibrous or filamentary materials” having either
of the following characteristics:
1.

A “specific modulus” of 12.7 x 106m or greater; or

2.

A “specific tensile strength” of 23.5 x 104m or greater;

Glass “fibrous or filamentary materials” having both of the
following characteristics:
1.

A “specific modulus” of 3.18 x 10 6m or greater; and

2.

A “specific tensile strength” of 7.62 x 104m or greater;

Thermoset resin impregnated continuous “yarns”, “rovings”, “tows”
or “tapes” with a width of 15 mm or less (prepregs), made from
carbon or glass “fibrous or filamentary materials” specified in
Item 2.C.7.a. or Item 2.C.7.b.

__________________
a Item 2.C.7.a. does not control aramid “fibrous or filamentary materials” having 0.25 per cent or

more by weight of an ester-based fibre surface modifier.

62

12-37171

S/2012/395

Annex VIII
Iranian rockets and missiles
Missile

Fuel type

Estimated range

Payload

Fajr-3

Solid

45 km

45 kg

Fajr-5

Solid

70-80 km

90 kg

Fateh-110

Solid

200 km

500 kg

Ghadr-1

Liquid

1 600 km

750 kg

Iran-130/Nazeat

Solid

90-120 km

150 kg

Nazeat-6

Solid

100 km

150 kg

Nazeat-10

Solid

140-150 km

250 kg

Oghab

Solid

40 km

70 kg

Qiam 1

Liquid

500-1 000 km

500 kg

Sejil/Ashura

Solid

2000-2 500 km

750 kg

Shahab-1

Liquid

300 km

1000 kg

Shahab-2

Liquid

500 km

730 kg

Shahab-3

Liquid

800-1 300 km

760-1 100 kg

Zelzal-1

Solid

125 km

600 kg

Zelzal-2

Solid

200 km

600 kg

Source: Information provided by Member States and “Iran’s Ballistic Missile Capabilities: A Net
Assessment”, IISS, 2010.

12-37171

63

S/2012/395

64

Annex IX
Incidents inspected by the Panel in 2011-2012
United
Nations item
number

United
Nations class

Incident

Item

Seizure by the
International Security
Assistance Force on
5 February 2011 of
missiles in Southern
Afghanistan, reported
to the Committee in a
letter dated 21 April
2011

122-mm
rockets

n/a

n/a

48 Approx.
64 kg

Fuses

n/a

n/a

49 0.680.70 kg

7.62-mm
ammunition

n/a

n/a

1 000 n/a

AK-47
assault rifles

n/a

n/a

60 n/a

BKC (Bixi)
machine
guns

n/a

n/a

14 n/a

BKC/AK-47
ammunition

n/a

n/a

7 920 n/a

60-mm
n/a
mortar shells

n/a

560 n/a

120-mm
n/a
mortar shells

n/a

1 288 n/a

Seizure by the Turkish
authorities on 19 March
2011 of arms and
ammunition, reported
to the Committee in a
letter dated 28 March
2011

Quantity

Weight

Country of origin

Country of seizure

Country of
destination

Mode of
transportation

Highly
Afghanistan
probable
Islamic
Republic of
Iran
(continuing
investigation
by the Panel)

Afghanistan Truck

Islamic
Republic of
Iran

Syrian Arab
Republic

Turkey

Aeroplane

12-37171

12-37171

Incident

Item

United
Nations item
number

Seizure by the Turkish
authorities on 15
February 2011 of arms
and related materiel,
reported to the
Committee in a letter
dated 12 January 2012

Powder M9

27

1.1D

2 boxes 890 kg

Propelling
charge

160

1.3C

2 boxes 1 400 kg

Slow-burning 1325
material

4.1

1 box 30 kg

Sensitive
material

121

1.1G

1 box 10 kg

Rocket fuel

186

1.3C

6 pallets 2 643 kg

RDX

483

1.1D

2 pallets 1 700 kg

United
Nations class

Quantity

Weight

Country of origin

Country of seizure

Islamic
Republic of
Iran

Turkey

Country of
destination

Mode of
transportation

Syrian Arab
Republic

Truck

S/2012/395

65

S/2012/395

Annex X
Vessels and entities controlled by the Irano Hind
Shipping Company
List of vessels and registered owners (R/O)
Vessel

Flag

International Maritime
Organization No.

Teen

Malta

9101649

BIIS Maritime
Limited

Malta/Panama

Attar

Malta

9074092

ISIM ATR
Limited

Malta

Sattar

Malta

9040479

ISIM Sat
Limited

Malta

ISI Olive

Bolivia

9003237

ISIM Olive
Limited

Malta

Amin

Bolivia

9422366

ISIM Amin
Limited

Malta

Sinin

Malta

9274941

ISIM Sinin
Limited

Malta

Tour

Bolivia
9364112
(Plurinational
State of)

ISIM Tour
Limited

Malta

Taj Mahal

Malta

Irano Hind
Shipping
Company

Islamic Republic
of Iran (not in
operation)

9459046

Registered owner

Country of
registered owner

List of other companies related to the Irano Hind Shipping Company
ISI Maritime Limited
ISIM Taj Mahal Limited
ISIM Sea Chariot Limited
ISIM Sea Crescent Limited
Imir Limited

66

12-37171

S/2012/395

List of container carriers previously controlled by the Irano Hind
Shipping Company

Vessel

Flag

International
Maritime
Organization No.

Neri

Malta

9148491

Bai Handelas Limited

Malta

Melish

Malta

9148518

Bai Lai Limited

Malta

Registered owner

R/O Registered

Note: Bai Handelas Limited and Bai Lai Limited are owned by Transatlantik Denizcilik Limited
(registered in Turkey).

12-37171

67
