A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/124
23 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 102
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/50/624)]
50/124.

Implementation of the Programme of Action of
the International Conference on Population
and Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/128 of 19 December 1994 on the report of
the International Conference on Population and Development, 1/ and 48/162 of
20 December 1993 on the restructuring and revitalization of the United Nations
in the economic, social and related fields,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council decision 1994/227 of 14 July
1994, by which the Council approved the provisional agenda and documentation
for the twenty-eighth session of the then Population Commission, including
discussion of the implications of the recommendations of the International
Conference on Population and Development,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1995/55 of 28
July 1995 on the implementation of the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development, 2/ by which the
Council endorsed the terms of reference proposed by the renamed Commission on
Population and Development in its report on its twenty-eighth session, 3/
which reflect the comprehensive and integrated nature of population and
development,

1/
Report of the International Conference on Population and
Development, Cairo, 5-13 September 1994 (A/CONF.171/13/Rev.1) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18).
2/

Ibid., chap. I, resolution 1, annex.

3/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1995,
Supplement No. 7 (E/1995/27), annex I.
96-76795

/...

A/RES/50/124
Page 2

Acknowledging fully the integrated approach taken during the
International Conference on Population and Development, which recognizes the
interrelationship between population, sustained economic growth and
sustainable development,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General 4/ on the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 49/128 on the report of the
International Conference on Population and Development,
Recognizing that the implementation of the recommendations contained in
the Programme of Action is the sovereign right of every country, in accordance
with its national laws and development priorities, with full respect for the
various religious and ethical values and cultural backgrounds of its peoples
and in conformity with universally recognized international human rights,
Reaffirming the importance of the principles and concepts set out in the
Rio Declaration on Environment and Development 5/ and Agenda 21 6/ for the
purpose of implementing the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development, and in that regard recognizing that
chapter 5 of Agenda 21 6/ and chapter III of the Programme of Action 2/
reinforce one another and together form a comprehensive and compelling up-todate account of what needs to be done about the interface between population,
environment and sustainable development,
Noting with satisfaction the contribution that the outcome of the
International Conference on Population and Development has made to the World
Summit for Social Development and the Fourth World Conference on Women, and
expressing its belief in the contribution that the outcome of the
International Conference on Population and Development will make to the
forthcoming United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and in
the elaboration of an agenda for development, in particular with regard to the
call for a greater investment in people,
1.
Notes the action taken so far by Governments and the international
community to implement the Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development, and encourages them to strengthen their efforts
in that regard;
2.
Reiterates its commitment to the full implementation of the
Programme of Action, and reaffirms that Governments should continue to commit
themselves at the highest political level to achieving its goals and
objectives, which reflect a new integrated approach to population and
development, and to take a lead role in coordinating the implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of the follow-up actions;
3.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the SecretaryGeneral 4/ on the implementation of General Assembly resolution 49/128 and of
the proposals contained therein;

4/

A/50/190-E/1995/73.

5/
See Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference, resolution 1, annex I.
6/

Ibid., annex II.
/...

A/RES/50/124
Page 3

4.
Takes note of the following proposals made by the United Nations
Population Fund in the above-mentioned report:
(a)
To replace the biennial report of the Fund to the Commission on
Population and Development on multilateral population assistance by an annual
report on the amount of financial resources allocated for the implementation
of the Programme of Action at the national and international levels;
(b)
To refine and improve further, where necessary, the current system
devoted to monitoring the amount of international assistance for programmes
dealing with population and development so as to render it more accurate;
5.
Endorses Economic and Social Council decision 1995/320 of 12
December 1995, by which it enlarged the membership of the Commission on
Population and Development from 27 to 47 members, elected by the Council from
among the members of the United Nations and members of its specialized
agencies, in time to take part in the twenty-ninth session of the Commission,
and that the regional representation would be 12 for African States, 11 for
Asian States, 5 for Eastern European States, 9 for Latin American and
Caribbean States and 10 for Western European and Other States, bearing in mind
that the representatives of Governments that are to serve on the Commission
should have a relevant background in population and development, in order to
ensure that it fulfils its functions as reflected in its updated and enhanced
mandate, taking into account the integrated multidisciplinary and
comprehensive approach of the Programme of Action and the membership of the
other functional commissions of the Council;
6.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on monitoring
world population trends and policies, 7/ and of the Executive Director of
the United Nations Population Fund on monitoring multilateral population
assistance; 8/
7.
Renews its call to all Governments, organizations of the United
Nations system and other major groups concerned with population and
development issues, including intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, parliamentarians and other community leaders, to continue to
give the widest possible dissemination to the Programme of Action, including
the use of electronic data networks, to seek public support for its goals,
objectives and actions, and to maintain and enhance partnership between
Governments and non-governmental organizations so as to ensure their continued
contributions and cooperation concerning all aspects of population and
development;
8.
Urges Governments that have not yet done so to establish
appropriate national follow-up mechanisms, in partnership with
non-governmental organizations, community groups and representatives of the
media and the academic community, and to seek the support of parliamentarians
so as to ensure the full implementation of the Programme of Action;
9.
Reaffirms that the follow-up to the Conference, at all levels,
should take fully into account that population, health, education, poverty,
patterns of production and consumption, empowerment of women and the
environment are closely interconnected and should be considered through an
integrated approach;

7/

E/CN.9/1995/2.

8/

E/CN.9/1995/4.
/...

A/RES/50/124
Page 4

10.
Urges all countries to consider their current spending priorities
with a view to making additional contributions for the implementation of the
Programme of Action, taking into account the provisions of chapters XIII and
XIV thereof 2/ and the economic constraints faced by developing countries, in
particular the least developed among them, and emphasizes that international
cooperation in the field of population and development is essential for the
implementation of the recommendations adopted at the Conference; and in this
context, calls upon the international community to continue to provide, both
bilaterally and multilaterally, adequate and substantial support and
assistance for population and development activities, including through the
United Nations Population Fund and other organs and organizations of the
United Nations system and the specialized agencies that will be involved in
the implementation, at all levels, of the Programme of Action;
11.
Reiterates the importance of South-South cooperation for the
successful implementation of the Programme of Action;
12.
Reaffirms that the effective implementation of the Programme of
Action will require an increased commitment of financial resources, both
domestically and externally, and, in this context, calls upon the developed
countries to complement the national financial efforts of developing countries
on population and development and to intensify their efforts to transfer new
and additional resources to the developing countries, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Programme of Action, in order to ensure that
population and development objectives and goals are met;
13.
Acknowledges that countries with economies in transition should
receive temporary assistance for population and development activities, in
view of the difficult economic and social problems faced by those countries at
present;
14.
Urges the international community to promote a supportive
international economic environment by adopting favourable macroeconomic
policies aimed at promoting sustained economic growth and sustainable
development;
15.
Emphasizes the importance of the early identification and
allocation of financial resources by all members of the international
community, including regional financial institutions, to enable them to fulfil
their commitments with regard to the implementation of the Programme of
Action;
16.
Invites the Secretary-General to ensure that adequate resources
are provided for the Conference follow-up activities to be carried out by the
Secretariat during 1996;
17.
Invites the regional commissions, other regional and subregional
organizations and the development banks to continue to examine and analyse the
results of implementation of the Programme of Action at the regional level
under their respective mandates;
18.
Welcomes the work undertaken by the Inter-Agency Task Force on the
Implementation of the Programme of Action, chaired by the Executive Director
of the United Nations Population Fund, and stresses the importance of
continued and enhanced cooperation and coordination by all relevant organs,
organizations and programmes of the United Nations system and the specialized
agencies in the implementation of the Programme of Action, and, in this
context, notes the establishment of new inter-agency task forces for the
follow-up to conferences, which could be relevant for the implementation and
follow-up to the International Conference on Population and Development;

/...

A/RES/50/124
Page 5

19.
Emphasizes the need to maintain the momentum of the follow-up
activities relating to the Conference and the Programme of Action so as to
utilize, to the fullest extent possible, existing capacity within the United
Nations system in the area of population and development, including the
Commission on Population and Development, the Population Division of the
Department for Economic and Social Information and Policy Analysis of the
Secretariat and the United Nations Population Fund, other organizations, funds
and programmes of the United Nations and the specialized agencies whose
continued support and commitment are required for the successful
implementation of the full range of activities outlined in the Programme of
Action, and invites them to work closely in the preparation of reports for the
Commission on Population and Development;
20.
Requests the specialized agencies and all related organizations of
the United Nations system to continue to take appropriate measures to ensure
the full and effective implementation of the Programme of Action, taking into
account the specific needs of developing countries, and welcomes the intention
of the Secretary-General to report through the Commission on Population and
Development to the Economic and Social Council at its substantive session of
1996 on the work of the Inter-Agency Task Force, for coordination purposes,
and to the General Assembly at its fifty-first session, for policy
implications;
21.

Requests the Economic and Social Council:

To consider relevant reports and give guidance on matters
(a)
concerning harmonization, cooperation and coordination within the United
Nations system regarding the implementation of the Programme of Action;
(b)
To consider, as appropriate, the reports submitted by the
different bodies and organs on various matters related to the Programme of
Action;
(c)
To consider the proposed report on the work of the Inter-Agency
Task Force;
22.
Requests the funds and programmes of the United Nations system and
the regional commissions and funds to continue to provide their full and
active support to the implementation of the Programme of Action, in particular
at the field level, through the United Nations resident coordinator system,
and invites the relevant specialized agencies to do the same;
23.
Requests the Secretary-General to report, through the Economic and
Social Council, to the General Assembly at its fifty-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
24.
Decides to include in the agenda of its fifty-first session,
within existing clusters, the item entitled "Implementation of the Programme
of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development".
96th plenary meeting
20 December 1995
