United Nations

S/PV.4336

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4336th meeting
Tuesday, 26 June 2001, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Chowdhury . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bangladesh)

Members:

China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Ryan
Miss Durrant
Mr. Kassé
Mr. Neewor
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Lavrov
Ms. Lee
Mr. Mejdoub
Mr. Kuchinsky
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 15 June 2001 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2001/597).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-42649 (E)

*0142649*

S/PV.4336

The meeting was called to order at 3.55 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 15 June 2001 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to
the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2000/597)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Canada,
Germany, India, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and Yemen,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Douri
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Stuart
(Australia), Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria), Mr. Buallay
(Bahrain), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Kastrup
(Germany), Mr. Sharma (India), Mr. Francese
(Italy), Mr. Akasaka (Japan), Prince Zeid Ra’ad
Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan), Mr. Abulhasan
(Kuwait), Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia), Mr. van den Berg
(Netherlands), Mr. MacKay (New Zealand),
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia), Ms. Ndhlovu
(South Africa), Mr. Arias (Spain), Mr. Schori
(Sweden), Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Pamir (Turkey) and Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen)
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 25 June 2001
from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia, which
reads as follows:

2

“I have the honour to request that
Ambassador Dr. Hussein Hassouna, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the
United Nations, be allowed to participate without
the right to vote in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the United Nations Charter and rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council in the Council’s discussion of
the item presently on its agenda, ‘The situation
between Iraq and Kuwait’.”
This letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2001/631. If I
hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to extend an invitation under rule 39 to Mr. Hassouna.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Hassouna to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in response to the request contained in a letter
dated 15 June 2001 from the Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document S/2001/597.
I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2001/603, which contains
the text of a letter dated 18 June 2001 from the
Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation proposed the
convening of today’s meeting in this open format, with
the participation of all interested States, in order to
consider ways of improving the humanitarian situation
in Iraq under the devastating sanctions that have been
in place for so many years, as well as the question of a
comprehensive post-conflict settlement in the Gulf
region on the basis of relevant Security Council
resolutions.
Resolution 1352 (2001) of 1 June clearly defined
the main goal of possible changes in the Iraqi
humanitarian programme: facilitating trade and
economic ties between Iraq and the rest of the world.
Accordingly, we participated in work on various
possible ways of improving the humanitarian operation
and very seriously considered all the various proposals
made, including the draft resolution submitted by the
United Kingdom.

S/PV.4336

I must say frankly that the deeper we get into the
details of proposed changes in the sanctions regime,
the more our doubts grow as to the feasibility of the
concept enshrined in that draft and its political viability
vis-à-vis the prospects for a lasting settlement in Iraq.

oil, industrial and other areas of Iraq’s economy. An
analysis demonstrates that this list of goods would not
be broader, but would be rather more prohibitive. Its
approval could undermine prospects for the industrial
development of Iraq.

One basic element is that the system proposed in
the draft resolution leads us away from the task of full
implementation of Security Council resolutions on Iraq
and basically requires the freezing of the current
situation, in which sanctions are preserved with
unacceptable consequences for the people and
economy of Iraq and no progress is made on
disarmament. Specifically, the key elements of the
United Kingdom draft appear to lead not to easing the
very harsh economic situation of Iraq, but rather to
tightening the sanctions.

The draft resolution contains nothing investment
or economic projects — and not only infrastructure
projects — which runs contrary to resolution 1352
(2001) in respect of facilitating economic ties with
Iraq. There is also total silence concerning the fate of
the Memorandum of Understanding between Iraq and
the United Nations, on which the humanitarian
programme has been based to date. It would therefore
appear that this new scheme is to be introduced without
Baghdad’s consent, and that is utterly unrealistic.
Moreover, it is contrary to the decisions of the Council
concerning the need to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq.

Many questions are raised by the authors’
proposal of a “goods review list” for deliveries to Iraq.
Until recently, the Security Council proceeded on the
premise that, in order to ensure that Iraq did not resume
its programme of weapons of mass destruction, it was
quite sufficient to have the so-called “1051 list”,
including in the post-sanctions period. That list is
already in effect and a procedure in place for its regular
review. Such a review has just been carried out by the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the revised list requires
further study. In any event, we believe that the list will
continue to be applied on the basis of resolution 1051
(1996).
It is now being said that the authors of the new
concept regard the “1051 list” as inadequate. They
want to include in their “goods review list” goods from
the so-called Wassenaar Arrangements. Those
Arrangements, however, which bring together a limited
group of countries on a voluntary basis, are already
being applied in practice, inter alia, in respect of Iraq.
Giving those Arrangements a “sanctions status” under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations would
have very serious legal and political consequences.
Above and beyond the Wassenaar Arrangements,
a third part is being proposed for this “goods review
list”, in which there would be a list of additional
products also subject to monitoring for delivery into
Iraq. Included in this third category are goods defined
in such a way that it would be possible, via very
vague procedures for considering contracts, to block
projects that are essential to the recovery of the energy,

Overall, the concept that has been put together
changes the very essence of the humanitarian
programme of the United Nations, politicizes it and
makes it and UNMOVIC into an instrument for
applying sanctions pressure. Attempts to use the
humanitarian operation to resolve tasks unrelated to it
would bury all hope for a resumption of ongoing
disarmament monitoring in Iraq and the legal lifting of
the anti-Iraq sanctions, pursuant to Security Council
decisions.
The perpetuation of sanctions can make the
situation in the Gulf much worse. Given the conditions
of the crisis in the Middle East, this would raise
regional tension to a qualitatively new level of danger.
Neighbouring States of Iraq and other States of the
region already see this new concept as a threat to their
new socio-economic and political stability. We are also
concerned that, as a result of introducing these socalled “smart” sanctions, serious damage could be done
to the legitimate trade and economic interests of many
countries, including Russia.
We feel that the adoption of the proposed draft
resolution on smart sanctions would be detrimental to
averting the humanitarian catastrophe, devastate the
Iraqi economy and work against a post-conflict
settlement in the Gulf region.
Taking account of all these factors, we cannot
agree to this draft resolution, which seems
unadoptable. This certainly does not mean that Russia
is not prepared to discuss further questions of how the

3

S/PV.4336

humanitarian operation functions. However, such a
discussion must not be politicized and must be geared
towards reaching agreement on measures that would
genuinely improve the humanitarian programme in
order to undertake tasks that are truly humanitarian.

immediate: to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people
and take whatever steps we can from outside to ensure
that their needs are met. To this extent, we agree with
the Russian Federation that the status quo is not
acceptable.

At the same time, Russia feels that we must delay
no longer the resumption of Security Council work on
a comprehensive settlement of the Iraqi problem.
Everyone knows that this work was interrupted because
of the hasty adoption of resolution 1284 (1999), which
contained too many gaps and too much ambiguity that
made the resolution not implementable in its current
form. Since then, we have consistently advocated
creating the necessary conditions and mechanisms for
implementing the resolution, but some States members
of the Security Council did not want that. The deadlock
that has arisen as a result made us unable to implement
the Secretary-General’s initiative concerning a
comprehensive dialogue between the United Nations
and Iraq on all pending problems.

These two principles are embodied in resolution
1284 (1999), which remains the comprehensive
framework for the Council’s approach to Iraq. This
resolution instituted various steps to relieve the human
suffering in Iraq. It also sets out a route forward for
Iraq to the suspension and lifting of sanctions if Iraq
chooses to cooperate with the United Nations in
meeting its disarmament obligations. That route map
remains the Council’s policy and the only credible way
forward; and the implementation of resolution 1284
(1999) is supported by all Council members because it
will mean the end of sanctions. There is no good reason
to back away from or to alter that framework, nor does
the United Kingdom have any wish to do so.

We regard the status quo as unacceptable, so
today we have introduced a specific proposal that
contains clear criteria for suspending and then lifting
sanctions that are tied to the deployment in Iraq of the
ongoing monitoring and verification system on the
basis of implementation of existing resolutions of the
Security Council. We are convinced that there is simply
no alternative to this comprehensive approach if we all
want to achieve a lasting settlement around Iraq and in
the entire Gulf region that is strictly in accordance with
resolutions of the United Nations.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes this meeting. The Security
Council is at an important point in its consideration of
this issue. It is right for us to hear the views of other
Members of the United Nations before we take
decisions.
There are two principles which have guided us
and must continue to guide us in the Council in
handling Iraq. They are clearly enshrined in resolution
1352 (2001). First, it is our responsibility in the
Council to prevent Iraq from posing a threat to its
region and, as part of this, to ensure that Iraq is fully
and verifiably disarmed of its weapons of mass
destruction. Until this is the case, it is the responsibility
of the Council to ensure that Iraq cannot rearm and
cannot once again pose a threat to its neighbours. The
second principle is as important and even more

4

If Iraq decided to cooperate with resolution 1284
(1999), we are all willing to work with them without
any further delay. Let us be clear, resolution 1284
(1999) has not been implemented because Iraq has
refused to implement it. That cannot be the basis for
any kind of renegotiation of its terms. But if Iraq
indicates a willingness to move forward, the Council
will undoubtedly wish to reciprocate by fleshing out in
detail the precise steps that need to be taken. To move
while Iraq continues to reject the Council’s position
will only serve Iraq’s wish to divide the Council and to
avoid its international obligations. I repeat: the only
route to the ending of sanctions lies through the
confidence of the Security Council, living up to its
responsibilities, that Iraq has disarmed in accordance
with the resolutions.
We now have before us a series of proposals, set
out by the United Kingdom in our draft resolution, to
allow Iraq to import the full range of civilian goods
without restriction. Three weeks ago, in resolution
1352 (2001), the Council agreed to spend a month
examining and refining those proposals and, at the end
of that month, to agree on a new set of arrangements. I
emphasize that the aim was not to replace the Council’s
comprehensive approach in resolution 1284 (1999), but
to do two things: to set in place measures to liberalize
the flow of goods to Iraq and, at the same time, to
examine ways to make sure that military-related items
are not exported to Iraq.

S/PV.4336

These are two goals supported by the whole
Council and, I am sure, by the entire United Nations
membership. Resolution 1352 (2001) represented an
unusual agreement in the Council on these two aims
and gave hope to the wider world that we had gathered
some momentum and a sense of responsibility. In
agreeing on that resolution, all Council members
accepted that the measures should be instituted quickly,
and that a month was a reasonable target within which
to agree on the new proposals in detail.
That month is nearly up. There have been
intensive discussions at the expert level covering every
aspect of our proposals. Differences remain. It would
be naïve to expect agreement on every point, but
compromises have been worked out on many issues
and there is now no good reason why a decision should
not be taken to institute a set of arrangements to fulfil
the dual purpose set out in resolution 1352 (2001). My
delegation will continue to work as hard as it takes to
meet that deadline.
Clearly, others are less optimistic, or less
determined. We should examine their reasoning
carefully. The Council now has the chance to agree
upon and implement changes that will make an
immediate and positive difference to the flow of
civilian goods to ordinary Iraqis. Iraq is opposing these
changes because it wishes to freeze the work of the
Council and escape from its obligations. It has
calculated that time and international inertia will be on
its side. In that respect, the Council is being
challenged.
Let me say in all frankness that none of us, on
this issue in particular, can allow national economic
self-interest to hold up positive measures for the Iraqi
people. Having successfully negotiated the unanimous
adoption of resolution 1352 (2001), we must
collectively ensure that the two principles of that
resolution are the principles which guide us now.
The new proposals contained in the British draft
resolution will make an important and significant
difference to the flow of goods to Iraq. From a
situation where no export is allowed unless approved
by the Security Council Committee established by
resolution 661 (1990), we will move to a situation
where every export is allowed except for a very limited
range of items which must be reviewed by the 661
Committee on the basis of criteria related to their
potential military use. Even for those items, there is no

presumption of denial. We believe this change will
bring a dramatic improvement in the flow of goods and
a dramatic reduction in the level of holds. Even within
that limited category of items reviewed by the
Committee, we intend to allow the export of a good
number if there is proper monitoring.
The current discussion of the Goods Review List,
contrary to the Russian Federation’s contention, is a
search for clarity and therefore for ease of procedure,
and not a search for broadening or tightening. We are
even now constructively negotiating on the Goods
Review List.
We are fully aware that in many cases sensitive
items can form a key component of larger civilian
projects which must be allowed to go forward if the
economic infrastructure of Iraq is to be rebuilt. We
want to see the ordinary civilian infrastructure
reconstructed in Iraq, and our attitude to individual
items reviewed by the Committee will be guided by
that philosophy.
At the same time, we all have to continue to
exercise our responsibility to ensure that items are not
exported to Iraq that, unless closely supervised, will
allow Iraq to rebuild its military capability.
Accompanying these changes, there should be a
slimming down in the bureaucracy facing those who
wish to export goods to Iraq or operate projects there.
Procedures will be simplified. There will be no reason
why Iraq cannot import the civilian goods it needs. The
funds are there, and with these proposals Iraq will have
the freedom to purchase all necessary civilian items.
There is no intention in this draft resolution to harm the
economic interests of neighbouring States or others
doing legitimate business with Iraq. We expect to see
an expansion of civilian trade, which will benefit all.
There will be no reason why Iraq cannot import a full
range of civilian goods, and Iraq will have no pretext to
blame the United Nations for the suffering of the Iraqi
people. The new proposals will nail that false charge
once and for all.
The capacity to rebuild military potential, against
the rulings of the Security Council, is related to the
flow of money, as well as to the flow of goods. Do not
make the mistake, as some do, of confusing the Iraqi
civilian economy with the economic activities of the
Iraqi Government. We are all aware that Iraq continues
to export oil outside the United Nations system to build
up illegal revenue with which it can purchase weapons

5

S/PV.4336

and other proscribed items. There is worrying evidence
that such items continue to find their way into Iraq.
This traffic has to be controlled if the resolutions of the
Council are to have their intended effect.
Our draft resolution would ask the SecretaryGeneral to consult and cooperate with the neighbouring
States to address these problems. There are also
obligations on supplier countries. We are not laying
blame, but each one of us must be vigilant to ensure
that illegal flows are prevented.
The logic of those who argue that our proposed
measures will damage or set aside the policies set out
in resolution 1284 (1999) is precisely wrong. The aim
of all of us is the ending of sanctions. The period
December 1999 to June 2001 has seen no progress
towards that objective because Iraq has preferred the
continuation of sanctions, whatever the effect on the
Iraqi people, to acceptance of the disarmament process
set out in resolution 687 (1991) and resolution 1284
(1999). Doing nothing now will not change that. Nor
will any proposal to alter the conditions of resolution
1284 (1999) change that. Adoption of our draft
resolution will change the situation. There will be an
immediate improvement in the lives of ordinary Iraqis,
the longest-suffering victims of the situation between
Iraq and Kuwait. And the course mapped out by
resolution 1284 (1999) is more likely to be seen as the
right one if we take steps to refocus the sanctions
policy of the Council, as resolution 687 (1991)
originally intended it. That is our primary
consideration in advocating these proposals: calculate
the quickest route, in the light of the realities, to the
ending of sanctions.
There are other steps in our draft resolution which
will move the present situation forward. Iraq will be
allowed to pay its United Nations dues from the escrow
account. Aircraft frozen and held in other States will be
allowed to return to Iraq. Steps will be taken to begin,
on an independent and objective basis, to address the
problem of the illegal oil surcharge levied by Iraq on
purchasers of Iraqi oil. In other areas, practical work
can proceed to implement decisions of the Council. For
example, we have agreed, in resolution 1330 (2000),
that Iraq should utilize funds from the escrow account
for a so-called cash component in the oil sector. We are
ready to agree to this proposal, but note with regret that
Iraq continues to block the implementation of the cash
component elsewhere in the Iraqi economy. This is an
insupportable obstruction of a step that has been

6

recommended by every United Nations agency and
humanitarian non-governmental organization in the
field, a step which these bodies believe would make a
considerable difference to improving the situation of
ordinary Iraqis. Yet again we question the true
priorities of the Iraqi Government in blocking this
improvement. Nevertheless, the oil cash component
should go forward, on a basis whereby funds cannot be
diverted for illegal use.
The United Kingdom has put forward these
proposals in good faith within the overall framework of
resolution 1284 (1999), in response to calls made by
many in the international community to alleviate the
plight of the Iraqi people. The principles of the
approach were unanimously endorsed by the Security
Council through resolution 1352 (2001). We would
find it unaccountable for the Council, or any member
of the Council, not to move forward on the basis of
those principles. The risk is that if we do not act now,
the Security Council may never be in a position to act.
There is therefore every reason for the Council to put
into practice now the approach we set out in resolution
1352 (2001).
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): is
pleased that a public debate in the Security Council
open to all Members of the United Nations is being
devoted to the question of Iraq. This is a useful first on
an issue that has occupied the attention of the Council
for 11 years now.
Maintaining the current status quo is not
satisfactory. It is not satisfactory in terms of the
authority and credibility of the Council. Its decisions
have remained a dead letter. The Council has been
unable to impose a solution.
It is not satisfactory for the Iraqi population
either. Iraq is experiencing a humanitarian crisis of
unparalleled scope. Just to take one figure, the infant
mortality rate has more than doubled since 1990. The
efforts made by the Council through the oil-for-food
programme have of course had their merit. However,
the extremely bureaucratic nature of the system and the
blocking of the functioning of the sanctions Committee
have barely made it possible to do anything other than
ensure the survival of the Iraqi people and keep them
indefinitely dependent on assistance. Iraq’s interruption
of its oil sales a month ago can only further aggravate
the situation.

S/PV.4336

Finally, it is not satisfactory for regional security.
For two and a half years the Security Council has no
longer had any inspectors in the field to verify that Iraq
has not resumed its programmes of weapons of mass
destruction. The magnitude of smuggling, a practice
representing several billion dollars, makes the validity
of the escrow account illusory.
It is essential that we find a way out of this
impasse. Despite its divisions, the Security Council is
aware of this. It endeavoured to do this by adopting
resolution 1284 (1999), which we think was an
improvement upon resolution 687 (1991). In exchange
for the return of inspectors to Iraq and the
establishment of a long-term monitoring system,
Baghdad could have speedily obtained the suspension,
and then the lifting, of sanctions. The advantage of this
proposal was to reconcile humanitarian needs with
security concerns and to provide a long-term solution.
Iraq could expect to rejoin the community of nations.
This course has not yet been taken because of Iraq’s
rejection of resolution 1284 (1999). Yet this course
remains available. resolution 687 (1991) and its
complement, resolution 1284 (1999), remain the
foundation for the Council’s work. We intend to
continue advocating the return of United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and International Atomic Energy Agency
monitors to Iraq. We welcome the preparatory work
done to this end by Mr. Blix, and we call upon Iraq to
cooperate with the United Nations and UNMOVIC.
We appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General
in the context of the dialogue he began with Iraq after
the Islamic Summit Conference in Doha last
November. We encourage the Secretary-General to
continue his dialogue with Iraq in order to better ensure
that Iraq will understand Council action, to remind it
that resolutions 687 (1991) and 1284 (1999) are the
Council’s reference points and to promote the
resumption of Iraqi oil sales and the implementation of
the oil-for-food programme.
We would like Iraq to respond to that willingness
to engage in dialogue with constructive gestures, so as
to restore trust: the return of Kuwaiti missing persons
and Kuwaiti property; adherence by Iraq to the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction; and permitting travel by the
Chairman of the sanctions Committee. An opening by
Iraq would enable the Security Council to begin

working to clarify certain elements of resolution 1284
(1999).
Difficulties in the implementation of resolutions
687 (1991) and 1284 (1999) should not prevent the
Security Council from acting. If Council action is
unified and takes into account humanitarian and
regional security needs, it will be useful. With that in
mind, we welcomed the United States proposals for
improving the functioning of the oil-for-food
programme.
For more than three years we have been
proposing significant reform of the oil-for-food
machinery. We cannot fail to support a transfer of
jurisdiction from the sanctions Committee to the
Secretariat. That ought to result in a very substantial
reduction in the number of contracts that are on hold.
That is indispensable. Even after a decrease in holds
amounting to $600 million, $3.2 billion in contracts
remain on hold in the Committee established by
resolution 661 (1990). To that we must add $1.1 billion
in contracts still being studied by the Secretariat. The
length of the list of goods subject to sanctions
Committee control and the way in which this provision
is being applied by the Committee and by the
Secretariat are key elements in ensuring the success of
this enterprise.
Easing restrictions on trade with Iraq cannot by
itself enable the economy to recover sufficiently to
respond to the humanitarian crisis. That recovery
requires the return of normal economic conditions.
That is why France has proposed that foreign
investment be authorized, as proposed by the panel
chaired two years ago by Ambassador Celso Amorim.
That is why we propose that services be approved
without delay. That is why we request that local
expenditures for the petroleum industry — the cash
component — be accepted, as the Secretary-General
proposes in his 6 June report, and as had already been
agreed in resolution 1284 (1999).
To be successful, Security Council action must be
understood and supported by the international
community, especially the main interested parties:
Iraq’s neighbours. Is it not in the name of regional
security — the situation of Iraq’s neighbours — that
the Council is exercising its authority? It therefore
seems important that the Council, through the
Secretary-General, should work in close cooperation
and coordination with those States. Everyone

7

S/PV.4336

acknowledges that what should be done is to set up
machinery for cooperation with the countries
concerned, rather than imposing Chapter VII
obligations on them. Decisions on possible trade
arrangements between Iraq and its neighbours and on
possible improvements in border controls should be
taken with the agreement of those neighbours. Such
arrangements must not jeopardize the existing
arrangement between Iraq and Jordan, which has been
accepted by the sanctions Committee. Indeed, to our
mind, that arrangement could serve as a model.
Finally, a resolution must provide solutions to
thorny problems. There must be a liberalization of air
traffic without pointless constraints and without
creating problems for Iraq’s neighbours. Iraqi arrears to
all organizations must be subject to payment. Rates of
assessment on Iraqi oil sales for the benefit of the
Compensation Commission should be the focus of a
machinery agreed upon by the Council.
We are ready to work on all these matters with a
view to agreeing on an ambitious text that will truly
address the defined objective of easing civilian
sanctions. We are looking for a way for the Security
Council to regain unity on the issue of Iraq. Without
consensus, any resolution, even if it is adopted, could
be incompletely or poorly implemented. We must build
a system that will enjoy the support of the international
community, first and foremost Iraq’s neighbours. That
is the thrust of France’s written contribution to the
present discussion. We want speedy agreement on that
basis within the timeframe set out in resolution 1352
(2001).
Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
Ten years after the Iraqi regime invaded, occupied and
brutalized Kuwait, it is useful for the Council to
remind itself of how we got to where we are now and
of what we can do together to change an unsatisfactory
situation. On 2 August 1990 and for the six months it
took for the United Nations to remove invading Iraqi
troops, the Iraq regime attempted the unthinkable: to
extinguish the existence of another United Nations
Member State.
Once the international community defeated that
attempt, the Security Council focused on ensuring that
the regime which carried out the invasion and which
remains unrepentant to this day would not have the
ability to wage war on its neighbours or to threaten
them with weapons of mass destruction ever again. To

8

this point we have been successful. The Security
Council has assumed a special role in maintaining
security in the Gulf region; Iraq continues to pose a
clear threat to that security; and it must be the
Council’s purpose to ensure that that threat remains
contained.
But it is clear that the Iraqi people have borne the
burden of the regime’s policies. The oil-for-food
programme has grown into the largest humanitarian
programme ever run by the international community. It
is a reflection of the regime’s lack of cooperation and
of its disregard for its own population that, despite the
billions of dollars that have gone into Iraq under the
programme, Iraq’s development levels have not met the
potential of the oil-for-food process. It is equally a
measure of the programme’s success that Iraq’s
development, by some standards, actually exceeds that
of some of its regional neighbours.
During these past six years, the nature of the oilfor-food programme has changed, even though the
name has not. But a better name today would be “oil
for development”, because such a term would more
accurately reflect the fact that even today the Iraqi
regime could redevelop the country using the oil-forfood programme, if it chose to do so. Instead, Iraq is
using money and oil as a weapon against the
international community. Iraq has not sold oil since the
adoption of resolution 1352 (2001); that has cost the
humanitarian programme more than half a billion
dollars, on top of the several billion dollars that Iraq
lost by shutting off oil some months ago.
Iraq has made much of the fact that its financial
liquidity will allow it to defy the international
community for several months. It has been clear for
some time that we, the international community, care
more for the Iraqi people than the regime does. As a
result, Baghdad is making clear that despite all its
protests it actually prefers the status quo to our
proposal to change the oil-for-food programme so as to
allow the Iraqi people the broadest possible contact
with the rest of the world, especially through civilian
commercial trade, and to significantly improve the
humanitarian situation in Iraq.
My Government is accustomed by now to Iraq’s
cynicism towards its own people and to its bluster and
threatening policies. We find it harder to understand,
however, why others would join in playing that game
when the status quo is clearly not satisfactory.

S/PV.4336

Let us be clear about what we are trying to
accomplish with the United Kingdom draft resolution.
Far from “freezing the present situation”, if we agree to
something like it in its current form, we will have done
nothing less than lift the sanctions on regular civilian
commercial trade with the Iraqi people. It is the height
of irony that, at the very moment my Government and
others are prepared to undertake this radical shift of
direction, we find ourselves under attack by others who
have long pressed for change to the system. These
States, like the Government of Iraq, seek to perpetuate
the status quo instead of looking ahead.
We, on the other hand, want to change the system
now so as to allow purchases of the civilian goods
needed to develop Iraq’s economy. Under the current
system, to which we will revert if the new system
cannot be brought into being, all exports to Iraq are
forbidden unless specifically permitted by Security
Council resolution or a specific decision of the
sanctions Committee. Under the proposed system,
everything is permitted unless it is contained on a list
of military or dual-use goods, in which case it will be
reviewed, not denied.
Iraq will be able to acquire everything it needs to
improve the lives of its people and to provide for the
country’s development. The Iraqi regime will be
prevented only from acquiring the few items critical to
increasing its ability to threaten international peace and
security. Almost every item that Iraq could need or
want for its civilian development will not be subject to
review by the sanctions Committee. Goods could flow
rapidly to where they are needed most under a
simplified procedure. Even items subject to control
would go to Iraq once there is confidence that they
would not be used to rebuild Iraq’s weapons of mass
destruction or improve its military capabilities.
Some continue to confuse the proposed review
list with a denial list, so let me address this once again,
because it is at the heart of the proposal. The items on
the goods review list now under negotiation will be
subject to review by the sanctions Committee. If it is
clear that the goods will only be used for civilian
purposes, those goods will be approved for export. This
is a historically significant change in the way the
United Nations does business with Iraq, and it is
directly responsive to concerns raised in this Chamber
repeatedly in the past, and contrary to assertions about
“vague procedures”, we are in fact negotiating agreed

procedures that will provide the desired clarity, at least
to almost all of the members of the Security Council.
We share concern that Iraq’s neighbours might be
damaged economically if Iraq responds to the changed
system by ending trade arrangements with them. But
there is no way to be certain about anything the
Baghdad regime might do, and Iraq has its own
interests in these trade arrangements. But it has,
however, resorted to threats. Importantly, the current
draft resolution asks nothing of the States neighbouring
Iraq, except to continue consultations with the
Secretary-General. Neither we, nor, I am sure, any
other member of the Council, would seek to impose
any particular set of rules on these countries against
their will and without their cooperation. Instead, we
suggest that we would use the next six months at least
to explore what arrangements might be beneficial in
assuring the promotion of legitimate trade by which the
Iraq regime does not acquire unauthorized items or
illicit cash.
There are a number of other issues being
considered as well in this draft resolution. These
include international civil aviation and different forms
of economic interaction that would open prospects for
the Iraqi people. A number of these have been under
discussion for some time in this Council, and if we
were able to agree on this package, it would be an
important step forward in that regard as well.
Some have suggested this new approach to be an
abandonment of resolution 1284 (1999) and a move
away from implementing the other applicable Security
Council resolutions regarding Iraq. That assertion is
fundamentally misleading. The introduction of this new
approach to Iraq is in fact a bridge between the current
situation and the existing framework of Security
Council resolutions. The Council will still need to be
certain that the region no longer faces a threat from
Iraqi weapons of mass destruction. Instead of tearing
up the Council’s longstanding approach, this proposal
ensures its survival, expands vastly the range of goods
available to the civilian population and promotes future
implementation by showing the Government of Iraq
that it has no alternative to cooperation with the United
Nations. Perhaps that is why, indeed, the Government
of Iraq prefers the status quo.
The United States of America urges all members
of the Council who want something better for the Iraqi
people to join us in taking the next step toward the

9

S/PV.4336

creation of a better – not perfect – but better system
than the one that now exists. The draft resolution now
being considered by the members of the Council,
which moves far beyond the status quo, is that next
step.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the Russian
delegation for its initiative in calling for a public
meeting of the Security Council to consider all aspects
of the Iraq question. We also appreciate your timely
scheduling of this meeting.
The Iraq question is one of the important
international questions that has been under
consideration in the Council in recent years. Before the
Council makes its decision on the Iraq question,
holding a public meeting of the Council to hear the
views of the general membership of the United Nations
will help to ensure that the Council’s decision will fully
reflect the legitimate concerns of the Member States.
This is also a positive step in the reform of the
Council’s working methods.
The Chinese Government has always advocated a
comprehensive resolution of the Iraq question on the
basis of relevant Council resolutions. The current
stalemate in the Iraq situation is not in the interest of
peace and security in the Gulf region. It does a
disservice to the authority of the Security Council and
will not be conducive to achieving the overall easing of
the humanitarian situation in Iraq. In order to break this
stalemate as soon as possible, we favour a
comprehensive approach that takes into account all
aspects of the Iraq question and the search for a way
out of the impasse on the basis of resolution 1284
(1999).
This afternoon we received a draft resolution
submitted by the Russian delegation, which
undoubtedly is a useful proposal aimed at breaking out
of the present deadlock in the Iraq situation and
bringing about an early, comprehensive resolution of
the Iraq question. We will carefully study the Russian
proposal.
On 1 June, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1352 (2001) on the Iraq question. In
accordance with this resolution, the Security Council
will consider new arrangements on the sale and supply
of goods and commodities to Iraq. It is to take a
decision by 3 July.

10

Some Council members have already put forward
draft resolutions on the new arrangements. We believe
that the Security Council should seriously consider
these drafts in the context of a comprehensive
resolution of the Iraq issue. The Chinese delegation has
actively participated in the consultations on draft
resolutions regarding the new arrangements and the
Goods Review List in a constructive and pragmatic
manner. We have tabled the Chinese Government’s
position paper and amendments.
We hope that the discussions in the Council will
be able to create conditions for breaking the stalemate
on the issue of Iraq, so that this issue — which has
been before the Council for 11 years — will not be a
perennial item on its agenda. Judging from the weeks
of discussion — whether they have been inside or
outside the Council — there are still quite a number of
serious differences regarding the new arrangements. I
wish to make a few comments on the comprehensive
settlement of the issue of Iraq in the context of these
discussions.
First, resolution 1352 (2001) points out that the
new arrangements are aimed at improving the
humanitarian situation in Iraq and at greatly increasing
the flow of civilian goods into Iraq. The 11-year-old
sanctions have brought dire suffering to the Iraqi
people. In particular they have penalized large numbers
of innocent women and children. The international
community is vigorously called upon to effectively
improve the humanitarian situation in Iraq. If the
Security Council turns a blind eye to or does not do
enough to improve the humanitarian situation in Iraq, it
will not be justly addressing the great expectations of
the general membership of the United Nations.
The Security Council’s relevant resolutions
implementing sanctions against Iraq are aimed at
resolving the issues regarding Iraq’s disarmament, so
that Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction will be
destroyed and Iraq will no longer have the ability to
produce such weapons in the future. Iraq’s normal,
civilian interactions with other countries — for
example, trade and investment — should not have been
subjected to sanctions. The oil-for-food programme,
which started in 1996, has played a positive role in
easing the humanitarian situation in Iraq. However,
years of experience have shown that large numbers of
contracts for the export of civilian goods to Iraq have
been put on hold. It has also been impossible for the
Iraqi people to conduct normal economic activities.

S/PV.4336

Therefore the Chinese Government is of the view that
the new arrangements must take a new approach to
these matters.

and indispensable step towards breaking the deadlock
and achieving a comprehensive solution to the Iraq
issue.

During the discussions the Chinese side has
emphasized that the Council should draw up the Goods
Review List on the basis of a reduced list based on
resolution 1051 (1996), so that — with the exception of
items on the final approved list — Iraq will be able to
freely import any civilian goods that it needs. The
financial controls and restrictions against Iraq should
be relaxed, and Iraq should be allowed to use the funds
in the escrow accounts to pay its contribution to the
United Nations, as well as to contribute to other
international organizations. Foreign companies should
be allowed to invest in Iraq, and countries should be
allowed to freely sign service contracts with Iraq.
Civil-aviation flights to and from Iraq should be
allowed to resume.

At the same time we also believe that Iraq’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence
should be respected. The countries concerned should
demonstrate the required good will and sincerity by
putting an early end to bombings of Iraq and by doing
away with the no-fly zone, thus creating conditions for
an early resolution of the Iraq issue.

We believe that a fundamental amelioration of the
humanitarian situation in Iraq is an important and
indispensable step towards breaking the present
deadlock and towards a comprehensive resolution of
the Iraq issue.
Secondly, resolution 1352 (2001) also points out
that the new arrangements will improve the control of
the sale and supply of proscribed or unauthorized
items. This will mean that the necessary sanctions
against Iraq will continue. The Chinese Government
has always believed that Iraq should strictly implement
the relevant Council resolutions and resolve the
outstanding disarmament issues.
The new arrangements must not serve to
perpetuate the sanctions, but should be aimed at
finding a way out of the present deadlock on the Iraq
issue, so that this issue will be resolved in a
comprehensive fashion as soon as possible. We hope
that Iraq will resume its cooperation with the United
Nations, consent soon to the return of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission to Iraq and resolve the remaining
disarmament issues.
The Chinese Government has always stressed that
in order to make progress on the disarmament issues
the ambiguities in resolution 1284 (1999) have to be
clarified. In particular, in order to motivate Iraq to
resume its cooperation with the United Nations, there
is a need to clearly define the criteria for terminating
the sanctions against Iraq. This is another important

Thirdly, the tabling of the draft resolution on new
arrangements has caused serious concern among Iraq’s
neighbours. China is deeply aware of the losses
suffered by Iraq’s neighbours as a result of the
sanctions against Iraq. No new arrangement should
have further negative impact on the political, economic
and social life of Iraq’s neighbours. It is our belief that
the Council’s approach in this area should be based on
an objective assessment of the facts, pay close attention
to the views of Iraq’s neighbours and seek their
understanding and cooperation. We cannot continence
any harm to the legitimate interests and rights of Iraq’s
neighbours as a result of the new arrangements.
In addition, the issue of missing Kuwaitis and the
loss of property should be properly resolved at an early
date. This issue has long been a source of great
suffering for the Kuwaiti people and has remained a
priority concern of the countries of the Gulf. In
accordance with the relevant provisions of international
law, Iraq is obliged to cooperate by identifying and
returning to Kuwait the missing Kuwaitis and Kuwaiti
property. We believe that the timely and proper
resolution of this humanitarian issue will contribute to
an early normalization of inter-State relations in the
Gulf, as well as to an early comprehensive resolution
of the Iraq issue.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Thailand in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

11

S/PV.4336

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jayanama
(Thailand) took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.
Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, we would like to thank you and
Ambassador Sergey Lavrov of the Russian Federation
for having suggested this public debate, which has
provided the Security Council with an opportunity to
assess the progress made towards achieving its goals in
the Gulf region and the Middle East, and to visualize
clearly the next step. My delegation would like to make
its contribution to the debate with the following
thoughts.
I turn first to the general guidelines for the
Security Council. The Council must take a
comprehensive approach to the question of Iraq. As we
know, there are many varied aspects to this question,
but they are not unrelated. Indeed, they have a potential
impact on one another, whether it be disarmament, the
humanitarian situation in Iraq, or other humanitarian
issues such as Kuwaiti nationals and nationals of other
countries, or Kuwaiti property. The status of those
issues, and the continuing quest to attain the objectives
that have been set in those areas, must be viewed in
relation to the achievement of the Council’s goals in
the region — that is, security and stability for all.
Secondly, I turn to the humanitarian situation in
Iraq. Because of the many different sanctions imposed
on the country — indeed, the most extensive and the
harshest ever imposed by the United Nations on a
country — Iraq’s economy is devastated, its society is
crumbling, and the humanitarian situation of the Iraqi
people is on the brink of utter collapse and a source of
serious
concern,
according
to
international
humanitarian organizations.
Last week, the London Economist wrote that this
country of 22 million people, with its great civilization,
has been reduced to the level of a Stone Age society.
Despite its positive contribution, the oil-for-food
programme — a temporary and limited measure —
cannot stand in for a genuine recovery of the Iraqi
economy, which is the only way of providing an
appropriate response to the urgent and immense needs
of an entire population.
But how can one possibly even think of economic
recovery in the country without direct foreign
investment, particularly in the key oil sector, without a
cash component for that same sector, without service

12

activities, without any real lifting of the restrictions on
air transport, without financial resources — enough for
Iraq to pay its arrears to the various international
organizations — and the list goes on.
The Security Council should accept and approve
such steps, because otherwise, the humanitarian
tragedy of the Iraqi people, which has been playing out
for so many years now, will simply continue to be a
blot on our conscience. Tunisia will continue to work
daily in the Security Council, as it has consistently
done, with a view to improving, before it is too late,
the situation of the Iraqi people, who are in such
distress.
Thirdly, I turn to the question of implementation
of Security Council resolutions. The Council’s
resolutions on Iraq provide a legal framework and
define Iraq’s obligations, in particular in the area of
disarmament. They also reflect the Council’s
commitment to modifying the sanctions regime on
Iraq — in other words, to easing the sanctions and
lifting them completely, once and for all, depending on
Iraq’s cooperation in discharging its obligations.
Those resolutions must be implemented in good
faith by all parties. The principle of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all States — one of the
cardinal principles of the Charter, which can be found
throughout the Council’s resolutions on Iraq — must
be respected by all, including members of the Council,
as the Council’s resolutions are the collective
expression of its will. Indeed, legality is indivisible, as
is the law. What is at stake is the credibility and
effectiveness of the work of this organ, which has the
great responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In this connection, I would mention
that the question of no-fly zones should be reviewed.
Moreover,
and
in
order
to
facilitate
implementation of those resolutions, every effort
should be made to avoid ambiguity, which, far from
being
constructive,
only
complicates
their
implementation on the ground. The Council must
therefore consider the possibility of making the
necessary clarifications to certain resolutions — such
as resolution 1284 (1999) — because, failing that, there
is a danger of the resolutions’ simply remaining a dead
letter. Indeed, if this were the case, a comprehensive
solution would not be facilitated, the sufferings of the
Iraqi people would not be eased, and the achievement
of the Council’s objectives would not come any faster.

S/PV.4336

This also applies to any resolution to be adopted in
future, and it is even more true in respect of resolutions
that would innovate and introduce substantial changes
in the existing regime.
As for Iraq itself, it has been cooperating for
several years with the United Nations and the
Disarmament Commission. This cooperation, which
must be duly noted and recognized, must continue with
a view to resolving the remaining pending problems,
because its contribution is indispensable. It must be
encouraged, through incentives and through the real
and tangible prospect of finally seeing light at the end
of the tunnel — in other words, seeing the sanctions
lifted, so that it can resume its seat in the community of
nations.
Fourthly, I turn to the question of post-conflict
settlement for the region. For 11 years now, Iraq has
been under a very broad embargo. The situation is
painful, both morally and in humanitarian terms.
Geopolitically, it is a factor of instability in the region.
Obviously, this does not serve the objectives of the
Council. That is why we believe that the question of
Iraq should not continue to be viewed and dealt with
only from the standpoint of sanctions and coercion.
Political and diplomatic paths do have their virtues,
and they should inspire a fresh approach to this
question by the Council, with a view to hastening the
advent of a comprehensive solution that would
facilitate a final settlement of pending issues, such as
Kuwaiti missing persons and Kuwaiti property, and
would ensure for all countries of the region — I stress,
all countries of the region — conditions of security,
stability and peaceful coexistence — in a word, peace.
On the basis of that peace, the Governments and
peoples concerned would build good neighbourly
relations and mutually beneficial cooperation in
rediscovered trust.
In order to get the Iraqi issue out of the current
deadlock, and finally to sketch out a comprehensive
solution, which is what we all would advocate,
negotiation is the only right road. Since joining the
Security Council, Tunisia has always called for
negotiation. We welcomed the beginning of a dialogue
last February in New York between an Iraqi
government delegation and Secretary-General Kofi
Annan. However, that exercise was not continued as
had been envisaged between the two parties. Our
Council should encourage resumption as soon as
possible. It is high time that some movement or

dynamic be started so that we can move ahead;
otherwise, this situation runs the risk of continuing to
stagnate — but at what price for Iraq, for its people and
for the region? It is a region in upheaval because of the
situation in the occupied Arab territories. It is a region
where public opinion is bitter and frustrated,
impatiently waiting for the winds of peace and
reconciliation to blow through.
It is our hope that the Security Council will be
inspired by this overall approach in its future actions.
This is the approach that we would advocate at a time
when the Council is actively seized of a draft to review
the sanctions regime.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): Norway attaches the
utmost importance to a prompt and lasting settlement
of this issue. At the same time, we recall the
background and purpose of sanctions against Iraq,
which are clearly linked to preventing Iraq from yet
again constituting a threat to peace and security in the
region. We are committed to the premises for ending
these measures. A lasting settlement can happen, and
will happen, only on the basis of full Iraqi cooperation
with the international community in conformity with
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
including its resolution 1284 (1999).
The basic requirements of cooperation with the
international community are simple. They are shared
by all members of the Council. They are reasonable,
seen against the background of earlier records of
compliance by the Iraqi authorities.
The essential message from the international
community is, therefore, that the key to unlocking the
door of sanctions is through full cooperation. Iraq
holds the key. On our part, we have been eager to see
that key being properly turned in order to lift the
sanctions.
Weapons inspectors must be given entry to Iraq,
and Iraq must demonstrate its willingness to cooperate
fully with the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC). We have
full confidence in the Commission’s Chairman,
Mr. Hans Blix, and his team. In the field of weapons of
mass destruction, particularly after Iraq has
demonstrated use of such weapons, the international
community could not issue a clean bill of health
without reasonable guarantees. The international
community has been demanding nothing more, and
nothing less.

13

S/PV.4336

Moreover, we regretfully have to revert to the
issue of missing persons and stolen property. We are
deeply concerned by the plight of the missing Kuwaiti
and third-country nationals, as well as their families. It
is disturbing that there is no progress on this matter.
We urge Iraq to ensure the expeditious repatriation or
the return of all Kuwaiti and third-county nationals or
their remains. Iraqi statements attacking the integrity of
the high-level Coordinator, Ambassador Vorontsov,
must be clearly rejected. We fail to understand why the
required transparency with regard to missing persons
and stolen property cannot be achieved through
cooperation with the United Nations.
Paramount among Norwegian concerns is the
humanitarian situation of the Iraqi people. We remain
dismayed by the dire living conditions of various
segments of the civilian population. It would be too
simple to attempt to identify one single reason for these
difficult living conditions and health problems. There
are various reasons for this situation. Nevertheless, we
all have solid evidence not only on the usefulness but
also of the necessity of the humanitarian programme in
Iraq pursuant to resolution 986 (1995). Therefore, it is
a matter of particular concern that $2.2 billion of the
funds destined to meet these humanitarian objectives
remain unused in the United Nations escrow account.
It would be naïve to claim that full utilization of
the oil-for-food programme would by itself solve all
the outstanding issues related to the development of the
social and economic infrastructure in Iraq, and we are
not doing so. However, the Iraqi authorities bear the
main responsibility for utilizing all means put at their
disposal by the United Nations to meet urgent needs.
Moreover, they must ensure budgetary priorities and
take other appropriate measures to accommodate these
needs.
Norway attaches great importance to a
humanitarian cash component under the humanitarian
programme in order to allow for the purchase of locally
produced goods and thus stimulate development of
local resources. Needless to say, our primary wish
remains, however, full Iraqi cooperation with the
United Nations, leading to an end to sanctions, and
thereby allowing for a normalization of the economy.
Security Council resolution 1284 (1999) remains the
overall framework and stipulates the conditions for the
lifting of sanctions against Iraq.

14

Pending the cooperation we all hope for, and
which so far has not been forthcoming, we find on our
part that it would be irresponsible not to engage in a
result-oriented and concrete attempt to revisit how
current sanctions work. It is our collective
responsibility to make a thorough assessment of current
practices and consider how they could be improved.
Drawing on my own experience from chairing the
Security Council Committee established by resolution
661 (1990), I think I have all members with me in
saying that certain immediate improvements and
changes are called for in the handling of imports of
goods into Iraq. This has also been highlighted by the
Secretary-General in his latest report dated 18 May
2001 (S/2001/505) on the implementation of the oilfor-food programme. We should heed his call to
Council members to ensure a more effective
implementation of the programme. This can be
achieved by doing away, as far as possible, with certain
cumbersome and time-consuming procedures involved
in today’s practice.
We believe that the focus of the Committee
should be solely on items which represent a militaryrelated threat or clear dual-use risks. We would
welcome significant simplification and streamlining of
procedures towards this objective.
Such a step requires the adoption of a list of
goods to scrutinize, a so-called goods review list. I
believe it is important to note here that such a notion,
although new, reflects the fact that, in reality, we have
already had a comprehensive control list for 11 years.
With the exception of a few items that have been fasttracked, the overwhelming majority of items destined
to Iraq have been undergoing the scrutiny of the
sanctions Committee. We all know how cumbersome
and, in my view, unnecessary such an approach can be.
More importantly, it can lead to unwanted obstacles to
the flow of important items. Limiting the scope of
control by the sanctions Committee to potentially
sensitive items by leaving all other items aside is, in
our view, plain common sense.
Moreover, Norway is in favour of the increased
involvement of Iraq’s neighbouring States in upholding
effective United Nations measures and thus of sending
a signal of renewed unity from the international
community to Iraqi authorities. At the same time, their
legitimate concerns need to be taken into full account.
In exploring ways to enhance United Nations controls,

S/PV.4336

we should be guided by a thorough analysis, in close
consultation with the States concerned.
By the unanimous adoption of resolution 1352
(2001), the Council is faced with both the challenge
and the responsibility of reforming the implementation
of the humanitarian programme. This is the main task
that we have undertaken to do by 3 July.
In summing up, the basic issue before us today is
the following choice between two alternatives: either
we seize this opportunity to radically simplify and
promote the flow of everyday civilian goods into Iraq,
thereby establishing beyond any doubt that the
international community is giving paramount
importance to humanitarian concerns, while keeping
sensitive goods under control; or we preserve the status
quo. This appears in reality to be the only other option.
A continuation of the current state of affairs would
mean carrying on with a cumbersome and timeconsuming scrutiny of almost all goods destined for
Iraq. Such a course of action would be contrary to the
interests of the Iraqi civilian population.
The choice is clear. We must seize the
opportunity before us and mark a clear departure from
the status quo.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
This debate is taking place as the Security Council is
conducting negotiations to make some changes in the
oil-for-food programme. As members of the Security
Council, we are aware of the responsibility delegated
to us by the other Members of the United Nations in
order to represent them in this important organ,
entrusted with the maintenance of international peace
and security. Thus, we feel it appropriate that, on
certain occasions such as this, the Security Council
take into account the views of other Members of the
United Nations before adopting decisions on highly
important issues.
The first point we wish to make is that this matter
appears on the agenda of the Security Council precisely
because of its impact on international peace and
security. That is why the Government of Iraq is subject
to the sanctions regime.
The oil-for-food programme was adopted by the
Security Council as a provisional measure to alleviate
the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people affected by
the sanctions regime. The most recent report of the
Secretary-General on this topic, in document
S/2001/505, concludes that, despite the limitations and

difficulties that have restricted the effective
implementation of the oil-for-food programme, it has
contributed not only to arresting the decline in but also
to improving the living conditions of the average Iraqi
in many cases.
The report also highlights aspects of the
humanitarian programme where improvements could
be made to enhance its functioning. These include
extending the so-called “green lists” to other sectors in
order to include all kinds of articles, except for those
referred to in resolution 1051 (1996); simplifying the
plan of distribution and making it more flexible;
reducing the large number of applications, that remain
on hold; and defining with greater precision the
elements considered to be of dual use. From these and
many other aspects, it is clearly possible to make
improvements in the oil-for-food programme, which
should have a positive impact on the humanitarian
situation of the Iraqi people. However, in order to
ensure the proper functioning of the programme, the
Government of Iraq must cooperate. As the SecretaryGeneral indicates,
“It is essential for the Government of Iraq to
prioritize its contracting, giving particular
attention to the food, health and nutrition
sectors”. (S/2001/505, para. 132)
He also mentions the need to avoid delays in the
submission of applications and to expedite the issuance
of unopened letters of credit for already approved
applications.
During its informal revision of the sectors of
contracts on hold, the Office of the Iraq Programme
reiterated the need for members of the sanctions
Committee that are placing contracts on hold to be
more clear as to the criteria for such an assessment and
more clearly to identify the elements they consider
problematic for export to Iraq. In this vein, the socalled “goods review list” proposed by the United
Kingdom will shed further light on the elements to
which the international community believes Iraq should
not have access if it is to be prevented from rearming.
The least that can be expected from members of
the Security Council is that we comply with our own
resolutions. Accordingly, and taking into account the
agreement in resolution 1352 (2001), the members of
the Security Council are currently considering various
proposals to enhance the functioning of the oil-for-food
programme. Under the coordination of the United
Kingdom, meetings of experts have been held
concerning the text of a draft resolution and an annex

15

S/PV.4336

of proceedings. These consultations of experts have
been useful and considerable progress has been made.
We hope that all delegations will participate
constructively with a view to drafting a consensus text
in the coming days. Only in that way will we be
complying with our own resolutions.
Sanctions are not an end in themselves. They are
simply a tool of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
should not forget that, as such, they are an alternative
to the use of force. In this case, it is important for the
Government of Iraq to have a clear understanding of
what the international community expects from it,
including guarantees for regional security, before
sanctions are lifted. That is why a decision allowing the
necessary changes to be made in the oil-for-food
programme, acceptable to all members of the Council
and in conformity with the spirit of resolution 1352
(2001), would help to create consensus between the
Security Council and Iraq, thus leading to the lifting of
sanctions.
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): First of all, my
delegation would like to express its profound gratitude
and appreciation to you and to the delegation of the
Russian Federation for convening this important open
meeting of the Security Council in a timely manner.
The humanitarian situation in Iraq remains one of
the most critical problems before the Council and
continues to be a focus of its attention. Consistent and
purposeful efforts undertaken by the Council and the
Office of the Iraq Programme to enhance the
effectiveness of the humanitarian programme have
made it possible to improve the humanitarian situation
in Iraq and to alleviate the critical situation in some
sectors.
As was correctly noted by the Secretary-General
in his report to the Council of 18 May 2001
(S/2001/505):
“Over the past four years, the humanitarian
programme has contributed not only to arresting
the decline in but also to improving the living
conditions of the average Iraqi.”
At the same time, the Secretary-General notes
further that “the achievements ... should not lead us
into a sense of complacency.” In this room we have
repeatedly heard the view that the oil-for-food
programme will not lead us to a comprehensive
solution of the humanitarian crisis in Iraq; decisive

16

measures by the Council are needed based on a
completely new approach to the implementation of the
humanitarian programme.
Just over a month ago, before the end of another
regular phase within the humanitarian programme, the
Council began very important work that, in our view,
has far-reaching consequences and is aimed at
developing new arrangements for its implementation.
In its resolution 1352 (2001) of 1 June, the
Council expressed its intention to consider new
arrangements that would significantly improve the flow
of commodities and products to Iraq and would
facilitate civilian trade and economic cooperation with
Iraq. Today nobody has any doubts that this work
should bring about serious changes in the functioning
of the programme, which in turn should lead to drastic
changes in the humanitarian situation in the country. It
is in the context of these considerations that my
country views the tasks facing the Council with regard
to formulating a draft resolution that would lay the
foundation for the future phases of the humanitarian
programme.
It is exactly from this standpoint, from the
viewpoint of the humanitarian challenges and security
tasks facing the Security Council in Iraq, that we have
been considering the draft resolutions submitted by the
United Kingdom and France and that we will consider
the draft resolution introduced by the Russian
Federation.
We sincerely hope that today’s discussion will
help us address the current situation in the most
comprehensive manner and hopefully find ways to
solve the existing problems.
To change the status quo and improve the
humanitarian situation the Council should reconsider
the mechanism currently in place, which regulates the
sale or supply of commodities to Iraq. We believe that
a rule of the type everything is permitted that is not
prohibited is the right approach to the problem, but this
requires that the Council ensure that everything banned
for supply to Iraq is thoroughly itemized and specified.
Only such an approach will allow the Office of the Iraq
Programme and the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission to process
Iraqi contracts more efficiently.
Although we are legitimately concerned over the
possible uncontrolled use of dual-purpose goods,

S/PV.4336

especially when an effective international monitoring
mechanism in Iraq is not in place, we must,
nevertheless, thoroughly weigh all the possible
consequences of approving a control list of goods to
deal with the contracts put on hold. In his reports the
Secretary-General has repeatedly given examples of
how seriously the practice of putting contracts on hold
affects fulfilment of the tasks within the Iraq
Programme.
If we ignore these concerns, the problem will
relentlessly plague us by reducing to nothing all our
efforts to improve the humanitarian situation in Iraq.
We are convinced that this problem should be taken
into account in the process of adopting the Goods
Review List. The Council should provide for approval
of contracts that include goods from this list as key
elements without which the contract becomes useless.
To this end, it is necessary to put in place United
Nations mechanisms to monitor the end use of these
goods within the limits determined by the contracts.
We also think it necessary to create appropriate
conditions for the economic restoration of the country
that can provide a basis for self-reliant development
and generate additional resources needed primarily to
meet civilian needs of the Iraqi people. In this regard,
we support the provisions that would make it possible
to attract foreign investments, primarily in the oil
sector of the country’s economy, and to render various
services in the process of implementing programmes
and projects. Besides, utilization of the so-called “cash
component” in all sectors in Iraq in accordance with
the resolution 1330 (2000) will also contribute to
drastically changing the humanitarian situation and
revitalizing the national economy.
The issue of ensuring Iraq’s cooperation in
implementing the decisions taken by the Security
Council is a separate matter. Our delegation has
consistently called upon Iraq to cooperate with the
Council as a precondition that could lead to lifting of
the sanctions. We still maintain that Iraq’s compliance
with the provisions of Security Council resolutions,
and in particular resolution 1284 (1999) related to the
establishment
of
the
international
inspection
mechanism, could be a concrete step leading to the
lifting of sanctions. At the same time we cannot ignore
concerns expressed by a number of delegations over
the ambiguous character of some provisions of that
resolution. It is obvious that Iraq’s cooperation could
be ensured by making its voice and its concerns heard

and taken into account in an impartial manner by the
Council.
We think that a continuation of the dialogue
between the United Nations Secretary-General and Iraq
that began in February 2001 has a special role to play
in this regard.
The fact that we discuss the Iraqi issue in this
format today, together with non-members of the
Council, proves once again that finding a solution to
this problem is not an exclusive prerogative of Council
members. It generates legitimate concerns among
neighbouring States and States that are far from the
region. It is of great importance to take into
consideration the views and concerns of those countries
and to provide for their participation in developing the
Council’s new approaches. When doing this, we should
be guided by the principle that cooperation between
those States and Iraq should, by all means, be
preserved.
The Council should have a clear understanding of
the extent to which the measures it is going to
introduce can be implemented. It should also make sure
that those measures represent a step forward and not
lead to another impasse in dealing with the Iraqi issue.
To achieve this, it is important that they be supported
by the countries of the region and should help ensure
Iraq’s cooperation in their implementation.
Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): We thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this important meeting at the
request of Ambassador Lavrov of the Russian
Federation, whom we also thank.
The Gulf War of 1990 was short-lived and ended
swiftly with Iraq withdrawing its invading forces from
Kuwait under overwhelming military and political
pressure from the international community. Today, ten
years later, that war continues to cast its long shadow
over peace in the Gulf and in the Middle East region.
The outcome of the war was clear from the very
beginning. It was a reminder to all of us that the days
of achieving territorial ambitions through military
ventures are long over, and that the international
community will never condone any such pursuit by any
nation. The invasion of Kuwait was an act that
seriously violated the fundamental principles of the
United Nations Charter. The robust reaction by the
international community to end the invasion was fully
justified.

17

S/PV.4336

Unfortunately, the consequences of the war have
been terrible for the Iraqi people. Imports into their
country take place under the sanctions regime imposed
by the United Nations with the aim of controlling
Iraq’s acquisition of materials that may be used to
produce weapons of mass destruction. Its oil exports
today are restricted with a view to monitoring its
revenues and expenditures for the same purpose. The
sanctions also require the inspection of the military
production facilities in Iraq to ensure that its capacity
to produce nuclear and other weapons of mass
destruction is fully terminated.
The implementation of the sanctions require the
full cooperation of the Government of Iraq in order to
ensure that the purposes of the sanctions are met
without unduly hurting the Iraqi people. I must add
here that the sanctions regime in itself may not be
perfect, but through a process of constructive dialogue
with the Security Council, Iraq can have the
imperfections addressed.
However, regrettably, implementation of the
sanctions has always been a rough ride, mainly because
of inadequate dialogue. This is clearly evident from the
fact the oil-for-food programme, designed to facilitate
availability of essential goods and services, has never
been a smooth operation, resulting in continued
scarcities of food, medicines and other commodities
with devastating effects on the people of Iraq. A
terrible humanitarian situation has unfolded in Iraq
over the years due to the enforcement of the sanctions
regime. At the same time, due to a lack of cooperation
on the part of Iraq, the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
is prevented from carrying out its inspection work
inside Iraq in fulfilment of its mandate under Security
Council resolutions.
The present stalemate cannot be allowed to go on.
The humanitarian situation has been bad enough for a
long time and has assumed such serious proportions
that the international community cannot remain
indifferent to it any longer. In recent months there has
been a growing demand from international public
opinion for a relaxation of the sanctions against Iraq. In
the Security Council, too, many members, including
Mauritius, sensitive to the sufferings of the Iraqi
people, have been calling for new initiatives that can
engage Iraq in a positive dialogue, so that the present
stalemate may be broken.

18

On his part, the Secretary-General has made
every possible effort in this regard. We have welcomed
the review process undertaken in Washington, D.C. and
London with a view to bringing about a relaxation of
the sanctions against Iraq. My delegation has also been
contributing to the discussions at the level of experts of
the Security Council, aiming to evolve the package that
would ease the sanctions against Iraq but, at the same
time, not absolve Iraq totally from honouring its
responsibility under the relevant Council resolutions.
This important work must continue.
We take this opportunity to urge Iraq to respond
to the efforts of the international community to ease the
sanctions to which it is subjected and to take some
concrete steps of its own as a reciprocal action. We
believe that as a first step in this direction, Iraq should
resume cooperation with UNMOVIC and allow the
designated inspectors to do their work inside the
country. It is our considered view that Iraq has no need
for nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction. Iraq
should not find it difficult to reassure the international
community that it has no designs in this regard. Last
but not least, Iraq must, once and for all, close its
painful chapter in relation to Kuwait, by showing full
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the State of Kuwait and returning its historical and
cultural heritage, including Kuwaiti archives, as well as
repatriating missing Kuwaiti persons.
This meeting is taking place at a crucial juncture
of the important question of Iraq at the United Nations.
My delegation hopes that our discussion will be
dispassionate and focused so that, in the end, the
Security Council is helped in the search for a pragmatic
way forward on the difficult issue of Iraq.
Mr. Kassé (Mali) (spoke in French): The
Security Council is meeting today to consider the
humanitarian situation in Iraq, following a request by
the Russian Federation. My delegation is grateful to
you, Mr. President, for finding the ideal format for this
important meeting. I would also like to extend my
delegation’s thanks to the Office of the Iraq
Programme, which, with dedication, is doing the bulk
of the work on implementing this humanitarian
programme. Mali is deeply concerned with the
humanitarian situation in Iraq, which deserves careful
consideration, as it is receiving today.
Information provided by the Secretary-General
through his regular reports to the Council show that

S/PV.4336

over the last four years the oil-for-food programme has
helped to halt further deterioration in the living
conditions of average Iraqis and has improved living
conditions in some cases, and that the programme’s
humanitarian nature should be preserved. We concur
with the Secretary-General on these conclusions. That
is why we believe everything possible should be done
to attain all the humanitarian goals of the programme.
Here, we would join the Secretary-General in
calling on the Iraqi Government to give priority to
meeting the essential needs of its people by increasing
imports of food and of health and medical supplies. My
delegation regrets that no request for the purchase of
such products has been submitted to the sanctions
Committee during phase IX of the programme, despite
the accumulation of a substantial amount in the escrow
account.
The food and health situation in Iraq is
particularly unacceptable. The caloric intake among
children is very low, and the nutritional goal set in the
distribution plans is far from being met.
Given that situation, the Council must take steps
to ease the devastating impact of the sanctions on the
civilian population. In that connection, my delegation
reiterates its great concern at the excessively high
number of contracts kept on hold by the Committee
established by resolution 661 (1990). We agree with
the Secretary-General that this is one of the main
obstacles to proper implementation of the humanitarian
programme. That is why my delegation welcomes the
Secretary-General’s recommendation to broaden the
green lists in various sectors to include all items except
those covered in resolution 1051 (1996). For its part,
the sanctions Committee should step up its efforts
diligently and speedily to consider applications for
contracts so as to reduce significantly the number of
holds.
Mali welcomes the new sanctions regime that the
Council is discussing because it aims to ease the
harmful effects of 11 years of sanctions on the civilian
population. It would remove constraints on the import
of goods for civilian consumption and basic
necessities, on the principle that everything that is not
explicitly forbidden would be authorized. The reverse
principle now in use is the reason for the excessively
high number of contracts kept on hold by the
Committee established by resolution 661 (1990).

But in our view there are several shortcomings in
the new regime. The first relates to United Nations
control of Iraq’s resources through the maintenance of
the escrow account and to the need for the
rehabilitation of the country. Thus, we support
injecting cash from oil sales into the local economy —
the “cash component”.
Here, we support the arrangement proposed by
the team of experts established pursuant to paragraph
15 of resolution 1330 (2000). The Iraqi oil industry
still faces considerable constraints of all kinds which,
if nothing is done, could result in a drop or even a
collapse in crude oil production.
Beyond the oil sector, the cash component ought
to be extended to other sectors in Iraq, because, as the
Secretary-General notes in his report (S/2001/186), in
some sectors of the population, because of the
sanctions, poverty is widespread; some Iraqis are often
forced to barter what they receive through the food
basket in order to procure other basic necessities.
To ensure the economic reconstruction of the
country, the draft resolution should cover services and
investments, which are essential to economic recovery
and to rebuilding the country’s entire infrastructure.
My delegation fully supports the provisions relating to
the humanitarian situation, and considers that the text’s
new provisions, if fully implemented, will help ease the
suffering of the Iraqi people. In that connection, we
hope that the Iraqi Government will react positively,
will cooperate with the United Nations, and will seize
the opportunity being provided.
Let me assure the delegation of the Russian
Federation that my delegation is willing to study
carefully the text of the draft resolution it submitted
this afternoon just before this meeting.
I cannot fail to mention another aspect of the
humanitarian situation. It is not directly related to
today’s debate, but it is of importance: it concerns part
B of resolution 1284 (1999), which obliges Iraq to
facilitate the repatriation of all Kuwaiti and third
country nationals or the return of their remains if they
are deceased. For the past 11 years, more than 600
families have been living in torment, and they continue
to suffer. Moreover, Iraq has failed to account for
property seized in Kuwait, including the national
archives, which represent the memory of the country.
Kuwait thus remains traumatized by the 1990 invasion.

19

S/PV.4336

Mali calls on Iraq to cooperate with Mr. Yuli
Vorontsov, the High-level Coordinator for Iraq, whose
work we support, so that he can carry out his task and
so that this sad situation can come to an end. This is a
major humanitarian issue on which true consensus
exists in the Council. We therefore call on Iraq to meet
its international obligations, to continue to participate
in the work of the Tripartite Commission and the
Technical Subcommittee, and to cooperate fully in
order to resolve these problems once and for all.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Qatar, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Khal
(Qatar) took the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): My delegation is very
pleased to have this opportunity to hear, in open format
in the Council, the views and concerns of so many
delegations on this issue of such importance to us all.
The Irish Government has consistently made clear its
grave concern at the humanitarian situation in Iraq.
When comprehensive economic sanctions were
imposed on Iraq by resolution 661 (1990), almost 11
years ago, it was not anticipated that they could
possibly last so long.
When they were reaffirmed by resolution 687
(1991), the conditions for their suspension were clearly
established. That they have still not been fulfilled 10
years on, even as modified by resolution 1284 (1999),
is a matter of utmost regret to the Irish Government. It
is regrettable because without their fulfilment, the
objective of restoring international peace and security
in the region cannot be considered to have been
achieved. It is regrettable also because of the effect that
the long-term comprehensive economic sanctions have
had on the people of Iraq, most of whom had nothing
whatever to do with the decisions taken by the Iraqi
authorities that led to the imposition of sanctions.

20

The international community and the Security
Council, acting on its behalf in the area of international
peace and security, have a responsibility to ensure that
the measures they adopt do not prevent the people of
the country under sanctions from obtaining the
necessities of life. That was acknowledged in
resolution 661 (1990) itself, which permitted the
supply of medicines, and of foodstuffs in humanitarian
circumstances. Because it was realized pragmatically
that the disarmament process would require some time,
the Council, in resolution 687 (1991), calibrated the
sanctions regime established by resolution 661 (1990),
lifting the prohibitions on foodstuffs, and establishing a
no-objection procedure for essential civilian needs.
That process was continued in resolution 986
(1995), with the establishment of the oil-for-food
programme. It was developed further in successive
resolutions, including in resolution 1284 (1999), which
lifted the cap on the amount of oil that Iraq can sell.
The arrangements envisaged in resolution 1352
(2001), therefore, do not represent anything radically
new. The Council has for a considerable time
recognized that the longer the sanctions continue, the
more the sanctions regime must be adjusted in the
interests of the people of Iraq and concentrated more
and more on their primary objective.
It is now time to take a further step, and to
acknowledge the need, after 11 years of sanctions, to
allow the people of Iraq to recover their national
economy and life, while maintaining the controls
necessary to ensure that the Government of Iraq does
not further develop weapons of mass destruction and
does not acquire the means of again threatening Iraq’s
neighbours, pending the fulfilment of its disarmament
obligations in line with the Council’s resolutions.
My delegation considers the approach now
envisaged on the basis of resolution 1352 (2001) to be
a promising one that would improve significantly the
flow of commodities and products to Iraq, while
maintaining the necessary controls.
However, the development and prosperity of a
people do not depend solely on the supply of
commodities. They also depend on modern
infrastructure — roads, railways, telecommunications,
medical facilities, water and sanitation systems. We
must ensure that nothing in the measures that we adopt,
or in the way we apply these measures, prevents the
development of Iraq’s normal economic infrastructure.

S/PV.4336

In this context, it is important that the list of goods that
would be reserved for review by the Iraq sanctions
committee under the envisaged system is as short and
as precise as possible. Furthermore, any contract
containing an item on the list must be carefully
reviewed from the point of view of its overall
economic and infrastructural importance.
The new arrangements that the Council envisages
are intended, in the words of resolution 1352 (2001),
for the facilitation of civilian trade and economic
cooperation with Iraq in civilian sectors. Before the
Gulf War, Iraq had vigorous international economic
relationships, and international service contracts were
important in many sectors of Iraq’s economic life. Such
contracts should again be permitted and appropriate
arrangements made for authenticating them and for
paying for them from the escrow account.
However, the people of Iraq will never achieve
the level of development and prosperity to which the
natural wealth of their country entitles them without
access to foreign investment. The longer they must do
without the resources and expertise that foreign
investment can make available, the longer development
in real terms will be put off.
None of this is to deny the responsibility of the
Iraqi authorities to take the steps clearly open to them
to secure their people’s future. In particular, they must
devote the necessary priority to the education and
health sectors. The neglect of these sectors can not be
laid fully, or even mainly, at the door of the sanctions
regime. Every administration has the primary domestic
responsibility for these sectors, and citing the sanctions
regime as an excuse is not a posture that impresses the
international community.
My delegation has no interest whatever in the
perpetuation of sanctions. We are committed at any
time to act on the suspension and lifting of sanctions
on Iraq to the extent that the necessary conditions are
fulfilled. We can perhaps consider these conditions, but
the Iraqi authorities also have a big step to take in the
direction of the Security Council. When they are
prepared to take that step, we will be ready. In the
interim, however, we have a duty to the people of Iraq.
The strong sense of that duty underpins our approach to
the draft resolution under consideration and our
approach to the detailed work in the area of reserved
goods lists.

Ms. Lee (Singapore): Today’s debate is timely. It
has been 15 months since the Council last reviewed the
developments in the situation between Iraq and Kuwait
in this Chamber. The Security Council is also presently
engaged in discussions on new arrangements to
facilitate the flow of goods and commodities into Iraq
and other types of economic cooperation with Iraq in
the civilian sectors.
Security Council resolution 661 (1990) was
adopted 11 years ago. The impact of its measures has
been too broad in Iraq. The innocent people of Iraq
have borne the heaviest burdens of Iraq’s continued
economic isolation, while the Government continues to
defy Security Council resolutions and has succeeded in
recasting its international image from a belligerent to a
victim. Furthermore, after more than a decade, Kuwait
continues to be deprived of the sense of closure on this
issue that the return of key Kuwaiti property and
Kuwaiti nationals and their families seized by Iraq
could bring.
The oil-for-food programme, which the Council
enacted in 1996 to bring need relief to the Iraqi
population without compromising the objectives of
resolution 687 (1991), has evolved over the years. It
has contributed to improvements in key economic and
infrastructure sectors in Iraq, such as the oil industry,
electricity, agriculture, water and sanitation, education,
housing, transportation and telecommunications. But,
rightly or wrongly, the growing perception is that the
programme has not done enough to help ordinary Iraqis
and has not been effectively implemented. Many have
argued that the programme has not made much of a
dent in arresting the deterioration of the Iraqi economy
and alleviating the humanitarian situation in Iraq.
In the meantime, the unchecked smuggling of
Iraqi oil through Iraq’s borders and the levying of
illegal oil surcharges by the Government of Iraq have
generated substantial revenues for the Government
outside of the escrow account. This has further
conspired to undermine the credibility of the United
Nations policy in Iraq. The erosion of support for the
programme and United Nations sanctions is also
fuelled in part by the existence of sharp differences
within the Security Council on this issue. As a result,
we have witnessed challenges to the United Nations
Iraq policy in the last several years. We agree with
Ambassador Lavrov, who pointed out at the beginning
of today’s debate — as did subsequent speakers — that
the status quo is unacceptable.

21

S/PV.4336

Against this backdrop, the unanimous adoption of
Security Council resolution 1352 (2001) on 1 June
2001 assumes great significance. It signals the
intention of the Security Council to adopt and
implement new arrangements that would modify the
Iraq programme in a significant way. The proposed
new arrangements will free the flow of legitimate
civilian goods and commodities to Iraq, which will
significantly improve the welfare of the Iraqi people.
Only exports of items on a limited list of goods that
would compromise items expressly prohibited under
previous resolutions and other items that could be
deployed in ways that are inconsistent with resolution
687 (1991) would be subject to review by the 661
sanctions committee.
The new arrangements will also address in a
pragmatic way the problems of cross-border smuggling
and oil surcharges, as well as clarify a few longstanding issues arising from the implementation of the
sanctions policy, including arrangements that would
authorize the return of Iraqi civilian aircraft and
remove common restrictions on civilian flights to Iraq.
Iraq’s neighbouring States have expressed their
concern over the implications of the proposed new
approach on their economic well-being.
We support efforts to consult them and obtain
their cooperation. We are confident that arrangements
can be worked out that would adequately take into
account their special needs and circumstances within
the framework of existing Security Council resolutions.
We would like to emphasize the point made by
Ambassador Cunningham that the Council does not
seek to impose any arrangements on the neighbouring
countries of Iraq against their will.
We have a unique opportunity to make substantial
improvements in the Iraq humanitarian programme and
more generally in the United Nations sanctions policy
in Iraq. For this to take place, it is important that the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, unite behind such efforts. There remain
many outstanding issues in current efforts to develop
the new arrangements, including the contents of the
goods review list and provisions relating to the
arrangement with the neighbouring countries and the
scope of economic activities that should be permitted
under the new arrangements. Ambassador Levitte has
earlier eloquently listed these issues.

22

We should bear in mind that the Council is
embarked on a project to refocus its sanctions policy
with respect to Iraq that requires striking a delicate
balance between two objectives. They are increasing
the effectiveness of sanctions to compel Iraq to comply
with all relevant resolutions, on one hand, and ensuring
that the measures will not impose unduly onerous
burdens on the Iraqi population and the neighbouring
countries, on the other.
Complications are therefore quite natural. But if
the discussions in the Council are conducted in good
faith, and in a genuine spirit of cooperation, we should
be able to resolve outstanding differences within the
time-frame envisaged in resolution 1352 (2001). That
is what is expected of the Council. We may never
resolve the different views we have on the cause and
effect of the humanitarian situation in Iraq. Neither will
we agree completely on how far the Council should go
to dismantle aspects of the sanctions policy to achieve
the humanitarian objectives without weakening our
leverage to get Iraq to comply with all Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 667 (1990)
and 1284 (1999). But we should see such efforts as part
of a process.
This is not the first time that the Council has
reviewed the implementation of the Iraq programme.
We should recall that since the adoption of resolution
986 (1995), the Council has adopted a series of followup resolutions. They are resolutions 1153 (1998), 1284
(1999) and 1302 (2000). These were to expand and
improve upon the Iraq programme. The ongoing
discussions in the Council on the new arrangements are
therefore parts of that evolutionary process to focus the
impact of the sanctions, a process that began a few
years ago. But for this process to be effective and
positive the Council needs to do this incrementally and,
more importantly, together, taking into account at the
same time the views of the larger international
community.
Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Let me join others in
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this open
meeting to discuss issues related to the agenda item
“The situation between Iraq and Kuwait”. We consider
this a very important meeting, as this will allow the
Security Council to take into account the views of nonmembers before taking decisions that all the Member
States of the United Nations will have an obligation to
implement.

S/PV.4336

When the Council last March held an open debate
on the humanitarian situation in Iraq, Council members
expressed concern about the plight of the Iraqi people
and welcomed the recommendations put forward at that
time by the Secretary-General. The Council has since
taken a series of actions to improve the oil-for-food
programme, in addition to removing all quota
restrictions on the quantity of oil authorized under the
programme, which resulted from the adoption of
resolution 1284 (1999). Having removed the ceiling for
oil exports, we also recognized the constraints posed
by the lack of capacity inherent in the deteriorating
state of the oil industry of Iraq. Jamaica, like other
members of the Council, advocated an increase in the
amount of money to be made available for oil spare
parts and equipment. The Security Council responded
favourably by increasing substantially the amount of
money made available for this purpose.
There remained, however, a problem with the
holds placed on certain items, which made the approval
of the increase in expenditure somewhat meaningless.
Jamaica joined others in the Council to urge those
countries placing those holds to ease them. While many
of these holds have been removed, much more needs to
be done to increase and improve the flow of goods and
services to the oil industry.
Jamaica also supported increased expenditure on
areas critical to the socio-economic well-being of the
Iraqi people, particularly in the health and education
sectors, as well as the removal of all impediments to
the import of goods and services earmarked for these
sectors. We supported the call for expenditures targeted
on Iraq’s infrastructure, particularly on water and
electricity. We shared the belief that the long-term
damage to Iraq’s development should be ameliorated.
We must, however, express our regret that the
Government of Iraq has not taken full advantage of the
funds available in the oil-for-food programme, and that
the people of Iraq are not deriving the full benefits
from it. At the same time, Jamaica has consistently
stated in the Council that sanctions regimes must be
focused, effectively targeted and of limited duration.
We have also emphasized that sanctions must be
designed in such a way that the civilian population is
not made to suffer for the intransigence of its leaders.
For this reason, Jamaica supports the current efforts
being undertaken in the Security Council to modify the
sanctions regime so as to alleviate the suffering of the
Iraqi people.

Jamaica is cognizant of the concerns expressed by
States neighbouring Iraq that the changes being
contemplated could cause disruptions to their
economies. Their legitimate concerns must be taken
into account in our deliberations.
In this review many difficult issues remain to be
resolved. For that reason, Jamaica would have been
prepared to support a period longer than the month’s
extension of the oil-for-food programme adopted under
resolution 1352 (2001). Nevertheless, we believe that,
given the requisite political will, appropriate solutions
can be found to reduce significantly the effect of
sanctions on the people of Iraq, while preventing Iraq
from acquiring the ability to threaten its neighbours
and the international community.
In this regard, we call on the Government of Iraq
to cooperate fully with the United Nations, to comply
with Security Council resolutions and, through
verification, to prove to the international community
that it no longer possesses the ability to produce
weapons of mass destruction. Iraq, we believe, must
allow the United Nations Monitoring and Verification
Commission (UNMOVIC) to carry out the tasks
assigned to it. UNMOVIC stands ready to engage Iraq
in the inspection and verification process. It is up to the
Government of Iraq to act.
Finally, we call on the Government of Iraq to
abide by all relevant Security Council resolutions with
respect to Kuwait. We urge Iraq to cooperate with
special envoy Vorontsov on the issues of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and to return
Kuwaiti cultural property.
As we consider the proposals presented by
various members of the Council, my delegation will be
guided by the determination to improve the socioeconomic conditions of the Iraqi people, while seeking
to ensure that Iraq’s neighbours and the region can
enjoy peace, security and prosperity.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Bangladesh.
The 11-year-long comprehensive sanctions
imposed on Iraq have been at the centre of an intense
debate in the United Nations and also in the
international community. The strict control on Iraq’s
imports and exports has resulted in a steady decline in
the living conditions of the Iraqi people. It is doubtful
whether the objective of alleviating the distress of the

23

S/PV.4336

people of Iraq through the oil-for-food programme has
been fully achieved. It is therefore incumbent on the
United Nations, as well as on the world community, to
seriously examine the situation in Iraq, taking a
comprehensive approach and focusing particularly on
the humanitarian condition of the people of Iraq.
In March 2000, during its first presidency of the
Council, Bangladesh took the initiative of holding an
open debate on Iraq. This finally, after many years,
afforded the wider membership of the United Nations
an opportunity to focus on the plight of the Iraqi
people, as well as on other relevant issues, particularly
that of Kuwaiti missing persons. For the second time
during a Bangladesh presidency, we believe, a welcome
opportunity is being provided to address the situation
in Iraq, in particular the devastating effect of the
sanctions on the life of the people of Iraq.
The oil-for-food programme was designed to
alleviate the humanitarian situation in Iraq. Although
Iraq accepted the programme, it has serious
reservations on provisions that it thinks impinge on its
sovereignty and national independence. Multiple
problems relating to the implementation of the
programme are perhaps rooted in this perception. It is
for this reason that many, including some Council
members, have been underscoring the need for a
comprehensive approach in addressing this issue.
The most comprehensive framework so far for the
United Nations policy on Iraq is provided in Security
Council resolution 1284 (1999). Yet it is deficient in
not indicating clearly a pathway towards the
suspension and final lifting of the sanctions.
We believe that sanctions regimes should clearly
define the modalities for the lifting of sanctions. That
only makes them credible. As a number of speakers
have said, the current deadlock in the situation must
not be allowed to continue. Council members must
make a serious effort to address these issues — issues
that have been giving rise to problems in the
implementation of the Council’s resolutions.
To make the current exercise on negotiating the
draft truly comprehensive, all issues of concern,
including Kuwaiti missing persons and the return of
Kuwaiti property, should be addressed. In doing so, the
Council should be mindful of the fact that Iraq has
rejected resolution 1352 (2001), which provides for the
broad principles guiding new arrangements. Making
the adoption and implementation of these new

24

arrangements contingent on the usual rollover of the
oil-for-food programme risks jeopardizing it.
Clearly, the cooperation of the Government of
Iraq, as well as the cooperation of the States sharing
borders with Iraq, is a key factor in the implementation
of these arrangements. Questions of their sovereignty,
economic interests, additional burden and so on,
enmeshed in legal issues, have critical significance. It
is, in our view, vital to closely consult with those States
in order to arrive at suitable arrangements.
The Council cannot be oblivious to the regional
political context that surrounds the issue. That calls for
a vision beyond the sanctions, a vision to salvage
future generations in Iraq. If the Council fails to get the
political perspective right, no procedural simplification
is likely to bring the desired result. Iraq’s involvement
in the process is crucial. The international community
has the obligation to help Iraq as much as Iraq has the
obligation to help itself by cooperating with the United
Nations.
That is why we welcomed the dialogue between
the Secretary-General and the Iraqi delegation in
February this year. It would make sense for the
Council, in its current endeavour, to encourage that
process.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Kuwait. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation is pleased to extend its congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We know that your
experience and wisdom will serve you well in steering
the deliberations of the Council successfully. In
addition, you represent Bangladesh, a friendly country
that maintains close ties with Kuwait. I should like also
to pay tribute to your predecessor, the Deputy
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, Ambassador James Cunningham, for his
remarkable stewardship of the Council during the past
month.
I should like also to thank the Russian Federation
for its initiative to convene this meeting, and to thank
you, Mr. President, along with the other members of
the Council, for agreeing to discuss the humanitarian

S/PV.4336

situation in Iraq and the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. All of these are issues of
great importance, and some of them have a direct
impact on the security and stability of my country,
Kuwait, and of the Arabian Gulf region.

programme, highlighted that fact, especially in his
most recent report (S/2001/505), in which he
underscored the Government of Iraq’s laxity in
discharging its responsibilities towards its people, as
demonstrated in the following areas.

If we are going to start talking about the
humanitarian situation in Iraq as being the central
theme which has been extensively discussed by the
Council for over a month, it is only fair to begin by
acknowledging with appreciation the role of the
Council and its continuing and tireless efforts to
improve the humanitarian situation in Iraq by
introducing many improvements to the oil-for-food
programme, with a view to enhancing its efficiency in
meeting the humanitarian needs of the brotherly people
of Iraq.

First, the Government of Iraq, at the beginning of
phase IX of the oil-for-food programme, deliberately
reduced its oil exports, on some occasions suspending
them completely, as it tried to commit companies that
would buy Iraqi oil to paying illegal surcharges on
every barrel of oil purchased.

We in Kuwait fully understand the depth of the
Iraqi suffering, simply because of our own bitter
experience of anguish during the seven months of our
occupation. Therefore, Kuwait has all along expressed
sympathy for the suffering of the brotherly people of
Iraq. We have translated those feelings of sympathy
into every possible form of assistance and aid to
individuals in Iraq. Furthermore, we have always called
for an end to the suffering of the Iraqi people, pursuant
to Security Council resolutions.
The assistance given by Kuwait has not been
limited to the aid provided by the Government of
Kuwait, but has gone beyond that to include assistance
rendered by civilian organizations such as the Kuwaiti
Red Crescent Society.
The intensive deliberations undertaken by the
Council for over a month in order to mitigate the
suffering of the Iraq people attest to the sense of
responsibility demonstrated by the Security Council
towards the suffering of the Iraqi people. Kuwait
therefore welcomes and supports all efforts under way
to improve the humanitarian programme with a view to
eliminating restrictions on the flow of civilian goods,
in order to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people.
What is regrettable, however, is that, despite the
strict humanitarian nature of the oil-for-food
programme, the Iraqi Government, for its part, has not
worked to ensure the success of that programme or to
ensure benefits from its modalities.
The Secretary-General, in many of his periodic
reports on the implementation of that humanitarian

The Secretary-General, in paragraph 4 of his
report, stated that the reduced rate of export of Iraqi oil
resulted in a loss by the humanitarian programme of
revenues estimated at $2.6 billion. It is clear that this
substantial revenue could easily have been collected
and used for the purchase of humanitarian goods for
the benefit of the Iraqi people.
Secondly, I wish to note the inordinate and
unjustifiable delays in the submission of applications
for humanitarian supplies. The Secretary-General, in
paragraph 15 of the same report, expressed his deep
regret that, as at 14 May 2001 — that is to say, three
weeks before the end of phase IX — the Office of the
Iraq Programme had not received a single application
in the sectors of health, education, water and sanitation
and oil industry spare parts and equipment. Paragraph
17 of the report adds that $2.82 billion was still
available for new contracts.
Clearly, such delays in the submission of
applications for these basic humanitarian necessities —
especially medicines and health-care supplies, which
are badly needed by the Iraqi people — raise the
serious question of the Iraqi Government’s indifference
to the suffering of its civilian population. Indeed, these
delays, if anything, confirm some accounts that the
Government of Iraq is exploiting the plight of civilians
in order to get the sanctions lifted without committing
itself fully to the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Thirdly, the Government of Iraq has deliberately
delayed, and prevented the granting of entry visas to
international personnel working to implement the
humanitarian programme, especially in the three
northern governorates, with a view to impeding the
efforts of United Nations agencies and to stalling the
vital projects undertaken by those agencies in the areas
of infrastructure development and mine clearance.

25

S/PV.4336

In paragraph 134 of the report, the SecretaryGeneral expresses his deep concern over the current
visa situation and the negative impact that the
interruption in essential activities is having on the
humanitarian situation in the three northern
governorates. The Secretary-General reiterated his call
to the Government of Iraq to issue the required visas
expeditiously, in conformity with the relevant
provisions of the Memorandum of Understanding.
It is clear that the obstacles placed by the
Government of Iraq in the way of the implementation
of the humanitarian programme in the northern
governorates are aimed only at preventing any
improvement in the humanitarian situation in those
areas. Indeed, an improvement there would embarrass
the Iraqi Government, if compared with the
humanitarian situation in the central and southern
governorates, which are under its control.
Fourthly, aside from the inordinate delays in
submissions of applications by the Government of Iraq,
there are unopened letters of credit in the amount of
$1.151 billion, as indicated in paragraph 133 of the
report of the Secretary-General. The Secretary-General
recommended that the Iraqi Government take all
necessary measures to expedite the processing of the
letters of credit.
Fifthly, the Government of Iraq has, for political
reasons, refused to implement Security Council
resolution 1352 (2001), which was recently adopted
unanimously and which extends phase IX of the oilfor-food programme for a period of 30 days. Without a
doubt, this refusal will result in the loss of assured
revenues estimated at more than $1 billion at current
international oil market prices.
Despite all of the obstacles and difficulties that
are impeding the implementation of the humanitarian
programme, one cannot ignore the substantial
achievements registered by the United Nations since
the inception of the programme in December 1996. The
value of the humanitarian supplies received by Iraq
exceeds $11.1 billion, and there are humanitarian
supplies in the pipeline estimated at $10.36 billion,
which have been approved and are due to arrive in Iraq.
The Secretary-General, in paragraph 123 of the
same report, stated that the programme has contributed
not only to arresting the decline in, but also to
improving, the living conditions of the average Iraqi.
This would have been difficult to achieve without the

26

sincere and genuine efforts made by the Office of the
Iraq Programme and the specialized international
agencies operating in Iraq. Indeed, the efforts of all
international personnel who are implementing this
unprecedented programme deserve our applause and
appreciation.
It is indeed regrettable that, despite the fact that
more than 10 years have elapsed since the Iraqi
aggression against the State of Kuwait, the Security
Council remains seized of the consequences of that
aggression because of procrastination and equivocation
by the Government of Iraq, whose aim is to evade
implementation of the basic commitments set forth in
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The most important of these commitments, which
represent the primary demands by Kuwait vis-à-vis
Iraq, are as follows: the first is the question of Kuwaiti
and third country prisoners and hostages. This
humanitarian issue, which embodies the suffering of
hundreds of families who do not know their children’s
fate, has seen no progress due to lack of cooperation on
Iraq’s part in the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 686 (1991), 687 (1991) and 1284 (1999),
all of which, among other things, call upon Iraq to
cooperate with the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) and the high-level Coordinator,
Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov, who was appointed by the
Secretary-General to facilitate the return of these
prisoners and hostages.
It is clear that the Government of Iraq is
indifferent to the humanitarian dimension of this issue,
because it refuses to resume its participation in the
meetings of the tripartite committee and its technical
subcommittee, whose meetings it boycotted in January
1998 on the basis of unjustifiable political pretexts
despite the humanitarian suffering of those innocent
prisoners, their families and loved ones.
Indeed, that attitude does not contribute to the
creation of an atmosphere of confidence and serenity
among the people of Kuwait. Furthermore, the
Government of Iraq has not responded to the repeated
calls made in the Secretary-General’s periodic reports
on this issue, which also urge it to continue cooperating
with the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov. Kuwait believes that Iraqi
disregard for the statements given in this context by the
President of the Security Council to the press,
supporting the remarks of the Secretary-General and

S/PV.4336

lauding the sincere efforts of Ambassador Vorontsov, is
further evidence of the fact that it is still bent on
creating and maintaining high tensions in our region.
In this regard, we call on the Security Council
and the international community to redouble their
efforts to convince the Government of Iraq to be more
forthcoming and positive in addressing this issue and to
resolve the entire matter on humanitarian, religious and
moral grounds and in conformity with relevant Security
Council resolutions.
We can safely say in all objectivity that there is a
firm international consensus, both among members of
the Security Council and within the entire community
of nations, on the long-standing tragedy of those
innocent victims and that the Government of Iraq is
responsible for their continued suffering and for
restoring stolen Kuwaiti property. The record of the
Government of Iraq in dealing with this issue does not
essentially differ from its record in dealing with other
issues.
The statement issued to the press by the President
of the Security Council on Wednesday, 20 June 2001,
regarding the question of the return of stolen property
is yet another indictment of Iraq and proves that Iraq is
in full compliance neither with paragraph 2 of
resolution 686 (1991) nor with resolution 1284 (1999).
In that statement, the Council expressed its full support
for the efforts of Ambassador Vorontsov and endorsed
the Secretary-General’s report contained in document
S/2001/582. It calls on the Government of Iraq to
cooperate fully with the high-level Coordinator in
order to resolve the matters pending in this file and to
restore all property seized, especially the national
archives and other official Kuwaiti documents, as well
as Kuwaiti military equipment. Kuwait hopes that the
Security Council will continue to pay adequate
attention to this important question beyond issuing
repeated statements, which fall on deaf ears in
Baghdad.
Thirdly, Kuwait has often drawn the attention of
the Security Council and the Secretary-General to the
non-peaceful intentions of the Iraqi Government
towards the State of Kuwait and other countries of the
region. Those intentions have taken the form of
repeated threats to the security and sovereignty of the
State of Kuwait. These threats have been made by
ranking officials in the Government of Iraq, such as
one by Uday Saddam Hussein, member of the Iraqi

National Assembly, who called for drawing up a map
of Iraq that includes Kuwait as part of that country.
Moreover, Iraq has alleged that Kuwait is stealing Iraqi
oil in the border region.
Such charges are taken very seriously and
carefully assessed in Kuwait. We cannot in any
circumstances accept these as statements for domestic
consumption only, as some claim them to be, because
the security and stability of States are not consumer
commodities. Similar accusations were levelled by the
Government of Iraq as pretexts for its invasion of the
State of Kuwait in August 1990. That is why, in its
letter to the Secretary-General and the President of the
Security Council, contained in document S/2001/412,
Kuwait declared its readiness to cooperate with any
impartial body the Security Council may see fit to
establish to investigate these Iraqi accusations, which
we are fully confident have no basis in truth.
The States of the Arabian Gulf cannot forget what
really happened because they had never imagined that
it could ever come to pass. Furthermore, the Iraqi
political and informational language addressed to the
Iraqi people and to neighbouring States in no way helps
to reassure us that the catastrophe will never recur or
that the Government of Iraq has learned anything from
past experience, abandoned its dreams or changed its
approach in dealing with its neighbours.
One reason for concern is that this Iraqi policy
seeks to create tension and to destabilize the entire
region. Instead of responding to the repeated calls of
regional and international organizations that it take the
necessary steps to demonstrate its peaceful intentions
towards the State of Kuwait and other neighbouring
countries and that it change its political and
informational language with a view to establishing an
atmosphere of confidence, Iraq — at the Arab summit
held in Jordan last March — rejected the inclusion of a
paragraph in the final declaration renewing its
commitment to guaranteeing the security and
sovereignty of the State of Kuwait. This position was
the source of consternation among the Arab leaders and
destroyed the consensus on the declaration, although
the text reflected all of Iraq’s demands, including that
for the lifting of the sanctions against it. Thus, no
statement regarding the lifting of the sanctions was
issued by the Arab Summit because of Iraq’s refusal to
include such a paragraph. Iraq’s position prompted
many Arab leaders to assert that it had squandered an
opportunity to achieve an unprecedented consensus

27

S/PV.4336

among them on the need to call for an end to the
sanctions.
In closing, Iraq’s implementation of all relevant
Security Council resolutions is the primary guarantee
of the security and stability of our region. Without
Iraq’s full compliance with those resolutions, this vital
region of the world will remain in a state of constant
tension. Had Iraq implemented its commitments under
resolution 1284 (1999), adopted some 18 months ago,
in all probability the sanctions would have been
suspended, if not lifted, as has happened to other States
subject to a sanctions regime.
Therefore, we call upon this Council to continue
its efforts with a collective will and to affirm its unity
in its vision and approach. The Council should send a
clear, unmistakable message to the Government of Iraq
that the Security Council is acting on the basis of its
political and legal responsibilities in order to urge that
Government to fulfil its obligations.
In this way, Iraq will be able to regain its natural
status as an active regional and international member.
This would allow the fraternal people of Iraq to make
full use of the bounties and resources conferred upon
them by God and to enjoy a good life, with the same
wealth and potential as the people of all other States of
the region.
Our last prayer is to praise our Lord.
The President: I thank the representative of
Kuwait for his kind words addressed to me and my
country.
The next speaker is the representative of Jordan. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan)
(spoke in Arabic): Please allow me to warmly
congratulate you, Sir, and your friendly country,
Bangladesh, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the current month. I am
confident that with your experience and skill the
proceedings of the Council will be successfully guided.
I would also like to express my gratitude to your
predecessor, Ambassador James Cunningham of the
United States, for his impressive stewardship of the
Council during the month of May.
It would be remiss of me not to mention Jordan’s
deep appreciation to Secretary-General Kofi Annan for

28

his
tireless
efforts,
prudent
leadership
and
extraordinary sense of purpose, and for his pursuit of
the purposes and principles of the United Nations in
order to attain international peace and security.
Today we are discussing the agenda item entitled
“The situation between Iraq and Kuwait”, and our
deliberations take place 10 years after the eruption of
the Gulf crisis that was triggered by Iraq invading the
State of Kuwait.
Our entire region is still suffering from the severe
repercussions of that crisis. Iraq continues to pay a
hefty price as a consequence of the comprehensive
sanctions imposed upon it that will have an impact on
future generations of the Iraqi population in terms of
their food, livelihood, health and prospects for
economic growth and development. The result is an
unprecedented case of civilian suffering.
Jordan has consistently called for an end to the
plight and suffering of Iraq and its people. This type of
collective punishment, the most severe in the history of
the United Nations, did not achieve its declared
purposes of consolidating peace and security. On the
contrary, those sanctions created conditions that in the
long run may endanger the future of the whole region.
Jordan is one of the countries that continue to
endure dire economic consequences as a result of its
adherence to the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Large segments of our economy, including land,
maritime and air transportation, manufacturing,
agriculture, and labour, continue to incur substantial
losses. This, in itself, should prompt work to eliminate
the adverse impact on Jordan of the sanctions imposed
on Iraq.
My delegation is aware that the Council is
currently engaged in consultations aimed at reviewing
the policies and modus operandi of the oil-for-food
programme that was initiated in 1996 on the basis of
the Memorandum of Understanding signed with Iraq to
implement Security Council resolution 986 (1995).
However, we would like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to the fact that any revised
policies elaborated should be viable. They should be
implementable and should enjoy the agreement of all
concerned, including Iraq, especially given that these
policies are based on prior understandings among all
parties.

S/PV.4336

In this context, we would like to emphasize that
the parameters for improving the humanitarian
conditions in Iraq must prevail over all other
considerations. Furthermore, a clear line must be drawn
between the policies governing the modus operandi of
the oil-for-food programme and the process of calling
for the implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions.
It must be stressed that the Council itself must
bear the consequences of any preventive collective
measures, as is clearly provided for in Articles 49 and
50 of the Charter, as well as the legal implications
thereof. This is all the more so in view of the extremely
sensitive circumstances prevailing in the region as a
result of the stalling peace process and the spiralling
cycle of violence.
Hence, we believe that the Council should
carefully and thoroughly examine the implications of
any actions to be taken on Jordan and the region, and
should act according to its sense of responsibility under
the Charter.
In this context my Government has submitted a
memorandum to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations illustrating the gigantic repercussions that
would face Jordan and its economy if the existing
agreements governing all aspects of economic relations
between it and its primary trade partner, Iraq, are
interrupted. These include Jordan’s import of all its oil
needs from Iraq. Jordan notified the Council of this
matter in 1990.
The call for the faithful implementation of
relevant Security Council resolutions should respect
the preservation of Iraq’s unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity and should refrain from any actions
that may infringe on these principles. We believe that
the only way out of the current crisis lies in the lifting
of sanctions imposed against Iraq by the Council,
thereby extricating Iraq from this dilemma, and by
reviving a comprehensive dialogue between Baghdad
and the United Nations in order to settle all the
outstanding issues that emanate from Iraq’s invasion of
Kuwait, including those relating to Kuwaiti and third
country prisoners and missing persons, and the
maintenance and security of the sovereignty of both
Kuwait and Iraq.
The President: I thank the representative of
Jordan for his kind words addressed to me and my
country.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Saudi Arabia. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, allow me, as my predecessors have
done, to congratulate you and your brotherly country
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the current month. I am confident that your experience
and wisdom will successfully guide the deliberations of
the Council. We would also like to thank your
predecessor,
Mr.
Cunningham,
the
deputy
representative of the United States, for his outstanding
steering of the deliberations of the Council last month.
The Security Council is meeting today to discuss
the situation between Iraq and Kuwait and to look into
ways of improving the humanitarian situation in Iraq,
as well as of implementing all Security Council
resolutions related to Iraq and of settling of the
situation in the wake of the conflict that beset the Gulf
region, as mentioned in document S/2001/597 dated
18 June 2001.
It is no secret to you, Mr. President, or to the
members of the Security Council, or to the whole
membership of the United Nations, that the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia spares no effort in consolidating
security and stability in the Gulf region and in
establishing an environment conducive to economic
development and fruitful cooperation between
neighbouring countries. This is why our relations with
all countries are based on good mutual relations, on the
principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of
others, and on the peaceful settlement of conflicts. The
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia deeply believes in the
brotherly bonds binding Arab countries and in
humanitarian principles, and is truly keen on achieving
and guaranteeing the security and stability of the region
through good neighbourly relations and respect of the
Security Council resolutions.
This is precisely why we have taken the initiative
in proposing a settlement for the situation in Iraq. The
Saudi initiative was that of the Committee of Arab
Action emanating from the consultative ministerial
meeting of the Arab foreign ministers held in Cairo on
28 January 1999 to put an end to the suffering of the
Iraqi people. In that meeting, we called for a reexamination of the sanctions regime. We also called for
an overhaul of this regime to put an end to the
suffering of the Iraqi people by enabling Iraq to import

29

S/PV.4336

all its basic humanitarian needs, medical supplies,
foodstuffs and educational material, without requiring
the prior consent of the Council. This would enable
Iraq to provide for its basic livelihood in a dignified
fashion and would start the necessary economic
development process.
On the other hand, Iraq is required to fulfil all its
international financial obligations, such as reparations,
as well as payments for costs incurred due to the
constant monitoring of banned weapons in Iraq.
Sanctions should be restricted to the acquisition of
arms, military equipment and dual-use materials as
stipulated in relevant Security Council resolutions,
especially the resolutions relating to the elimination of
weapons of mass destruction, be they nuclear, chemical
or biological, and of any other military potential that
might endanger the sovereignty, safety, security and
stability of neighbouring countries. This requires an
effective long-term monitoring programme based on a
number of checks and balances defined by credible,
efficient and neutral international monitoring agencies.
This would guarantee the fulfilment of the task in an
efficient, impartial manner. The end result of the
activity would be the alleviation of the suffering of the
Iraqi people and the assurance that revenues would not
be used for any other illicit purposes.
Our initiative has highlighted the necessity for
Iraq to fully abide by its obligations regarding Kuwaiti
and non-Kuwaiti prisoners of war and missing persons,
as is mentioned in relevant Security Council
resolutions, especially in paragraph 30 of resolution
687 (1991).
Our initiative aims at putting an end to the
suffering of the brotherly Iraqi people and to
guaranteeing the security, safety and stability of
neighbouring countries. Furthermore, our initiative was
adopted by the League of Arab States and was rejected
by Iraq. Iraq has also rejected the Arab initiative
agreed to by the Arab leaders during the Amman
Summit, held on 27 and 28 March 2001. It has become
abundantly clear to the international community that
the continuation of the international sanctions imposed
on Iraq is due to policies adopted by the Iraqi
Government, such as the non-implementation of some
of the major aspects of relevant Security Council
resolutions.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia feels empathy with
the suffering of the brotherly Iraqi people and wishes

30

to highlight its support for putting an end to their
suffering, for enabling Iraq to obtain the necessary
materials to achieve this goal and for lessening the
constraints on civil trade, all in conformity with the
resolutions of the Security Council and without
affecting the security and safety of neighbouring
countries.
We wish also to stress that Iraq must prove its
good intentions with concrete actions, and must refrain
from provocative or aggressive action towards Kuwait
or other neighbouring countries, by the terms of
resolution 949 (1994). Strict Iraqi compliance with and
implementation
of
relevant
Security
Council
resolutions on the situation between Iraq and Kuwait
and full cooperation with the United Nations and its
agencies constitute the best way to resolve this crisis,
to build confidence and to restore security and stability,
thus paving the way for cooperation to the benefit of
the countries of the region.
Here again, I want to reaffirm that we wish to
preserve the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Iraq, and that we look forward to Iraq’s return to the
fold of the international community, once it has
implemented the Council’s resolutions, as a responsible
member playing a constructive role in the international
arena through the efforts of its able and dynamic
people.
The President: I thank the representative of
Saudi Arabia for the kind words he addressed to me
and to my country.
The next speaker is the representative of Sweden.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Schori (Sweden): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the manner in which you are handling this meeting.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union —
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia — and the associated countries Cyprus and
Malta, as well as the European Free Trade Association
country member of the European Economic Area
Iceland, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union remains committed to the
full implementation of all Security Council resolutions
pertaining to Iraq. In particular, the European Union

S/PV.4336

calls for the implementation of all the provisions of
resolutions 687 (1991) and 1284 (1999). Those
resolutions specify the obligations of Iraq in several
areas, including weapons of mass destruction, and
define the way to suspension and lifting of the
prohibitions imposed by the Council. There can be no
doubt that the key to suspension and lifting of
sanctions lies in the hands of the Government of Iraq.
The European Union looks forward to the future
reintegration of Iraq into the international community
and to a more prosperous and dignified life for the Iraqi
civilian population. We reiterate that Iraq must fully
comply with its obligations as provided for in the
relevant Security Council resolutions, and we call on
the Government of Iraq to cooperate to that end. The
European Union also welcomes the dialogue between
the Secretary-General and the Government of Iraq.
The European Union regrets that, as a result of
Iraq’s failure to fulfil its international obligations, the
conditions do not exist which would enable the Council
to lift the prohibitions imposed under resolution 687
(1991). The European Union urges Iraq to cooperate
with the United Nations in all respects, and reiterates
the demand that Iraq allow the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
and the International Atomic Energy Agency to
undertake the responsibilities mandated by the Security
Council and to enable them to initiate their work in
Iraq as soon as possible.
Until the fulfilment by Iraq of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, there is a clear need, as a
temporary measure, to provide for the civilian needs of
the Iraqi people. The European Union has strong
sympathy for the fate of the Iraqi population, and
remains the largest contributor of humanitarian aid and
assistance to Iraq.
The European Union notes that, though not meant
to meet all the needs of the Iraqi people, the United
Nations humanitarian programme, as reported by the
Secretary-General on 18 May (S/2001/505), has
contributed not only to arresting the decline in the
living conditions of the average Iraqi, but also to
improving them. Important measures have also been
taken lately, including in resolutions 1284 (1999), 1302
(2000) and 1330 (2000), to further improve the
implementation of the oil-for-food programme.
However, the humanitarian situation in Iraq remains
alarming, calling for ambitious measures aimed at

alleviating the suffering among the population. In
particular, measures to stimulate normal activity in the
civilian sectors of the Iraqi economy are vital.
Lasting security and stability in the region, as
well as the living conditions of the Iraqi population, are
the prime considerations that must guide the Security
Council’s actions. In that regard, the European Union
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 1352
(2001) on 1 June 2001. We find particularly important
the commitment by the whole Security Council
membership to consider new arrangements for the
supply of commodities and products to Iraq and for the
facilitation of civilian trade and economic cooperation
with Iraq in civilian sectors. The two principles
outlined there have full European Union support: that
such a system should, first, improve the flow of
commodities and products to Iraq, with the exception
of those covered under resolution 687 (1991) and those
included in the so-called goods review list, and,
secondly, improve the controls to prevent the sale or
supply of items prohibited and unauthorized by the
Council and to prevent the flow of revenues to Iraq
outside the escrow account. The European Union hopes
that this new system will enhance transparency and
allow Iraq to import the full range of civilian goods
with the minimum of restrictions necessary to ensure
that military-related items are not exported to Iraq.
The European Union welcomes the intention by
the Security Council to adopt and implement such
arrangements for a period beginning on 4 July. We
strongly support the ongoing deliberations within the
Council with the purpose of alleviating the predicament
of the Iraqi civilian population. We encourage the
Security Council to adopt, in accordance with
resolution 1352 (2001), a decision on the new
arrangements as soon as possible.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Malaysia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you formally on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month, and to pay
tribute to Ambassador Cunningham of the United
States for his able stewardship of the Council last
month.
My delegation expresses its appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this important and timely
meeting. Our appreciation goes also to the Russian

31

S/PV.4336

Federation for initiating the request for a meeting on
this subject, and to the other members of the Council
for their support. We are encouraged that the Security
Council is supportive of an open debate on one of the
Council’s most challenging issues: how to mitigate the
humanitarian crisis in Iraq and move forward on the
issue of disarmament. We believe that today’s meeting
will provide the Council with important feedback on
this issue from the general membership of the United
Nations.
In an earlier commentary on the humanitarian
situation in Iraq, the Secretary-General had described
the situation there as one that was posing “a serious
moral dilemma” for the United Nations. He remarked
that as a matter of principle, the Organization had
always been on the side of the vulnerable and weak,
focusing its efforts to relieve suffering, but in the case
of the Iraqi situation, the United Nations was accused
of promoting the suffering of an entire population. His
lament remains as poignant today as it was then.
The United Nations will be hard pressed to
defend itself against this charge in the face of
substantive cumulative evidence — much of it gathered
by its own agencies — that comprehensive sanctions
against Iraq have resulted in the severe suffering of
innocent civilians and caused profound socio-economic
dislocations. The fact remains that a decade of the most
comprehensive and punitive sanctions ever imposed on
a society has decimated Iraq as a modern State,
effectively forcing that country’s economy back to a
pre-industrial age and making it ever so dependent on
the United Nations humanitarian programme for basic
survival. That is beyond dispute.
It is time for the Council to muster the political
will to move beyond its current approach in dealing
with the situation. We do not believe that the Council’s
efforts for disarmament in respect of Iraq, which in fact
have made significant progress, should continue to be
linked to a policy of comprehensive sanctions that have
resulted in the loss of lives and untold suffering for the
Iraqi people. We do not believe the situation today
justifies the continuation of these comprehensive
sanctions.
After more than a decade of debilitating
sanctions, the time has come for the international
community and the Council to take a new and more
balanced approach, one that would address the
legitimate security concerns of the countries in the

32

region, but would also spare the people of Iraq further
collective punishment. If this Council is indeed serious
in its intention to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi
people, this new approach should not link progress and
disarmament with efforts to alleviate the humanitarian
suffering.
It has long been our view that incremental
improvements within the framework of the sanctions
regime will not mitigate the impact of sanctions in any
significant way. Based on our own direct observation
of the situation on the ground, including the
observation made by the recent humanitarian
delegation from Malaysia to Iraq, the so-called
humanitarian improvements against the background of
a weakened physical, health, medical, water and
sanitation infrastructure, due to the numerous holds,
have failed miserably. This has reinforced our
conviction that the oil-for-food programme will not be
able to adequately mitigate the effects of the sanctions.
The issue of the moral dilemma alluded to by the
Secretary-General is very pertinent to the question of
violations of human rights and humanitarian law.
Paragraph 109 of the Bossuyt report, entitled “The
adverse consequences of economic sanctions on the
enjoyment of human rights”, issued by the Commission
on Human Rights in document E/CN.4/Sub.2/2000/33,
of 21 June 2000, states:
“Sanctions regimes that clearly violate
international law, especially human rights and
humanitarian law, need not be respected. This is
especially true when the imposers are clearly on
notice of those violations and have undertaken no
effective modification. Sanctions are now
imposed with no consideration whatsoever of
their legal status. In these situations, the
humanitarian tragedy must be viewed as
constituting an ‘override’ to an unduly harsh
economic sanctions regime — analogous to the
doctrine of force majeur. And, as already set out,
the degree of public outcry is a factor in
determining whether a sanctions regime is too
harsh.”
Perhaps the most important implication of
international law for the issue of sanctions from the
perspective of human rights and humanitarian law is
that the right to impose sanctions is not unlimited. The
rights of the civilian population must be protected to
the maximum extent possible through the provisions of

S/PV.4336

the essentials for survival. Even with this modest
objective, the ability of the oil-for-food programme to
deliver is being seriously questioned. We are not even
talking about the higher-level needs of civil society,
which also constitute a right of every individual.
We cannot in any serious discussion of the
situation in Iraq be oblivious to the ongoing operations
in the so-called no-fly zones. Malaysia has consistently
challenged the purpose and the legality of such
operations. Due to the low level and limited nature of
the operations, the bombing of Iraqi targets remains as
background noise in the general effort to confront or
contain Iraq. The tendency of the international
community has been to generally ignore these events as
if they were routine operations, even when civilian
casualties — the so-called collateral damage — are
involved.
Clearly the continuation of these illegal
operations is not conducive to a constructive dialogue
between the United Nations and Iraq, which is so
necessary at this stage. Indeed, these illegal and
provocative operations will only complicate any effort
towards dialogue and engagement with Iraq, such as
the one initiated by the Secretary-General, for which
we commend him and strongly encourage him to
continue. Only dialogue and engagement will move the
process forward, not continued isolation and
containment, which will punish the long-suffering
people of Iraq even further.
In the light of the continuing suffering of the Iraqi
people, there has been increasing outcry among civil
societies in a number of countries against the
continuing sanctions and a more discernible

manifestation of international solidarity with the
people of Iraq. The dispatch of some 132 humanitarian
flights to Iraq since November last year is a clear and
undeniable reflection of this rising concern and
solidarity with the people of Iraq. In working out its
approach on Iraq, the Council should not turn a blind
eye to this clear manifestation of international public
sentiment on the situation in Iraq.
While Malaysia is concerned about the plight of
the Iraqi people living under sanctions, it has never
failed to also add its voice to the call by the
international community for an early resolution of the
issue of more than 600 Kuwaiti missing persons, as
well as those from third countries. We consider it a
grave humanitarian issue that needs to be addressed
and more vigorously pursued. We reiterate our call on
Iraq to fulfil all its international obligations and resume
participation in the Tripartite Commission and the
Technical Subcommittee. Not less important is the need
to facilitate the return of Kuwait’s national archives
and other property that was taken out of Kuwait. These
are important issues that should not be relegated to the
back burner of Council deliberations. The existence of
complete consensus in the Security Council on these
two humanitarian issues should provide a strong basis
for their early resolution.
The President: There are a number of
speakers — as I just mentioned, about 20 — on my list.
In view of the lateness of the hour and with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, I intend to
suspend the meeting until the afternoon of Thursday,
28 June. The exact time will be announced in the
Journal.
The meeting was suspended at 7.30 p.m.

33
