Resolutions adopted on reports of the Third Committee
538 (VI). Assistance to and protection of
refugees
A

The General Assembly
1. Takes note of part I and part II of the annual
report 2 of the United Nations High Com~issioner f_or
Refugees submitted through the E~onom1c and Soc_1al
Council to the General Assembly m accordance with
paragraph 11 of the Statute of his office ;3
2. Expresses its satisfaction at the conclusion of the
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees ;4
3. Invites Member States and non-member States
which have demonstrated their interest in the solution
of the refugee problem to become parties to that Convention as soon as possible ;
4. Reiterates its call upon governments to co-operate
with the High Commissioner as recommended in its
resolution 428 (V) of 14 December 1950.
371st plenary meeting,
2 February 1952.

B
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the communication 5 of the General
Council of the International Refugee Organization on
residual refugee problems and the observations 6 of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees contained in his report on the problem of assistance submitted in accordance with resolution 430 (V) of 14
December 1950,
Having noted the serious unsolved problems which
in certain areas will face refugees who will not have
been repatriated or resettled by the end of the operations of the International Refugee Organization,
Bearing in mind the urgency of finding solutions for
the refugee problem, including the repatriation to their
countries of origin of refugees who express the desire
to return there,
1. Authorizes the High Commissioner, under paragraph 10 of the Statute of his Office, to issue an appeal for funds for the purpose of enabling emergency
aid to be given to the most needy groups among
refugees within his mandate;
2. Recommends all States directly affected by the
refugee problem, as well as the appropriate specialized
agencies and other inter-governmental agencies concerned, to pay special attention to this problem when
drawing up and executing programmes of economic reconstruction and development; and requests the High
Commissioner to contribute to the promotion of activities in this field, paying due regard to the desirability
of repatriating to their countries of origin refugees who
express the desire to return there;
• See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Supplement No. 19.
• See resolution 428 (V) adopted on 14 December 1950 by
the General Assembly.
• See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Supplement No. 19, part tl.
• Ibid., Annexes, agenda items 30 and 31, document A/1948.
'Ibid., Supplement No. 19, part III.

35

3. Appeals to States interested in migr_ation to gi~e
to refugees within the mandat~ of the ~1~h Co_mm1sp
sioner every possible opportumty to _part~c1pate m and
benefit from projects to promote nugrahon.
371st plenary meeting,
2 February 1952.
539 (VI). Draft Protocol relating to the Status
of Stateless Persons
The General Assembly,
Considering that the progress of p_roc~edings at its
sixth regular session does not allow 1t time to de.vote
adequate attention to item 58 of its agenda, entitled
"Draft Protocol relating to the Status of Stateless
Persons",
Decides to defer consideration of this item until its
seventh regular session.
373rd plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.
540 (VI). Observance of human rights
The General Assembly,
Considering that, notwi~hstanding the p~oclamati_on
of the Universal Declaration of Human R1ghts, 7 violations of human rights ·have continued to occur,
Considering that it is the responsibility of the Members of the United Nations, individually and collectively, to see that human rights and freedoms shall be
enhanced throughout the world,
Recommends that Members of the United Nations
intensify their effor~s for_ the obseryan~e of h_uman
rights and freedoms m their own territories and m the
Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories.
374th plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.
541 (VI). Freedom of information
A

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the consideration that they deserve
cannot be given at the sixth regular session to the contents of documents A/C.3/L.239, A/C.3/L.244, A/C.3/L.242/Rev. land A/C.3/L.243,
Decides to postpone until its seventh regular session
consideration of the points raised in those documents
relating to questions of freedom of information.
374th plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.

B
The General Assembly,
Regretting that the progress of the proceedings at its
sixth regular session does not allow it to devote a detailed discussion to the problems of freedom of information, and especially to the study of the draft convention on freedom of information,
Decides to place consideration of all these problems
on the provisional agenda of its seventh regular session
for early discussion.
374th plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.
• See resolution 217 (Ill) adopted on 10 December 1948 by
the General Assembly.
