S/PV.9030

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9030th meeting

Wednesday, 11 May 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ravindran
Ms. Moran
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-34578 (E)
*2234578*

S/PV.9030

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Council reaffirmed its decisions that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea shall not conduct any
further launches using ballistic missile technology.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Japan and the Republic of Korea to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Khaled
Khiari, Assistant Secretary-General for Middle East,
Asia and the Pacific in the Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Khiari.
Mr. Khiari: The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has intensified the pace of its launches using
ballistic missile technology. Indeed, it has launched
more missiles in the past five months than in the prior
two years combined.
On 4 May, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea launched a missile using ballistic missile
technology that covered a range of 470 kilometres and
reached an apogee of 780 kilometres. It was launched
from the Sunan, area near Pyongyang. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea launched a ballistic missile
of possible intercontinental range from the same location
on 24 March. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea launched another missile on 7 May, possibly
from a submarine, which reportedly covered a range of
600 kilometres and reached an apogee of 60 kilometres.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea did not
issue public information on either launch, and neither
did it issue airspace or maritime safety notifications.
The Secretary-General strongly condemns the
continued development of missiles using ballistic
missile technology by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Such actions are clear violations of
relevant Security Council resolutions and contribute to
increasing tensions in the region and beyond. It should
be recalled that, in resolution 2397 (2017), the Security
2/16

11/05/2022

There have been other troubling developments since
our previous briefing, on 25 March (see S/PV.9004).
On 16 April, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea carried out its first launch of a system it
characterized as intended for use in “tactical nuclear
operations”. The system in question covered a range of
110 kilometres. Developing such systems was among
the core defence development tasks for the 2021 to 2025
period set forth during the eighth Party Congress of the
Workers’ Party of Korea in January 2021.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea leader
also made statements on 25 April and 30 April that
Pyongyang could pre-emptively use its nuclear weapons.
Statements of this nature are deeply concerning.
Finally, there are indications of resumed
construction activities at the Punggye-ri nuclear-test
site, which was declared shut down in 2018.
Those developments all relate to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s continuing pursuit of its
nuclear programme. While some States continue to rely
on nuclear weapons in their security policies, nuclear
weapons pose an existential threat to humankind. Their
existence heightens the risk of unintended escalation
or miscalculation. We must strengthen our efforts to
eliminate nuclear weapons.
We have consistently conveyed our concerns to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. However, by
continuing to pursue its nuclear-weapons programme,
including its development of missiles using ballistic
missile technology, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea continues to defy the repeated demands of the
Council to cease such activities.
The Secretary-General reaffirms his commitment
to working with all parties for sustainable peace and the
complete and verifiable denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula. He urges the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to comply with the Council’s decisions, reset
the course to dialogue and build on previous diplomatic
efforts. Furthermore, the United Nations welcomes
and encourages the regular contact and cooperation
among key parties regarding the Korean peninsula. We
commend the parties for their willingness to engage
in dialogue with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea without preconditions.
22-34578

11/05/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The Secretary-General reiterates the importance of
addressing the critical humanitarian needs of people in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The United
Nations remains engaged and stands ready, along with
its humanitarian partners, to assist people in need in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Their
vulnerability has likely increased since the pandemic
outbreak and border closures in 2020.
We reiterate our call for the entry of international
staff, including the United Nations Resident Coordinator,
and for the unimpeded entry of humanitarian supplies
to allow for a timely and effective response. We also
acknowledge the work of Member States towards
resolving the banking channel for humanitarian
operations and emphasize the growing urgency of
its conclusion.
Let me conclude by reiterating that the unity of
the Security Council on this matter is essential to ease
tensions, overcome the diplomatic impasse and avoid a
negative action-reaction cycle.
The President: I thank Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his remarks.
Once again, the Security Council is gathered in
response to provocations coming from the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea regime. It is our common
responsibility to address those continued and repeated
violations of international law and multiple Security
Council own resolutions. The reckless actions of North
Korea dramatically increase tensions not only in the
Korean peninsula, but far beyond. The world must
know that such provocations do not — and should
not — go unnoticed.
The Security Council cannot simply wait for
an impending catastrophe before we show true
commitment. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s actions and reports from the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) confirm our concerns

S/PV.9030

and raise an even greater alarm. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has not abandoned or slowed down
its existing nuclear programmes. On the contrary, it has
accelerated them, as the Assistant Secretary-General
just highlighted, and it is mounting its nuclear capacities
and capabilities with new sophisticated technologies.
We strongly condemn those actions and reiterate, once
again, our call on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to return as soon as possible to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
IAEA safeguards.
Since the beginning of the year, we have witnessed
multiple high-technology ballistic missile launches by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, threatening
the Korean peninsula and regional and global security.
Today we are discussing the fifteenth test by the regime
this year — this time, a submarine-launched ballistic
missile on 7 May.
The message is clear: the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea continues on its irreversible,
dangerous path towards proliferation and weapons
of mass destruction programmes. It is now also
threatening the use of nuclear weapons, as rightly
highlighted by the Assistant Secretary-General. The
dangerous militarization course of, and threats by, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must be stopped
immediately. The international community — and
the Security Council in particular — must act now to
prevent a further increase of tensions and instability
in the Korean peninsula, which would have huge
consequences worldwide.
While the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
is threatening the world with its ballistic missiles and
nuclear programmes, it is starving its own population
into submission at the same time. It is also implementing
a large-scale policy threat in cyberspace. Recent credible
media reports have shown that the regime has conducted
several malicious cyberactivities to collect intelligence,
carry out cyberattacks and generate unlawful income.
The income from those illegal activities is used to fund
its militarization and proliferation efforts.
We are strongly concerned about the findings of the
recent report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, which speaks about
“a new arms race that will further militarize
the region and dampen prospects for peace and

22-345783/16

S/PV.9030

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

denuclearization and divert resources from social
and economic priorities.” (A/HRC/49/74, para. 6)
That is a stark reminder that the time to act is now.
Repeated calls addressed to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to stop its provocations and violations
of international law have clearly failed. Patience has
worn out and action is needed. The regime has made the
choice to ignore the Council and its resolutions and to
break its own commitments: it must be held accountable
for its actions. The patience shown by the Council has
been misread by the regime, and the Council’s lack of
unity has shielded its provocations. That can no longer
continue. Speaking out, condemning and calling on the
regime to reverse its course and go back to negotiations
is no longer enough. There is a need for strong, concrete
and resolute action by strengthening measures against
the regime. Otherwise, everything indicates that, if
we stay idle, we only provide the regime with more
opportunities to continue to starve its people and satisfy
its appetite for more weapons, threatening the world.
It is therefore of paramount importance that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea return to the
self-imposed moratorium of 2018 on intercontinental
ballistic missile launches, as well as to meaningful
dialogue without preconditions, so that the full,
comprehensive and irreversible denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula does not remain a call or a wish but
becomes a reality, as foreseen in the resolutions of the
Security Council.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari for his very useful briefing.
Ireland condemns the recent missile launches by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The intense and
escalatory series of launches over the past six months,
including intercontinental ballistic missile launches, in
violation of Council resolutions, are a matter of deepest
concern and must be brought to an end. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s actions serve only to raise
tensions, threatening the peace and stability of the
Korean peninsula and the wider region. They also risk
undermining the global non-proliferation architecture.
Since the Council last met on this issue (see
S/PV.9004), the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has conducted three launches and has restated its aim of
enhancing the efficiency in the operation of its tactical
nukes, while President Kim Jung-Un has declared the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s resolve to
4/16

11/05/2022

further build up the country’s nuclear combat forces.
At the same time, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has continued its nuclear activities at Yongbyon,
with the production of further stocks of fissile material,
as well as at other sites related to the nuclear programme.
That is wholly unacceptable. It directly contravenes the
expressed concerns of the international community and
the decisions of the Council.
The Council has been silent for too long. In that
regard, the ongoing work towards a possible Council
resolution is welcome and necessary. The Security
Council must be united, strong and determined in
responding to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s actions.
There can only be a diplomatic and peaceful
resolution to the issues on the Korean peninsula.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must
understand that and take up the offers of dialogue
by the United States and South Korea in good faith
and without preconditions. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea must meet its obligations, as set out
in the relevant Security Council resolutions, to abandon
its ballistic missile programme and its nuclear and other
weapons of mass destruction programmes in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner. It must resume its
obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and the International Atomic
Energy Agency safeguards, and it must sign and ratify
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
Until the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
takes meaningful steps to fulfil its obligations, the
relevant Council resolutions and the sanctions regime
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) must be fully and
effectively enforced. Equally, we must strengthen our
efforts to stem sanctions evasion by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which funds and assists
procurement for the country’s illegal programmes.
Ireland remains deeply concerned at the worrisome
humanitarian situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We again urge the Democratic
People’s Republic to allow access for United Nations
and other humanitarian actors to assess needs and
provide appropriate assistance in the country. The
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006), in providing expedited exemptions, has sought
to ensure that necessary humanitarian assistance
reaches the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
22-34578

11/05/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

However, the Democratic People’s Republic itself
must recognize that prioritizing its illegal military
programmes over the livelihoods, well-being and rights
of its citizens has had disastrous consequences for its
own people. It is time for that to end. The Council has
made clear the necessary steps; it is for the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to act on them.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Khiari for his briefing and welcome
the participation of the representatives of the Republic
of Korea and Japan at this meeting.
Once again, we wish to express our deep concern
over the steadily escalating situation in the Korean
peninsula. This year alone, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has carried out 15 test launches of
missiles using ballistic technology, in clear violation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions. In addition,
there have been disconcerting reports attributed to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s State media
of a determination by the country to develop its nuclear
weapons in the shortest possible time. Those incessant
and provocative acts are driving the region into an arms
race, with attendant destabilizing effects and grave
implications for global peace and security.
Given the situation that obtains, any miscalculation
could plunge the Korean peninsula into unspeakable
turmoil. The resultant global socioeconomic and
security repercussions would be too grave to
contemplate, particularly for the global South. In view
of that, Kenya reiterates its call for the halting of any
further provocative acts in the Korean peninsula. We
urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
recommit to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, the safeguards established by the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.
We reiterate that the only acceptable path is genuine
dialogue without preconditions — dialogue that takes
into consideration the concerns and perceptions of
threat of all parties in the region. In that regard, Kenya
urges the international community, in particular
States with influence on both sides, to help restart
diplomatic efforts.
It is disturbing that the provocations are happening
against a backdrop of a deteriorating humanitarian
situation, with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea experiencing its second-worst drought in 40

S/PV.9030

years. We encourage the Democratic People’s Republic
to prioritize the needs of its people over militarization.
Meanwhile, all other parties concerned should
spare a thought for the humanitarian plight of the
approximately 11 million citizens of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea who are in need. They
should endeavour to ensure that any actions taken do
not unnecessarily worsen the suffering of the innocent
people of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Assistant-Secretary-General Khaled
Khiari for his valuable briefing. I also welcome the
participation of the representatives of Republic of
Korea and Japan in today’s meeting.
The United Arab Emirates condemns the latest
series of missile tests by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, as well as the missiles launched since
September 2021, including the submarine-launched
ballistic missile on 7 May, as reported, in addition to
the intercontinental ballistic missile launched in March.
The reports showing that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is preparing to conduct another nuclear
test are troubling. We call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to respect relevant international
law and norms. We also urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to refrain from any further missile
tests, abide by the Security Council resolutions as well
the relevant obligations under international law and
return to diplomatic talks.
The Security Council must spare no effort to
prevent further deterioration of the security situation on
the Korean peninsula and additional harm to the global
non-proliferation agenda. In that context, we would like
to emphasize the following three points.
First, it is important at this critical juncture that
the international community continue to send a clear
message on the importance of non-proliferation and
maintain intensive efforts aimed at ensuring full
compliance to it by all States Members of the United
Nations, as this is fundamental to preserving the
achievements that have been made over the past
few decades.
Secondly, with regard to the concerns that
measures taken by the Council, including sanctions,
could harm the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s development and affect stability in the region,
the United Arab Emirates reaffirms its readiness to

22-345785/16

S/PV.9030

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

work with Council members and other Member States,
including the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
neighbouring countries, to address humanitarian
concerns, while ensuring that the Council shoulder
its responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. In that regard, we call on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to resume dialogue with the
relevant stakeholders so as to benefit, with its people,
from numerous economic and development returns if it
engages in a genuine denuclearization process.
Thirdly, the United Arab Emirates is deeply
concerned that the people of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea continue to suffer from the
deteriorating humanitarian conditions. We stress that
the country’s limited resources should be directed
towards the fulfilment of basic needs and necessities
of the people. In order for the international community
and the United Nations to help its people, the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea should engage constructively in a dialogue with
United Nations officials, including the United Nations
Resident Coordinator, and should allow them to return
to the country to carry out their vital activities.
In conclusion, my country emphasizes that
sanctions compliance by all Member States and the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions remain
essential pillars for maintaining international peace
and security.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for
his briefing.
Once again, the Security Council is meeting to
condemn ballistic-missile launches by North Korea.
This year alone, as we have heard, North Korea has
launched 17 ballistic missiles, each in violation of
Security Council resolutions. In the whole of 2021,
North Korea conducted eight missile tests. Let us
therefore make no mistake about the escalation in tempo
and missile capability that those 17 launches represent.
North Korea has been quite clear that it intends to
continue to develop prohibited programmes, including
intercontinental ballistic missiles. Such actions are
a threat to regional peace and security. The United
Kingdom unequivocally condemns the ballistic-missile
launches by North Korea on 4 and 7 May.
We urge Council members to meet such violations
with a firm and united response. We again call on all
Member States to implement existing Security Council
6/16

11/05/2022

resolutions in full. Those are an essential part of the
efforts to curtail the continued development of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s prohibited
programmes. We fully support the United States-led
efforts to update sanctions in the context of the evolving
threat that North Korea’s actions present.
We are particularly concerned by North Korea’s
cyberactivity, through which it evades sanctions and
raises funds to support its nuclear and ballistic-missile
programmes. That includes the recent cryptocurrency
theft by North Korean cyberactors of $620 million. The
international community should work together to detect
and mitigate such activity, and hold those committing
malicious cyberactivity to account.
The Security Council’s sanctions are not targeted
at the people of North Korea, and we fully support the
delivery of humanitarian support to the most vulnerable.
We call on North Korea to allow humanitarian workers
into the country to carry out an independent assessment
of the humanitarian situation and to allow aid to flow
freely into the country. North Korea’s continued
channelling of its resources into proscribed weapons
programmes is responsible for worsening the dire
humanitarian situation in that country.
We
reaffirm
our
full
commitment
to
non-proliferation obligations. We call on North
Korea to refrain from further provocations, to engage
meaningfully in dialogue with the United States and
to take concrete steps towards denuclearization in a
complete, verifiable and irreversible manner.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to thank your delegation, Madam
President, for having convened this meeting. I would
also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari
for his briefing. We also welcome the representatives of
the Republic of Korea and Japan.
A little over a month after we met in this
very Chamber on the issue of the launching of an
intercontinental ballistic missile by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea (see S/PV.9004), we express
our deep concern about the latest ballistic launches,
most recently on Saturday, 7 May. That constitutes a
new provocation, in clear disregard both of Security
Council resolutions and of the multilateral system
grounded in international law.
Mexico condemns the missile launches, which
contravene the resolutions of the Security Council,
22-34578

11/05/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

as well as statements on the possible use of nuclear
weapons. The continued missile launches, coupled with
the development of a nuclear military programme with
clear offensive intentions, impede multilateral efforts
to foster an environment of stability and cooperation in
North-East Asia.
Given the failure to suspend the development of
missile systems and a possible resumption of activities
at the nuclear test site, it is urgent that the Council
take a united stand against any action that undermines
international peace and security. The current
international context has made clear the need for actors
with influence, particularly members of the Council, to
spare no effort towards de-escalation, including in the
various formats envisaged by the multilateral system.
I conclude by recalling that the threat of use of nuclear
weapons significantly increases the risk of accidents
or miscalculations and encourages proliferation. We
therefore reiterate our call for maximum restraint,
and we emphasize the need for a dialogue with the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that leads to the
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula. We also once again stress the
absolute imperative of which we cannot, and must not,
lose sight, namely, to achieve a world free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Let me begin by thanking
Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his briefing.
On 17 April, North Korean State media announced
the test of a “new type of tactical guided weapon”.
In the same communiqué, the official news agency
praised such a weapon for drastically improving the
firepower of the front-line long-range artillery units
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and for
enhancing the efficiency in the operation of tactical
nukes, thereby attending the core goals of securing the
war deterrent set at the eighth Congress of the Workers’
Party of Korea.
A week later, during a parade to celebrate the
ninetieth anniversary of the Korean People’s Army, the
North Korean leadership declared that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear weapons “can
never be confined to the single mission of war deterrent”
if there were a perceived threat against its homeland.
After that statement, ballistic missiles were launched
on 4 and 7 May.

S/PV.9030

The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
message to the international community could not be
clearer. At the eighth Congress of the Workers’ Party
of Korea, the North Korean leadership had already
announced its intentions to develop ultramodern tactical
nuclear weapons, hypersonic gliding flight warheads
and multi-warhead missiles. Its accomplishments and
its pronouncement throughout this year have only
confirmed what had already been said, but we perhaps
did not want to listen. If we, as the Security Council,
had listened to the message that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has delivered time and
again, we most certainly would not have been able to
respond. The Council’s silence in the face of successive
violations of its resolutions is deafening.
It is needless to say that Brazil condemns yet
another launch of a ballistic missile by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. I have lost count of how
many times my delegation has said that in the few
months that we have been on the Council. All members
of the Council — and I repeat, all members of the
Council — have individually condemned North Korea’s
violations, but none of those individual condemnations
matter if the Security Council cannot speak as one
single voice.
It is high time that the Council adopt strong and
unified action in response to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s provocations. Keeping our
silence in the face of so much noise only reinforces
the arguments of those who accuse the Council of no
longer being able to carry out the tasks entrusted to it.
Silence in the current situation means irrelevance, and
the organ that bears the primary responsibility, under
the Charter of the United Nations, for the maintenance
of international peace and security cannot afford to
seem irrelevant.
Mr. Ravindran (India): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting today.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Khiari
for his briefing on the most recent developments in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and welcome
the participation of the representatives of Japan and the
Republic of Korea in today’s meeting.
India has noted the reports of missile launches by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including
the most recent launch, on 7 May, which comes on
the heels of its launch of an intercontinental ballistic
missile in March and other successive launches. Those

22-345787/16

S/PV.9030

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

launches constitute a violation of the resolutions of the
Security Council on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. They affect the peace and security of the
region and beyond. We call for the full implementation
of Security Council resolutions on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
India also believes that there is a pressing need
to address the proliferation of nuclear and missile
technologies related to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in our region. Those linkages have
an adverse impact on peace and security in the region,
including on India. Let me reiterate our consistent
position here that India supports dialogue as the means
of resolving the issues on the Korean peninsula. We also
reiterate our continued support for denuclearization
towards establishing peace and security on the Korean
peninsula.
The Council has met several times since the
beginning of the year to discuss the series of missile
launches by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
In that context, we earlier called for the completion of
the report of the Panel of Experts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) on those
launches, in the context of Security Council resolutions.
We await that report as soon as possible.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I, too, thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s open meeting on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. I also thank
Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Mohamed Khiari
for his briefing to the Security Council.
While the Council’s attention has been focused
elsewhere in recent weeks, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has significantly increased the
frequency and types of missiles being launched. Last
Saturday’s launch was the fifteenth this year alone.
Ghana is therefore gravely concerned about the most
recent launch and the others that preceded it, which are
all in blatant violation of the international obligations
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as
expressed in multiple Security Council resolutions.
The reported intentions of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to accelerate the development of its
nuclear capabilities at “the highest possible pace”, as
well as its threat to use nuclear weapons if its national
interests are threatened, are extremely worrisome
and contrary to its obligations under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
8/16

11/05/2022

principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
enjoin all Member States to be peace-loving.
The implications of this new development for
international peace and security, including for the
immediate neighbours of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, are most grave, and the Council
must therefore acknowledge that fact and act in a united
manner to call on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to take concrete, immediate and urgent steps to
de-escalate tensions on the Korean peninsula.
Ghana reiterates its call for the resumption of
constructive and credible dialogue between the relevant
parties and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
in order to find an enduring, comprehensive and
peaceful solution to the issues on the Korean peninsula
in a manner that recognizes regional and global security
concerns, as well as those of the parties.
In that regard, we encourage the United States
to sustain its offer of dialogue with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea without preconditions and
in a manner that is clear to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to accept the offer in good faith and
in support of the cause for peace.
It is worth noting that, while tensions on the Korean
peninsula are high, the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues to be
dire. Ghana commends the Council and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) for its
proactive approach to addressing the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
in the context of exemptions to the existing sanctions
regime and calls on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to streamline its internal processes in order to
enable the much-needed medical and other humanitarian
supplies to reach the people of the country.
We also encourage the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to allow United Nations humanitarian
agencies back into the country. We support efforts by the
United Nations system to re-establish banking channels
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We hope
that the Council and other relevant parties will be able
to act in a manner that preserves the peace, while at the
same time ensuring that the humanitarian needs of the
people of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
are addressed.
22-34578

11/05/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
France condemns, in the strongest terms, the
ballistic missile launched into the sea by North Korea
on 7 May. That test, the fifteenth since the start of the
year, poses a threat to international peace and security.
It is yet another unacceptable violation of Security
Council resolutions.
The ballistic missile test is very worrisome.
Regrettably, it is in line with the stated ambitions
of the North Korean regime over the past several
months. We know that North Korea seeks to acquire a
credible ocean component and achieve a second-strike
capability. To that end, it is developing more modern
submarines, conducting research on nuclear propulsion
and diversifying its means of delivery.
The escalation continues. North Korea ended its
moratorium by launching an intercontinental ballistic
missile on 24 March. Since then, it has conducted three
additional ballistic-missile tests, in particular a test
on 16 April that sought to develop its tactical nuclear
capacity. Only a few days ago, the North Korean leader
announced that nuclear weapons would no longer
merely be a deterrent but could serve a second purpose
if its key interests were threatened. At the same time,
activities at the Punggye-ri test site continue, and
there is every reason to believe that North Korea could
conduct another nuclear test within weeks or even days.
The situation is very worrisome. The Council must
act and unanimously condemn that new provocation.
Doing nothing would pose a major risk to regional
stability and the international non-proliferation
architecture. In the light of those repeated provocations,
we support efforts to ensure that the Council responds
in unison. Some call for the easing of sanctions, which
would make no sense in the current context. Instead, we
must impose stricter sanctions and update the sanctions
regime, including in new areas such as the cyber domain,
which enable North Korea to fund its programmes.
France urges North Korea to begin the process
for the full, verifiable and irreversible dismantling of
its weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missile
programmes. We also call for a resumption of dialogue.
All actors in the region must be involved. North Korea
must accept the proposals offered to it in that regard.
Lastly, France expresses its concern about the
humanitarian situation. However, we also recall that

S/PV.9030

there are exemptions that function perfectly within
a sanctions regime. We deeply deplore the fact that
the North Korean regime continues to develop its
proliferation programmes to the detriment of its
own people.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Tensions are currently high on the Korean peninsula,
and the prospect of escalation is worrisome. China
calls on all parties to remain calm and show restraint,
remain on the path of dialogue and consultation and
avoid any action that might aggravate tensions and lead
to miscalculation.
We sincerely support better relations between
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
Republic of Korea and the promotion of reconciliation
and cooperation. We look forward to détente and
positive developments in the situation on the Korean
peninsula.
The issue of the Korean peninsula should be looked
at historically and comprehensively so as to understand
the causes and consequences of the matter at hand.
After 2018, there was a general de-escalation of the
situation on the Korean peninsula. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea took a series of measures to
denuclearize and de-escalate the situation. The leaders
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
United States met in person in Singapore and reached
an important consensus on establishing a new phase in
the relations between the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and the United States for building a peace
mechanism and advancing the denuclearization process
on the Korean peninsula.
Regrettably, the United States side later reneged
on its position and did not reciprocate the positive
initiatives taken by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea in accordance with the principle of “action for
action”, thereby leading to an intractable impasse in
talks between the two countries, increasing their mutual
distrust and stalling the denuclearization process on the
Korean peninsula.
Engaging in dialogue and consultation is the only
correct way to resolve the Korean peninsula issue. The
United States is a direct party to the Korean peninsula
issue and holds the key to breaking the deadlock. As
such, it should take concrete actions to constructively
address the reasonable concerns of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and create the conditions
necessary for the early resumption of dialogue.

22-345789/16

S/PV.9030

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Although the United States side verbally claims that
it is willing to engage in unconditional dialogue, when
it comes to actions it continues to tighten sanctions and
exert pressure, which is clearly not constructive. The
new draft resolution proposed by the United States,
which evokes Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, is focused on furthering sanctions, which is
not an appropriate way to address the current situation
on the Korean peninsula.
Over the years, the Security Council has adopted
numerous resolutions on the Korean peninsula issue,
which while authorizing sanctions have also stressed
the need for a peaceful, political and diplomatic
solution to the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula.
They all deserve our attention equally. Sanctions are
only a means to an end and should always serve the
overall goal of reaching a political settlement. Equating
sanctions to, or using them to replace, diplomatic
efforts is like putting the cart before the horse and will
not achieve the desired results.
Despite the fact that sanctions have already had a
negative humanitarian impact and resulted in collateral
damage in other countries, the countries concerned
continue to be in total denial, which is inconsistent with
the conclusions of various international humanitarian
agencies and the Panel of Experts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006).
In fact, in response to the current situation China
and a number of Council members have put forward
reasonable proposals for exploring ways to take strong
actions and promote a political solution to the Korean
peninsula issue in a way that best garners the consensus
of Council members. The draft resolution proposed by
China and Russia is also designed for that purpose.
Regrettably, the United States has turned a blind eye
to the reasonable proposals of China and other Council
members and remains superstitiously infatuated with the
magic power of sanctions. We believe that if the United
States changes its negative attitude, it will be possible
for Council members to reach a consensus. We hope
that Council members will give serious consideration
to the joint Russian-Chinese draft resolution.
Owing to its close proximity to the Korean
peninsula, China is extremely concerned about the
situation there and has always insisted on maintaining
its peace, stability and denuclearization, as well as on
resolving problems through dialogue and consultation.
We advocate that all parties concerned should prioritize
10/16

11/05/2022

the overall peace and stability of the Korean peninsula,
adhere to the approach of dialogue and consultation,
meet each other halfway, resume meaningful dialogue
at an early date and explore effective ways to resolve
all parties’ legitimate concerns in a balanced manner.
China is seriously concerned about several recent
negative developments. Some countries call for the
denuclearization of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea while they themselves promote cooperation
on nuclear submarines, which carries serious risks
of nuclear proliferation. Some countries profess
their concerns about the military development of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea while at the
same time they develop, with much fanfare, their
own offensive-weapons systems, such as hypersonic
weapons systems. A certain politician in a certain
country concerned even went so far as to openly
advocate for discussing the sharing of nuclear weapons
under the pretext of addressing security threats.
China’s global security initiative is an important
guide for resolving the issue of the Korean peninsula.
Security is indivisible. The security of one country
cannot be based on the insecurity of another, which is a
concept that applies everywhere and at all times. China
once again calls on all parties concerned to jointly hold
dear and maintain the Korean peninsula’s peace and
stability, work together to promote the establishment
of a peace mechanism and denuclearization process on
the Korean peninsula, and play a constructive role to
that end.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia opposes any military activity that
threatens the security of the Korean peninsula and
the States of North-East Asia. We are convinced that
seeking mutually acceptable political and diplomatic
solutions is the only way to peacefully resolve the issues
concerning the Korean peninsula and establish stable
security mechanisms in North-East Asia. That should
be our main goal, which once achieved will enable the
normalization of the situation in the region.
We note with regret that for the past four years,
the Security Council has been unable to respond to the
dismantling by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea of its nuclear test site, as well as Pyongyang’s
compliance with the moratorium on nuclear testing
and the launching of intercontinental ballistic missiles.
In each of the resolutions on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea adopted since 2006, the Council
22-34578

11/05/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

has expressed its readiness to review the restrictions
based on the level of Pyongyang’s compliance with the
provisions of the relevant documents.
Regrettably, to date the Council has only tightened
the sanctions, while ignoring the positive signals from
North Korea. In that regard, the current developments
are merely the consequence of the short-sightedness
of some colleagues here, who are not ready to move
beyond the limits of a sanctions-based paradigm, which
for many years has been unable to guarantee security
in the region. We have seen no other viable initiatives
from them.
We also believe that the further strengthening of
sanctions against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea exceeds the scope of measures that are needed to
cut off channels for funding nuclear missile programmes
and expose the people of North Korea to unacceptable
socioeconomic and humanitarian turmoil.
We would like to remind our American colleagues
that negotiations are a two-way street. There is no point
in expecting Pyongyang to disarm without conditions
under the threat of tightening the vice of sanctions,
while in return it receives only unsubstantiated
promises as guarantees. The establishment of new
military alliances in the region, such as the trilateral
security pact among Australia, the United Kingdom
and the United States, casts serious doubts about the
good intentions of those countries, including from
the perspective of Pyongyang, and does not help to
foster dialogue.
The institutions and mechanisms of the United
Nations and the Security Council should be used to
support the settlement processes and intra-Korean
dialogue and should not be an obstacle to them. Only
then will we be able to address the effective resolution
of the problems that have accumulated in the region,
including the nuclear issue, on the basis of dialogue
and mutually acceptable agreements. Sanctions and
pressure will not achieve that.
Further resentment has also been caused by the
so-called autonomous secondary sanctions against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and other States
that have been imposed by Washington and its allies, in
circumvention of and in addition to Security Council
sanctions. By running counter to the norms and rules
of international trade, unilateral sanctions undermine
not only the sovereignty and legitimate interests of

S/PV.9030

Member States but also the integrity of the sanctions
agreed by the Security Council.
It is unacceptable to attempt to enshrine such
sanctions through the Security Council’s authority
or that of its Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006). In that regard, we call on all
to exercise restraint and reaffirm a practical readiness
for renewed dialogue in line with previous agreements
and obligations.
The
Russian-Chinese
political-humanitarian
draft resolution remains before the Council and could
encourage parties to step up their negotiation efforts.
At the same time, we would like to note that the lack
of progress on the political track — progress that
could have been secured by the adoption of the draft
resolution I mentioned — threatens to further increase
tensions on the Korean peninsula, as has unfortunately
been the case in recent months.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I thank Mr. Khiari for his briefing and welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representatives of
Korea and Japan in this meeting.
We are meeting this afternoon because North
Korea carried out another missile launch on 7 May.
That missile launch — the fifteenth since the beginning
of the year — confirms an escalation in terms of both
frequency and the type of projectiles launched. In a
particularly tense global security context, that fifteenth
launch increases the magnitude of the potential threat
to peace and security, not only on the Korean peninsula
but also at the global level.
My country condemns the missile launches.
We are deeply concerned about North Korea’s
recent announcements of its desire to accelerate the
development of its nuclear capabilities. We are further
concerned about the trend of trivializing the nuclear
threat in recent months, which does not bode well for
collective peace and security.
However, it is precisely because nuclear peril is
imminent that the negotiating parties must redouble
their efforts and be bold in bringing North Korea back
to the table for talks. In that regard, we urge the parties
to de-escalate and refrain from any rhetoric that could
exacerbate tensions and undermine the common goal
of peace and peaceful coexistence on a nuclear-free
Korean peninsula. My country urges the parties to

22-3457811/16

S/PV.9030

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

activate channels of diplomacy in good faith in order to
advance discussions on the matter.
North Korea is subject to the highest and most
comprehensive sanctions regime. However, those
coercive measures do not seem to be having an
impact on the continuation of the country’s nuclear
programme. Furthermore, the humanitarian situation is
most alarming.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing the urgency
of resuming negotiations to find a viable solution in the
interests of the North Korean people and security on
the Korean peninsula. We call on all parties to engage
in diplomatic negotiations, based on the road map laid
out in 2017.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Khiari for his useful briefing, and
I welcome the presence of the representatives of the
Republic of Korea and Japan at the Security Council.
Norway strongly condemns the ballistic missile
launches by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
including most recently on 4 and 7 May. We are deeply
concerned by the growing capabilities demonstrated by
the intensive pattern of those launches. The continued
development of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a direct
threat to regional and international peace and security
and violates several Security Council resolutions.
The final report of the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to resolution 1874 (2009) (see S/2022/132)
shows the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
high-level and sustained commitment to developing its
ballistic missile programme. Central to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s ability to act on that
resolve is its ability to fund and procure materials and
technology for its illegal weapons of mass destructions
(WMD) programmes, including through cyber means.
The Council has a responsibility to consider
appropriate actions. We continue to urge the Government
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
comply fully with its international obligations, reverse
its course and rejoin the international non-proliferation
regime through the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and the International Atomic Energy
Agency safeguards.
The current path is not only a threat to regional and
international peace and security but also aggravates
the already deteriorating economic, humanitarian and
12/16

11/05/2022

human rights situation in the country. We are profoundly
discouraged to see that the Government continues to
channel its resources towards weapons development
instead of towards the housing, food and vaccines that
are much needed by its own people.
We call on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to end its self-imposed blockade and allow the
United Nations and its resident coordinator, as well
as other international organizations, to re-enter the
country and resume their humanitarian work.
We also call on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to respond to repeated offers of dialogue and
take concrete steps to abandon its WMD and ballistic
missile programmes in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner.
Now more than ever, we need the Council to
show unity. In 2017, a united Council expressed its
determination to take further significant measures
in the event of a further nuclear test or launch by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We therefore
welcome the United States efforts to address the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s continued
resolution violations.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States
of America.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for
his briefing, and I welcome our colleagues from the
Republic of Korea and Japan to our meeting today.
The United States strongly condemns the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s 16 April,
4 May and 7 May ballistic missile launches, which were
only the latest in a series of ballistic missile launches
conducted by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in recent months — each one a blatant violation
of multiple Security Council resolutions.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
conducted 17 — and I must repeat the number because
I have heard different numbers in the room today — 17
ballistic missile launches this year alone. At least three
were intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs); one
was an intermediate-range ballistic missile; two were
so-called hypersonic weapons; and two were described
as a new type of missile for tactical nuclear weapons.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is also
reconstructing its nuclear testing site in preparation for
a seventh nuclear test.
22-34578

11/05/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

All those ballistic missile launches, as well as
a nuclear test, violate Security Council resolutions.
They pose threats to regional and international
security, and they seek to undermine the global
non-proliferation regime.
The Security Council should not stand for that, but
it has stayed silent because two Council members have
argued that Council restraint will somehow encourage
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to stop
escalating and instead come to the negotiating table.
Clearly, silence and restraint have not worked. In fact,
the exact opposite has happened: while the Security
Council has remained silent, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea continues to escalate with repeated
launches and threatening rhetoric.
Let us be clear: the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea is not undertaking its activities defensively in
response to threatening behaviour. That self-initiated
and unprovoked campaign of ballistic missile launches
threatens its neighbours and attempts to undermine the
Council. In fact, on 25 April Kim Jong Un called for the
development of his State’s nuclear forces at the highest
level of rapidity. That further proves that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is not responding to the
Council’s silence with restraint or goodwill.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea sees
that the Council used to respond with meaningful
consequences but no longer does so. Therefore, it
interprets the Council’s silence to mean that it will
not face future consequences and it sees our silence
as permission to continue on its stated trajectory. It
is time to stop providing tacit permission and to start
taking action.
The United States remains committed to a
diplomatic solution. We have said that over and over
again. We hope that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea will accept our repeated offers of dialogue.
We have also asked those who regularly speak with the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to encourage it
to engage in diplomacy.
In the meantime, we have a responsibility to
respond to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
unlawful behaviour. The sanctions regime has been
effective in slowing the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s weapons-of-mass-destruction and ballisticmissile advancements. But every sanction regime
requires continued upkeep and ongoing focus on

S/PV.9030

implementation to be successful. It is long past time we
updated this one.
Unfortunately, over the last four years two members
have blocked every attempt to enforce and to update
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea sanctions
list, enabling the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s unlawful action. In resolution 2397 (2017), the
Security Council committed to taking action to further
restrict the export to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea of petroleum if that country conducted the
launch of a ballistic missile system capable of reaching
intercontinental ranges.
In full knowledge of that provision, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea moved forward with the
launching of at least three ICBMs this year. If we want
the word of the Security Council to mean anything, we
cannot stay silent any longer. To that end, in order to
further restrict the ability of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to advance its unlawful programme
and to send a signal to all proliferators, the United
States has been negotiating with our fellow Council
members on a new Chapter VII draft resolution.
I am very grateful to my fellow Council members
that have taken this issue as seriously as we have and
engaged constructively in negotiations. We are now
nearing the end of negotiations on the United Statesproposed draft resolution, and we cannot wait until
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea conducts
additional provocative, illegal, dangerous acts such as
a nuclear test.
We need to speak up, now, with a strong and unified
voice, in condemnation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s behaviour. We need to act now to
restrict any further unlawful developments before it is
too late. We encourage all Council members to support
our proposed draft resolution and show that the Security
Council will respond to threats to international peace
and security and to blatant violations of its resolutions.
This is not a bilateral issue. It is not a regional
issue. This is a global issue. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is testing capabilities that can
threaten all Council members and every single State
Member of the United Nations, including those that
are protecting them. This is about our collective
responsibility to prevent the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. The Council was formed precisely
to respond to the kinds of global threats that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is posing to

22-3457813/16

S/PV.9030

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

11/05/2022

the world. I encourage all Member States to join us in
denouncing this dangerous and unlawful behaviour and
to take action to prevent the worst.

local time. I appreciate this opportunity to participate
in today’s discussions and thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Ambassador Khiari for his briefing.

In response to the Chinese and Russian proposal
for a draft resolution predicated on their assessment
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is
showing goodwill through a moratorium, as understood
by them, on intermediate-range ballistic-missile and
ICBM and nuclear tests, the draft resolution is really
not appropriate at this time. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has shown repeatedly this year that
such a moratorium does not exist. In the light of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s escalating
provocations and its return to the testing of long-range
systems, the purported basis for its draft resolution has
no validity. We need to turn quickly to strengthening
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006) sanctions regime, not
considering sanctions relief.

At the most recent open meeting of the Security
Council held in response to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s intercontinental ballistic-missile
(ICBM) launch, held in March (see S/PV.9004), my
delegation urged the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to choose the path of engagement and cooperation
instead of that of confrontation and escalation. At the
time, almost every member of the Council urged the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to cease its
provocative actions. However, despite those calls by
the international community, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has chosen to further destabilize
the region.

Finally, as I have said repeatedly in this Chamber,
the enhanced trilateral security partnership known
as AUKUS does not violate the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and China
and Russia know that. We take our NPT obligations
very seriously, and I know that the United Kingdom and
Australia do, too. It is worrisome that two of our fellow
colleagues insist on distracting from discussions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s clear attempt
to undermine the global non-proliferation regime with
those false claims. Those countries’ attempts to defend
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should not
go unnoticed by the Council or the world.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I would like to again draw the attention of speakers
to paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho Hyun (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank you, Madam President, for having convened this
meeting of the Security Council to address the recent
ballistic-missile launches of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, which took place on 4 and 7 May,
14/16

The Republic of Korea condemns in the strongest
terms the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
recent ballistic-missile launches, which constitute
a flagrant violation of multiple Security Council
resolutions. They pose a significant threat to the
Korean peninsula, the region and the international
community, and is also a serious challenge to the
global non-proliferation regime. Those launches once
again demonstrate Pyongyang’s complete disregard
of international norms, including the Charter of
the United Nations and the Council. Moreover, the
launches demonstrate that the North Korean regime
continues to prioritize its weapons-of-mass-destruction
and ballistic-missile programmes at the expense of its
own people, who are continuing to suffer from the dire
humanitarian situation.
My delegation is particularly alarmed at and
concerned about the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s recent statements in which it has threatened to
pre-emptively use its nuclear weapons. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s position is becoming
increasingly aggressive, edging towards the actual use
of nuclear capabilities. In other words, the international
community is entering a much more dangerous phase
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
nuclear threat.
Unfortunately, despite such alarming threats and
continued violations of international law, the Council
has been unable to muster an effective response. If the
Council does not firmly respond to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s continued escalatory
behaviour, it will inevitably lead to more Member
22-34578

11/05/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV.9030

States deliberately ignoring their obligations under
multiple Security Council resolutions.

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Mr. Khiari for
his briefing.

Therefore, the Security Council must respond to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s repeated
provocations with the adoption of a new resolution
that contains robust measures corresponding to the
gravity of the behaviour of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Now is the time to take swift and
strong measures to send a firm message to Pyongyang
that its escalatory behaviour must come to an end.
The Council’s silence in the face of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s countless ballistic-missile
launches earlier this year, including the latest ICBM
launch, only further emboldened Pyongyang. That led
it to think that it can get away with its bad behaviour
without any consequences. In that light, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea must be held accountable
for its actions.

Since the Security Council last met on this agenda
item in late March (see S/PV.9004), North Korea has
only accelerated its nuclear and missile programmes
as if it were taking advantage of the lack of a strong
Council reaction. Its ballistic-missile launches on 4 and
7 May, local time, twice in just one week, are clear
violations of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
One of those launches is presumed to be that of a
submarine-launched ballistic missile, indicating further
diversification of its missile forces. Japan strongly
condemns those dangerous and destabilizing acts. The
absence of a public announcement by North Korea does
not provide impunity.

The international community has recently been
witnessing the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
activities around its nuclear test sites. Pyongyang has
also proclaimed that it will continue to take measures
for further developing nuclear forces at the fastest
possible speed, forewarning that a nuclear test may
be imminent.
The Security Council and the rest of the
international community must speak up and send a
clear warning to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea that another nuclear test is intolerable and will
be met with a very firm response by the international
community, including resolute and united measures to
be taken by the Council in accordance with multiple
consensus resolutions adopted by this very organ.
We strongly urge the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to cease its provocative behaviour, fulfil
its obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions and engage in meaningful dialogue on
denuclearization with the Republic of Korea and the
United States.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should
realize that it will gain nothing from provocations. We
urge Pyongyang to respond to our endeavours to build
sustainable peace on the Korean peninsula through
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.

I also have to alert the Council to the fact that
additional gravely worrisome signs are looming in the
nuclear dimension. North Korea announced in mid-April
that it had conducted another round of missile launches,
stating that the missiles were for “strengthening the
effectiveness of tactical nuclear operation” — the first
announcement placing a specific launch in the context
of its development of tactical nuclear weapons. North
Korea then publicly stated in late April that it would
develop its nuclear forces “at the fastest possible speed”.
It also alluded to the possible use of nuclear weapons,
not just for deterrence but for other purposes.
Furthermore, there have been widespread reports
of ongoing activities at a nuclear test site in North
Korea, possibly in preparation for another nuclear test.
We must not tolerate North Korea’s nuclear and
missile development becoming a new normal. The
level of threat far exceeds what we saw in 2017, and
it is increasing. It poses a grave and imminent threat
to the security of Japan and beyond. It challenges the
very authority of the Security Council. It increases
proliferation risks in every corner of the world and
threatens international peace and security.
Please allow me to emphasize the response that
Japan strongly wishes to see from the Security Council.
First, we need the Council’s swift action in the form
of a new sanctions resolution. North Korea has publicly
declared that it will implement its five-year plan, which
includes a new solid-fuel intercontinental ballistic
missile (ICBM) and tactical nuclear weapons. The right
message to discourage such potential developments and
urge it to come back to diplomatic dialogue can be sent

22-3457815/16

S/PV.9030

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

only through a new resolution. Japan earnestly supports
the United States initiative for a new resolution in that
respect. We request all other Council members to do
the same.
Secondly, a new resolution must match the increasing
level of threat. Japan considers it critical to follow up
on what resolution 2397 (2017) stipulates with regard
to further restrictions on oil in the event of a North
Korean ICBM launch. We also support possible actions
in relevant fields, including the cyberdomain, which
has been identified as a key source of North Korea’s
revenue by the Panel of Experts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006).

16/16

11/05/2022

In conclusion, Japan reiterates its sincere and
strong expectation that the Council will fulfil its
responsibility to realize the dismantlement of all North
Korea’s weapons of mass destruction and ballistic
missiles of all ranges in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner, in accordance with the relevant
Council resolutions. Japan will continue to cooperate
with Council members and all other Member States to
reach a comprehensive solution to the issues related to
North Korea.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

22-34578
