Re1olntion1 adopted on the reporta of the Fifth Committee

before he reached the age of sixty-five, the widow's
pension shall amount to one-half of the amount of
such pension, but shall not be less than one-twelfth
of the annual salary ;
" ( c) If the former member had reached the age of
sixty-five when he began to receive his retirement
pension, the widow's pension shall amount to one-half
of his retirement pension, but shall not be less than
one-sixth of the annual salary.
"4. A widow's pension shall cease on her remarriage."

7S

(US dollars)
(a) The President of the International

Narcotics Control Board . . .

2,500

(b) The Vice-Presidents . . . .
1,500
(c) Other members . . . .
1,000
( d) These payments shall, in accordance with the

decision of the General Assembly at its twelfth
session, be payable in the form of an annual
lump sum for any year during which the recipients attend the meetings of the Board.
1642nd plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

ARTICLE VIII

(Application and effective date)

Replace the present· text by the following :
"1. The present Regulations shall be applicable
as from 1 January 1968 to all who are members of
the Court on or after that date and to their eligible
beneficiaries.
"2. Former members of the Court who left office
prior to 1 January 1968, or their eligible beneficiaries,
shall continue to have their entitlements governed
by the Regulations approved in General Assembly
resolution 1562 (XV) or 1925 (XVIII), as the case
may be, except that the revised provisions of article
III and the consequential changes under article IV
shall be applicable as from 1 January 1968 to all
relevant entitlements regardless of the date on which
the said entitlements first became payable."

II
Desirous of protecting former members of the International Court of Justice and their eligible beneficiaries
from the rise in the cost of living that has occurred
since their pensions were first awarded,
Decides that, as from 1 January 1968, and notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained in
the Pension Scheme Regulations for members of the
International Court of Justice, pensions awarded prior
to 1 January 1964 and pensions awarded between 1
January 1964 and 31 December 1967, adjusted in
accordance with the revised provisions cited in article
VIII, paragraph 2, shall be raised by 33 per cent and
16 per cent respectively.
1642nd plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

2368 (XXII). Payment of honoraria to members
of the International Narcoties Control
Board

The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the reports of the Fifth Committee'0 and the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions0 on the question of the
payment of honoraria to officers and other members of
the International Narcotics Control Board ;
2. Decides to pay honoraria to the members of the
International Narcotics Control Board on the following
basis:

'° JIM., document A/C.5/1123.
,1 Ibid., document A/6878.

2369 (XXIl). Reorganization of the top echelon
in the United Nations Secretariatz amend•
ments to the Staff Regulations of the
United Nations
The_ General Assembly
1. Takes note of the proposals of the SecretaryGeneral for the reorganization of the top echelon in the
United Nations Secretariat;
2. Decides that the Staff Regulations of the United
Nations shall be amended with effect from 1 January
1968 as follows :
(a) Replace the present text of regulation 1. 10 in
article I ( Duties, obligations and privileges) by the
following text :
"Regulation 1.10: The oath or declaration shall
be made orally by the Secretary-General, by UnderSecretaries-General and by Assistant SecretariesGeneral at a public meeting of the General Assembly
and by all other members of the Secretariat before
the Secretary-General or his authorized deputy" ;
( b) Replace the present text of paragraph (a) of
regulation 3.4 in article III ( Salaries and related allowances) by the following text :
"Regulation 3.4: (a) Staff members whose salary
rates are set forth in paragraphs 1 and 4 of annex I
to these Regulations shall be entitled to receive dependency allowances as follows :
" ( i) At $400 per year for a dependent wife or
dependent husband and $300 per year for
each dependent child ; or
" (ii) Where there is no dependent spouse, a single
annual allowance of $200 for either a dependent parent, a dependent brother or a
dependent sister" ;
( c) Replace the present text of the first sentence of
paragraph (a) of regulation 4.5 in article IV (Appointment and promotion) by the following text :
"Regulation 4.5: (a) Appointments of UnderSecretaries-General and of Assistant SecretariesGeneral shall normally be for a period of five years,
subject to prolongation or renewal";
(d) Replace the present text of paragraphs 1 and 2
of annex I by the following text :
"SALARY AND ALLOWANCES--UNDER-SECRETARIESGENERAL AND ASSISTANT SECRETARIES--GENERAL

"Annex I, paragraph 1
"An Under-Secretary-General shall receive a salary
of $US 33,500 per year and an Assistant SecretaryGeneral shall receive a salary of $US 30,000 per year

General Aaeembly-Twenty-seeond Sea1ion

76

(subject to the Staff Assessment Plan provided in
staff regulation 3.3 and to post adjustments wherever
applied) and, if otherwise eligible, shall receive the
allowances which are available to staff members
generally.
"Annex I, paragraph 2
"The Secretary-General is authorized, on the basis
of appropriate justification and/or reporting, to make
additional payments to Under-Secretaries-General and
Assistant Secretaries-General to compensate for such
special costs as may be reasonably incurred, in the
interest of the Organization, in the performance of
duties assigned to them by the Secretary-General. The
maximum total amount of such payments is to be
determined in the annual budget by the General Assembly".
1642nd plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

2370 (XXII). United Nations regular budget
The General Assembly,
Recalling that in paragraph 68 of its second report 42
the Ad Hoe Committee of Experts to Examine the
Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized
Agencies expressed the view that further development
and application by the United Nations family of organizations of an integrated system of long-term planning on a programmed basis is an essential ingredient
in improving their programming and budgetary processes and ensuring throughout the United Nations
system the most rational use of available resources,
Recalling further that in paragraph 73 of its second
report the Ad H oc Committee formulated precise recommendations to reach the objective indicated in paragraph 68, by taking into account the priority needs of
Member States, the over-all capability of the Organization and the probable financial costs to Member States
and that, in accordance with Articles 22 and 62 of the
Charter of the United Nations and General Assembly
resolutions pertinent thereto, the several programmeformulating bodies of the United Nations were especially charged to study, repor~ and make recommendations to the General Assembly in their respective
areas of competence,
Recalling further that in paragraph 26 of its second
report the Ad H oc Committee recommended that : ·
"The heads of the organizations should transmit
preliminary and approximate estimates to the bodies
responsible for examining the budget early enough
to enable them to consider the main items of the
budget well in advance of formal presentation and to
make comments and suggestions thereon in good
time. This could be done about one vear before the
date on which the legislative bodies
the organizations are required to give their final approval to the

Noting that the Secretary-General in his foreword
to the budget estimates for the financial year 196841
directed attention to the fact that renewed emphasis
had been placed on the need for basic measures to ensure
greater efficiency and real value for money and to the
necessity of reconciling work programmes with resources,
Recognizing that it is essential to the sound management aiid orderly development of the United Nations
and to the effective implementation of its programmes
that the Secretarv-General communicate in advance to
tlw General Assembly preliminary and approximate
estimates for succeeding budgets in order to enable
the Assembly to act thereon,
1. lnvitcs the programme-formulating bodies of the
Cnited Nations, including the Economic and Social
Council and the Committee for Programme and Coordination, bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph
2 below and in consultation with the Secretary-General,
to develop their own processes to carry out at the
earliest possible date a system of long-term planning
and programme formulation, within their respective
fields of competence, taking into account the recommendations in paragraph 73 of the second report of the
Ad H oc Committee of Experts to Examine the Finances
of the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies;
2. Decides that the Secretary-General, taking into
account all the actions of the programme-formulating
bodies, including the Economic and Social Council and
the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination, shall
suggest to the General Assembly at each regular session
a planning estimate for the United Nations regular
budget estimates for the second succeeding budgetary
period (henceforth referred to as the forecast period);
this planning estimate for the forecast period shall be
reviewed by the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions and transmitted, together with
its comments and recommendations, to the General
Assembly no later than 1 December; the Assembly shall
consider the planning estimate suggested by the
Secretary-General and the comments and recommendations thereon of the Advisory Committee and shall at
the same session approve a planning estimate for the
iurecast period ;

Considering General Assembly resolution 2150
(XXI) of 4 November 1966, adopted unanimously, in

3. Decides further that the Secretary-General shall
then construct the United Nations regular budget esti1mtes for the forecast period, guided by the planning
estimate approved by the General Assembly; all organs
of the L nited Nations and their subsidiary bodies
financed from the United Nations regular budget are
requested to co-operate with the Secretary-General and
tn be guided by the planning estimate;
4. Requests that the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, review the Financial Regulations oi the United Xations and take any steps
required to bring them into conformity with the procedure set out above;

which the Assembly urged that the recommendations
and comments contained in the report of the Ad Hoe
Committee be given the most attentive consideration by
Member States and by the United Nations organs and
related bodies with a view to the earliest implementation
of the recommendations,

5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit for
consideration to the General Assembly at its twentythird session an integrated schedule of meetings for the
various bodies responsible for carrying out the several
parts of an integrated system of programming and
budgeting,

•2 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 80. document A/6343.

anrl Corr .1).

of

budget",

43 lbid ..

Twenty .H·co~d Session, Supplement No. 5 (A/6705
