11.

United Nations, and to exercise maximum flexibility and
understanding in approving projects funded from the indicative planning figure;
1S. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance provided by the United Nations Children's Fund, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the World Food Programme to Namibian refugees, and
requests them to expand their assistance in order to provide for the basic needs of the refugees;
16. Expresses its appreciation to those specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system
which have waived agency support costs in respect ofprojects in favour of Namibians, financed from the United
Nations Fund for Namibia and other sources, and urges
those that have not yet done so to take appropriate steps in
this regard;
17. Decides that Namibians shall continue to be eligible for assistance through the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southern Africa and the
United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa;
18. Commends the United Nations Institute for Namibia for the effectiveness of its training programmes for
Namibians and its research activities on Namibia, which
contribute substantially to the struggle for freedom of the
Namibian people and to the establishment of an independent State of Namibia;
19. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations system tocooperate closely with the United Nations Institute for Namibia in strengthening its programme of activities;
20. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia,
in consultation with the South West Africa People's Organization, to finalize and publish, at an early date, a
demographic study of the Namibian population;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Office of the United Nations Commissioner for
Namibia with the necessary resources for the performance
ofthe responsibilities entrusted to it by the United Nations
Council for Namibia as the co-ordinating authority for the
implementation of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia, as well as other assistance programmes.
54th plenary meeting
17 November 1988

43/27.

Mid-term review and appraisal of the implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution S-13/2 of 1 June 1986, the annex
to which contains the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development
1986-1990,
Reca/ling also its resolution 42/163 of8 December 1987,
Emphasizing that the African economic crisis is one that
concerns the international community as a whole and that
the accelerated implementation of the Programme of Action requires further effective action by ali parties concerned,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the mid-term review of the implementation of the Programme of Action, 85
85 A/43/500 and Corr.1

and Add. l and 2.

39

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Taking note of the mid-term assessment of the implementation of the Programme of Action, prepared by
the Permanent Steering Committee ofthe Organization of
African Unity at its fourteenth ordinary session, 86
Taking note also of the contribution made by individual
Governments, intergovernmental organizations and nongovernmental organizations to the work of the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Whole of the General Assembly on the
Review and Appraisal of the United Nations Programme
of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990,
Taking note furthcrof the report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole, 87
1. Adopts the conclusions of the mid-term review and
appraisal of the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery
and Development 1986-1990, consisting of an assessment
ofthe responses and measures to accelerate the implementation of the Programme of Action, as set forth in the annex to the present resolution;
2. Decides to conduct a final review and appraisal of
the implementation of the Programme of Action at its
forty-sixth session.
56th plenary meeting
18 November 1988
ANNEX
Mid-term review and appraisal of the United Nations Programme of
Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990
and recommendations for the acceleration of its implementation

l.

INTRODUC'TION

1. The United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic
Recovery and Development 1986-1990, which was adopted by the General Assembly in response to the critica! economic situation in Africa, is
based on mutual commitment and co-operation between Africa and the
international community.
2. In the Programme of Action, Africa committed itself to launch
long-term programmes for self-sustaining socio-economic development
and growth. The 111ternational community committed itself to assisting
Africa in achieving this obJective.
3. The African countries committed themselves to giving priority altention to necessary economic reform as mentioned in Africa 's Priority
Programme for Economic Recovcry 1986-1990 adopted by the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity
al its twenty-first ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 18 to 20
July 1985, 26 as a basis for broad-based, sustained economic development:
the rehabilitation and developmcnt of agriculture; other sectors supportive of agriculture: measures to combat drought and desertification: and
the dficient development and utilization of human resources.
4. The international ,·ommunity recognized that the economic
rccovery and devclopment efforts of African countríes must be supplemented by complementar) action on its part through intensified cooperation and suhstantially increased support. lt also realized that lasting solutions to the serious exogenous constraints, over which Africa has
no control, will have to be found. since their persistence will impcde lhe
efforts of the African countries. lt therefore committed itself to making
every effort to provide sufficient resources to support and supplement the
African development effort. The international community furthcr appreciated that Africa's efforts would be greatly facilitated if flows of externa! resources were predictable and assured and if the quality and modality of externa! assistance and co-operation were improved. lt also
recognized that, to bring aboul an improvement in the externa! econom,c
env1ronment. the internat1onal ,,,mmunity ,hould address and examine
the externa! factor, that aggrmate the African situation, especially in
terms of trade and the need to dcal urgently with commodity issues and
alleviate A frica ·s debt burden. The Programme of Action equally cmph,1si?e, thc ímportance for thc inkrnational community lo increa,c officíal
86 A/43/596,
87

annex.
A/431664 and Corr. l

40

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

development assistance to African countries and to improve its quality
and effectiveness.
5. The Programme of Action prov1des an importan! framework for
co-operation between Africa and the international community, and all
parties wish to reaffirm their commitment to the Programme of Action.
The continuing gravity of the economic situation in Africa requires that
ali partners take urgen! and decisive actions to accelerate and ensure the
effective implementation of the Programme of Action during its remaining period.
6. In the Programme of Action, the international community recognized the importance to African economic development of genuine peace
and security, as well as of the strengthening of international cooperation.
7. The review of measures taken to implement the Programme of Action demonstrates that most African countries have adopted significant
policy reforms to improve the overall management of their economies.
The determination with which African countries are pursuing and
strengthening these reforms is courageous and commendable, particularly since in many countries such measures involve severe social costs
and political risks. Many countries have also faced continuing climatic
problems and natural calamities. The political will demonstrated by
African countries and the commendable reform and policy reorientation
measures that have been pul in place should be sustained. Appropriate
reforms should be embarked upon by those countries that have not yet
initiated the process. The Governments of African countries should also
play a key role in the process of co-ordination of externa! assistance.
8. For its part, the international community has taken importan!
initiatives in support of the African efforts, through the Special Programme of Assistance of the World Bank, the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility of the International Monetary Fund and new bilateral
aid commitments. Resource commitments to Africa for the years
1988-1990 will increase and disbursements will assist countries implementing reforms. Furthermore, the international community has declared its intention to continue to support the efforts of African Governments to implement the Programme of Action.
9. The reform and restructuring that are being undertaken by African countries and the ongoing initiatives taken by the international community thus constitute an importan! beginning. However, the overall
performance of the African economies remains unsatisfactory. Despite
earnest efforts to carry out adjustments in their national economic policies, most African countries have found little reprieve from the harsh impact of climatic conditions and an unfavourable externa] economic environment. Interna] constraints, and the adverse impact of exogenous
factors to which African economies are highly susceptible, are impeding
the reform process and are severely hampering African development.
10. Dealing with the African crisis is a priority concern for the international community and the United Nations. lt is therefore a matter of
urgency that the promising actions that have been taken by ali parties
concerned to implement the Programme of Action should be strengthened and accelerated. Sustained and unfaltering efforts made by African
countries must be matched by substantial and urgent efforts by the international community to provide support to them at the required levels
and to create an international environment favourable to the process of
reform and restructuring.
Il.

ASSESSMENT 0F THE IMPLEMENTATI0N 0F THE UNITED NATIONS
AFRICAN ECONOMIC REC0VERY AND
DEVELOPMENT 1986-1990

PROGRAMME 0F ACTION F0R

A.

Response of African countries

11. The Programme of Action was designed and adopted to provide
an importan! framework for co-operation between Africa and the international community in fostering economic recovery and development on
the African continent. The continuing gravity of the economic situation
in Africa requires that ali partners take urgen! and decisive actions to accelerate and ensure the effective implementation of the Programme of
Action during its remaining term.
l.

Agricultura/ development

12. Agriculture, on which more than 75 per cent of Africa's people
depend for their livelihood, has been a major area of sectoral reform.
More countries have given higher priority to channelling resources to
agriculture, with the particular aim of making progress towards food
security and achieving increased agricultura! production. As regards export crops, almost ali countries have implemented price incentive measures, and sorne have adopted measures to liberalize marketing policies,

to increase the share ofthe export value retained by farmers and to bring
prices into line with world market levels. A large number of African
countries have instituted a wide range of measures to mitigate food emergenc1es. Approximately halfthe countries in the region now have various
types of national emergency preparedness mechanisms, about eighteen
countries have early warning systems and man y have set up national food
security arrangements.
13. The efforts of African countries to ensure food self-sufficiency
and to increase their exports have been hindered, among other things, by
the following factors:
(a) The recurrence and persistence of such phenomena as drought,
locust infestation and floods;
(b) The decline of international commodity prices at a time when
African Governments raised prices for producers;
( e) Competition from food exports that benefit from ali kinds of direct or indirect support measures;
(d) The inflow of lower-priced agricultura] products concurrently
with the adoption by many African Governments of import liberaliza11011 policies.
Other sectors in support of agriculture
14. To enhance agricultura! development, attention has been given
to the rehabilitation and maintenance of infrastructure that supports
agriculture. In particular, emphasis has been placed on the production of
agricultura! tools, small-scale irrigation equipment, fertilizer, pesticides
and other chemicals. Within the general constraint of scarce foreign exchange, efforts have been made to modernize, rehabilitate and expand
food-processing and other agro-based industries. Inadequate transportation facilities also remain a critica] bottle-neck in many countries. Similarly, the agro-based manufacturing sector has stagnated or grown only
marginally.
2.

3.

Drought und desertification

15. African countries are determined to reduce the effects of drought
and desertification. The measures taken to that effect include the development of water sources, the building of small dams and the development of renewable sources of energy to replace fuelwood. Despite cyclones, floods and other calamities, the countries affected are resolutely
determined to pursue activities to combat drought and desertification.
Overall, the African countries are determined to fight against every new
threat to their environment, including the dumping ofindustrial or toxic
waste in the continent.
4.

Human resources

16. African Governments have always considered that human resources development and planning are key to the economic recovery and
development ofthe continent and that the efficient utilization ofthese resources should become a major objective of their national policies. Since
the adoption of the Programme of Action, the majority of African countries have put particular emphasis on formulating national literacy and
vocational training programmes, elaborating information systems, setting up project appraisal machinery and, in certain cases, improving educational systems. Adapting training and educational systems to the development objectives of the Programme of Action is difficult, among
other reasons, because of budgetary constraints.
17. African countries have also adopted measures to promete the effective participation ofthe population in the development process. In so
doing, they have pul particular emphasis on the role of African women,
not only as beneficiaries but also as agents of development. However, as
underlined in the Khartoum Declaration, adopted on 8 March 1988 by
the International Conference on the Human Dimension of Africa's Economic Recovery and Development, 88 interna! and externa! constraints
may counter the efforts undertaken by Africa to fully develop its human
resources, especially in the high-priority fields of health and education.
18. Particular attention has been paid by sorne African countries to
their population policies on the basis of the Kilimanjaro Programme of
Action for African Population and Self-Reliant Development, adopted
by the Second A frican Population Conference and endorsed by the Economic Commission for Africa in 1984. 89 A growing number of countries
are putting in place national policies designed to harmonize population
growth with economic and environmental capacities, and formulating

88 A/43/430, annex l.
89 E/CONF.76/6, annex V.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

specific policies and action plans to address population issues in a longrun development perspective. Effective implementation ofthese policies,
however, still faces immense problems, which include a lack of resources,
in particular trained personnel, and a low leve! of public support. Future
elforts must focus on overcoming these problems.
5.

Policy reforms

19. Since the adoption of the Programme of Action, most African
countries have adopted significan! policy reforms to improve the overall
management of their economies. About thirty countries are undertaking
stabilization or structural adjustment programmes in conjunction with
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. These elforts are
intended to improve economic performance, bring about accelerated
recovery within the context of the Programme of Action and lay the
foundation for self-sustaining growth and development.
20. The determination with which most African countries are pursuing and strengthening economic policy reforms is courageous and commendable, particularly since in many countries such measures involve
social costs and political risks. However, reforms have not been adopted
by ali Governments; nor are they being pursued with equal vigour in ali
countries. Policy reform takes time to have a demonstrable impact on
economic performance. A vailable data on the achievement of structural
adjustment programmes, while incomplete, suggest that economic reform is beginning to make a positive impact in a number of countries.
Nevertheless, in sorne other countries the impact remains to be fully felt,
and the overall economic situation in Africa remains critica!. However,
there is no doubt that improvement of the economic situation requires
that appropriate reform policies and programmes be vigorously implemented and sustained, taking into account the need to improve them
continuously.
21. Most African Governments have instituted policy reforms aimed
at economic structural transformation and improvement of the overall
management of their economies, especially in the following areas:
(a) public investment management systems, institutions and practices;
(b) public enterprises; (e) reform of public services to make them more
oriented towards achieving national development goals; (d) lowering of
budget deficits and reduction and redirection of public expenditure;
(e) mobilization of domestic saving and increase in investment; (j) financia! and debt management; (g) reduction and reversal, where possible, of
foreign exchange leakage; (h) encouragement of the role of the productive prívate sector and market forces in the efficient allocation of resources; and (¡) promotion of foreign trade in general and intra-African
trade in particular.
22. Experience in the implementation of stabilization or structural
adjustment programmes currently instituted has revealed substantial
concerns to African Governments, bilateral donors, multilateral financia! institutions and non-governmental organizations, notably:
(a) African Governments need to play the central role in the design
and formulation of structural adjustment programmes, including the development of "policy framework papers";
(b) Projections of financia! flows, including export earnings, have
often been overly optimistic;

(e) The short-term adjustment or stabilization targets of structural
adjustment programmes should be integrated with long-term development objectives;

(d) The importance attached to macro-economic indicators should
not obscure the need to pay adequate attention to institutional, social and
sectoral factors that are critica! to the structural transformation of African economies. Supply responses are only partly tied to ¡.elative price levels. Market liberalization involves more than just the removal of controls. Strategies of sequencing, timing and complex institutional
restructuring are critica! to the success of market reform in Africa;
(e) To avoid straining the social, cultural and political framework
and to be credible and sustainable, structural adjustment programmes
must be designed so as to be sensitive to the interna! conditions of the
countries concemed. In implementing expenditure reductions as part of
adjustment elforts, care should be taken to ensure that such reductions,
especially those in basic health, nutrition, education and other social services are not made in areas where they would worsen the situation of the
poorest and most vulnerable groups;
(j) Realignment of exchange rates and rises in producers' prices have
not always generated the full expected benefits because of structural
rigidities that continue to characterize the current stage of development
of most African countries. In part this has occurred because African

41

countries have not had the human and financia! resources fully to address these rigidities.
23. In spite of ali the measures taken, the overall performance ofthe
economies of African countries remains unsatisfactory. Domestic structural problems and adverse exogenous developments, to which the African countries are highly susceptible, have complicated the reform process by restraining overall economic growth. In certain cases, weaknesses
in the management and co-ordination of externa! assistance at the level of
recipient countries and of bilateral and multilateral assistance agencies
had led to delays in the disbursement and utilization of externa! resources already available.
24. Domestic impediments include the elfects of recurren! drought
and other natural calamities such as cyclones, floods and locust and
grasshopper infestation in sorne areas, infrastructural and institutional
deficiencies, marketing problems, low capacity for domestic resource
mobilization, strong dependency of export income on a limited number
of commodities, excessive dependence on imports of consumer goods and
production inputs, human resources and population factors, refugee
flows, shortage of skilled labour and armed conflicts. The externa! constraints include weak demand for African exports, low commodity
prices, inadequate and stagnating foreign real resource flows, and a high
debt and debt-servicing burden. lndeed, these constraints, coupled with
natural calamities, continue to be major obstacles to economic recovery
and development in the region.
25. In southern Africa, the situation continues to be adversely affected by the policies of political and economic destabilization and acts of
aggression pursued by the South African régime against the front-line
and neighbouring States. The violence inherent in the system of apartheid has resulted in loss of human lives, the destruction of social and economic infrastructures, the diversion of substantial resources and elforts
away from economic development to defence spending, the disruption of
economic development and an increase in refugees and displaced persons
throughout the region. The United Nations has estimated that losses for
the member countries of the Southern African Development Coordination Conference for the period 1980-1986 amounted to 25 billion
to 30 billion United States dollars. These factors have been the main reasons for the sharp decline of economic growth and have consequently undermined development elforts in the region, including the implementation of the Programme of Action.
6.

lmplementation at the regional and subregional levels

26. At the regional and subregional levels, a number of concrete actions have been taken to promote recovery and development, in particular, as related to the formulation and implementation of joint programmes in the key economic sectors and the strengthening of
mechanisms for these elforts. The search for agreements between neighbouring countries on food supplies aimed at ensuring a better complementarity between surplus and deficit zones has progressed. Other importan! actions have included the establishment of regional networks for
crop protection and of mechanisms for co-operation among national
early warning systems. In 1987 and 1988, a number ofkey intra-African
conferellfe"S were convened to review and promote the implementation of
the Programme of Action. The major constraints on subregional and regional co-operation have been associated with infrastructural bottlenecks and scarce externa! financia] support to date.
B.
l.

Response of rhe international community

Response of other cou11tries
(a)

Resource fiows

27. In support of the goals of the Programme of Action, the intemational community has made commitments to provide an increased leve)
of financia! assistance to African countries, both bilaterally and multilaterally. Net resource flows to Africa increased from 17.9 billion dollars in
1985 to 19.9 billion dollars in 1986 and 22.9 billion dollars in 1987 in
nominal terms. However, measured in real terms, resource flows were
lower in 1986 and 1987 than in 1985.
2 8. Official development assistance has been a steady and vital
source of funding for Africa, accounting for over 73 per cent of net resource flows to the region. Total bilateral disbursements of development
assistance to African countries remained relatively constan! in real terms
in 1986 and 1987. Many donors made substantial increases in their bilateral assistance to African countries. Official development assistance reported by the member countries of the Development Assistance Committee of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

42

the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and the multilateral
institutions increased in current dollars. In sub-Saharan Africa, it rose
from 11. 7 billion dollars in 1986 to 13.3 billion dollars in 1987, hui that
reflects no increase when measured at 1986 prices and exchange rates.
According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, export credits to sub-Saharan Africa are estimated to have fallen
from 0.8 million dollars in 1985 to 0.4 million dollars in 1986 and to O in
1987. The limited data available suggest that other prívate commercial
flows remained unchanged. Member countries of the Council for Mutual
Economic Assistance continued their economic assistance to Africa.
29. The multilateral institutions, with the support of bilateral donors, are playing an importan! role in international efforts to increase financia( flows to Africa. Disbursement from the International Development Association rose from O. 9 billion dollars in fiscal year 1985 to
1.2 billion dollars in 1986 and 1.6 billion dollars in 1987. The World
Bank initiated a Special Programme of Assistance for the low-income
heavily indebted African countries that combines additional disbursement from the International Development Association with additional
co-financing by bilateral donors. lt is estimated that the programme will
increase resource flows to sub-Saharan Africa by about 3 billion dollars
overthe period 1988-1990. In 1986 and 1987, there was a substantial net
transfer of resources from Africa to the International Monetary Fund. In
response to the economic situation in African countries, the Fund undertook severa! initiatives. In particular, its members reached agreement on
an Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility that will increase the
concessional resources available to low-income countries by 6 billion special drawing rights over the period 1988-1990. The African Development
Bank reached agreement on a trebling of its authorized capital and on a
50-per-cent increase in the African Development Fund. That has enabled
it to increase commitments from 2 billion dollars in 1984-1985 to 3.8 billion dollars in 1986-1987. Net disbursements by the International Fund
for Agricultura( Development increased from 50 million dollars in 1983
to 85 million dollars in 1986. Those new multilateral flows, supported by
bilateral donors, constitute a major new commitment of resources to
Africa in support of the continent's efforts to achieve sustainable and
growth-oriented development. Many parties, in particular the African
countries, have expressed dissatisfaction with the methods by which conditionality for adjustment are developed. Efforts are under way to increase the participation of ali parties to resol ve those differences and such
efforts should be reinforccd.
30. The contribut ion of resources has been largely undermined by
the growth in debt-service obligations and the decrease in export earnings, resulting in a marked deterioration ofthe externa( financia] position
of man y African countries. Various estimates have been made of Africa's
externa( resource requirements. The Advisory Group on Financia(
Flows to Africa, which, contrary to its mandate, considered the needs of
only sub-Saharan Africa excluding Nigeria, estimated the requirements
to be at least 5 billion dollars per annum above their level in 1986-1987.
Other estimates differ from that, depending on the country coverage, assumptions and methodology used, but in general suggest that assistance
flows should be increased in support of the Programme of Action. Increased flows should be forthcoming within the period ofthe Programme
of Action when disbursements from new multilateral initiatives and
bilateral commitments are fully implemented.
(b)

Trode and commoditie.,

31. In many parts of the developing world and in Africa in particular, the recent growth of the global economy has not yet resulted in a
gathering of momentum in the devclopment process. Most African countries have found it difficult to increase their export earnings, although
those earnings are a critica! factor in their economic recovery and development. Protectionism remains " constraint to efforts by African countries to expand their trade. Non-tariff measures against exports from
African countries, sorne of which are applied progressively to processed
commodities, are an impediment to the expansion ofthe region's exports.
There remains scope for dismantling the non-tariff barriers that impede
access by African countries to the markets of industrialized countries.
The Uruguay Round o( multilateral trade ncgotiations, agreed upon
since the adoptíon of the Programme of Action, will provide an opportunity to address sorne of the difficulties that Africa faces in the area of
international trade.
32. In spite of thc recent improvement in sorne commodity prices,
Africa's financia] problems have been aggravated by the continuing decline ofmany commodity prices. Moreover, those prices continue to be at
historically very low levcls. This has been induced by a complex array of
market forces, often bcyond the control of African countries. A majority
ofthese countries depcnd on no more than three export commodíties for

the bulk of their foreign exchange earnings, which serve as the principal
source of externa( resources for development. Africa's total commodity
earnings fell by 18 billion dollars in 1986 and in 1987 remained below
their 1985 level. lt was agreed in the Programme of Action to deal urgently with commodity issues in the framework of an overall approach
taking into account the special interests of the African countries. The
matter was discussed at the seventh session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. Changing global conditions have
contributed to Africa's significan! losses in foreign exchange from falling
export earnings; this problem can be addressed only through a long-term
and overall approach, including efforts to increase the capacity of African countries to process, market, distribute and transport nontraditional exports. Moreover, there has been an overall deterioration in
the terms of trade of sub-Saharan African countries. Over the short and
medium terms, a major sustained improvement in commodity prices is
not expected. However, aid, debt-relief and direct foreign investment can
only supplement trade in that respect.
33. Existing arrangements to provide compensatory financing for
shortfalls in commodity earnings, such as the Stabex and Sysmin arrangements of the European Economic Community and the Compensatory Financing Facility of the lnternational Monetary Fund, have been
importan! but insufficient in themselves to deal with the magnitude and
nature of the difficulties that Africa faces in commodity export markets.
The speedy activation of the Common Fund for Commodities, in particular, its Second Account, may help to overcome these difficulties. The
new Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility of the International Monetary Fund will also be available to help to offset fluctuations
in export earnings for !hose countries that are able to meet the conditions
for its use.
(c)

Debt

34. The externa! indebtedness of African countries has become one
of the importan! factors constraining recovery and development in the
continent, since debt servicing draws substantially on scarce financia! resources that otherwise could be used for development purposes in the region. Debt service obligations were equivalen! to 29 per cent of export
earnings in 1985, 43 per cent in 1986 and 39 per cent in 1987. Debt service payments in these years were equivalen! to 29 per cent, 29 per cent
and 25 per cent of export earnings respectively.
35. The economic situation of many of the countries of the region
and their low levels of income make the debt burden particularly heavy.
Most outstanding debt is to official bilateral and multilateral agencies.
These agencies have responded with a number of initiatives to lighten the
debt burden, particularly of the low-income African countries. Efforts
have also been initiated to address the debt problems of African middleincome countries. The economic recovery and development of Africa
calls for continued efforts in this area.
36. A number of bilateral donors have converted official development assistance loans to sorne African countries into grants - a proces,
that began in 1978. Conversions to date affect only one sixth of Africa's
official development assistance debt but cover more than half of that of
the least developed countries of the region. Commitments have been
made by a number of donors to make further conversions, and proposals
have been made to further reduce the stock of debt. Progress has been
made in providing lengthened grace and maturity periods in rescheduling in the Paris Club. Rescheduling does not reduce the stock of debt.
Proposals are under discussion to provide additional relief. African
countries havc expressed three concerns regarding the process of rescheduling: the lack of a medium-term and long-term perspective; rescheduling terms that are not adapted to debtors' capacity to pay; and the
excessive duration of the rescheduling process itself.
37. Africa's continuing search for solutions to the problems ofits externa! indebtedness prompted African Governments to hold an extraordinary summit meeting at Addis Ababa from 30 November to 1 December 1987 devoted to Africa ·s externa( debt. This meeting resulted in the
adoption of Africa 's common position 25 on externa! indebtedness. The
economic summit meeting of the seven largest industrialized countries,
held at Toronto from 19 to 21 June 1988, 90 addressed Africa's debt and
development problems. The summit achieved consensus on rescheduling
official debt of the poorest developing countries that are undertaking internationally approved adjustment programmes, allowing offil'ial creditors to choose among severa] options. The likely overall impact of these
measures is difficult to quantify because it is not clear yet what the total
amount of relief would he. lt is the shared responsibility of ali partie,

9 0 A/43/43'i-S/l9974, annexes.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

43

concerned to develop lasting and durable solutions to the problems of
Africa's externa! indebtedness.

tional community to support the expansion and intensification of such
co-operation.

Quality and modalities of externa/ assistance
38. Sorne progress has been made in improving the quality and
modalities of externa! assistance, notably by improving the quality of
bilateral flows; increasing the pace of disbursement; increasing the
concessionality of assistance; and strengthening the co-ordination of donor programmes, notably through the expansion and improvement of
consultative groups and United Nations Development Programme
round-table meetings and through the introduction of "policy framework papers". Nevertheless, considerable scope remains for future improvement, particularly in relation to quick disbursement, wherever appropriate.

4.

(d)

(e) Structural adjustment programmes
39. An important consideration relates to the developmental framework within which externa] assistance is provided. The implementation
of structural adjustment programmes has given rise to general concerns,
such as human, social and political consequences, as well as long-term financing needs for Africa's economic recovery and development efforts.
These concerns have resulted in a dialogue on the nature and content of
adjustment programmes. This has led to greater understanding and increased awareness of the need to ensure that such programmes form an
integral part of a longer-term strategy for economic growth, incorporate
a human dimension and do not have an adverse impact on vulnerable
groups and would take due account of the specific economic situation
and national development priorities of each country. This is now being
reflected in actions by African Governments and donor agencies.
40. The efforts of the African countries to achieve sustained growth
and development through structural reform are seriously constrained by
the adverse externa] environment as it relates to the situation in Africa, in
particular, with respect to export earnings, the debt service burden and
concessional finance.

2.

Response of the United Nations system
41. The organizations of the United Nations system were invited to
attach high priority to Africa in their global operations, taking into account the priorities of the Programme of Action. These organizations are
now devoting more than 35 per cent of their resources to Africa, with expenditures amounting to more than 1 billion dollars annually.

42. The Secretary-General has taken importan! actions to sensitize
the international community to the serious economic situation in Africa,
to ensure a co-ordinated response by the United Nations system to the
implementation of the Programme of Action and to monitor and report
on the implementation of the Programme of Action. Although the contributions ofthe organizations ofthe United Nations system were diversified and useful, they were, however, insufficient. In view of the deterioration in Africa's financia] situation after the Programme of Action was
adopted, the Secretary-General appointed a high-level Advisory Group
on Financia] Flows to Africa; its report was issued in February 1988. 91
The Secretary-General also established a United Nations Steering Committee with the participation ofall relevan! bodies ofthe United Nations
to co-ordinate and monitor their response to the Programme of Action.
In addition, an inter-agency task force, which acts as the operational arm
of the Steering Committee, has been established under the chairmanship
of the Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Africa.
South-South co-operation
43. Progress in co-operation between African countries and other
developing countries has been rcgistcrcd in a number of areas, such as
trade, finance, technology and technical assistance. Sorne countries have
contributed through bilateral assistance and programmes oftechnical cooperation among developing countries. In the field of trade, the first
round of negotiations of the global system of trade preferences among developing countries was completed al the ministerial meeting on the Global System of Trade Preferences among Developing Countries of the
Group of Seventy-seven held at Belgrade from 11 to 13 April 1988. The
participants in the global system signed a contractual document that
seeks to facilitate their trade relations. Tht potential for South-South cooperation is considerable, and every effort should be made by the interna3.

Non-governmental organizations

44. Most non-governmental organizations, both African and nonAfrican, are contributing to Africa's economic recovery and development through effective programmes at the grass-roots leve!. Significan!
resources are mobilized by non-governmental organizations, from both
the general public and official aid institutions, for economic and social
projects and programmes as well as for humanitarian activities. These efforts support the goals of the Programme of Action and deserve to be
commended. One development has been the emergence and growing
presence of the community of indigenous African non-governmental organizations as importan! actors in Africa's development effort. They are
engaging in closer dialogue with African Governments, official development agencies and non-African non-governmental organizations in arder
further to clarify and define their own role in Africa's recovery and development. They are contributing their own experience to the implementation of development policies, especially those oriented towards the poorest groups.
III.

MEASURES FOR ACCELERATING THE IMPLEMENTATJON OF THE
UNITED NATIONS PROGRAMME OF ACTION FOR AFRICAN EcoNOMIC
RECOVERY AND DEVELOPMENT J986-1990

A.

Agricultura/ developmenl
45. In the course of implementing the Programme of Action, African
countries should continue to concentrate their efforts on agriculture and
its supporting sectors, the rehabilitation and development of agroindustries, the fight against drought, desertification and pests, and on the
other sectoral priorities identified in the Programme.
l.

46. It is importan! that development programmes give due recognition to the factors critica! to increased agricultura! production. These
factors include investment in appropriate technology, research and devel9pment and agricultura] inputs. African countries should intensify
their efforts to establish early warning systems and national food security
arrangements, diversify exports, improve export performance and maintain the incomes of farmers al appropriate levels.
47. The traditional role of women as producers of a significan! proportion of food should be protected and strengthened when new agricultura! production methods are introduced. More attention must be given
to ensure that women have access to agricultura! extension services,
credit, land titles and, not least, new technologies.
2.

Other sectors in support of agriculture

48. Increased attention and financia! resources should be directed to
the rehabilitation and maintenance of productive infrastructures in the
sectors that support agriculture, including transport and communications. Emphasis should continue to be placed on the production of
agricultura! tools, small-scale irrigation equipment, spare parts, fertilizers, pesticides and other chemicals. Greater attention should be given to
rehabilitating, modernizing and expanding food-processing and other
agro-based industries, by mobilizing the resources needed as well as providing training and credit in rural areas and promoting entrepreneurial
development programmes.
3

Drought and desertification

49. The environment and natural resources should become important considerations in development co-operation. Environmental activities must go hand in hand with efforts to enhance economic growth and
combat poverty, as there is a clear link between economic well-being and
the quality of the environment. Better management of the natural resource base is a major factor in moving towards sustainable development.
Action should be intensified to improve the economic situation and comba! more effectively environmental degradation arising, in particular,
from drought, desertification, deforestation, floods, locust and grasshopper infestation and the dumping of toxic and industrial wastes.
4.

Human resources

Since many interna! constraints are linked to weaknesses in educat1011, lraining and management systems and since human resources
play a key role in the long-term development prospects of the continent,
the effective development and utilization of human resources of the region must be made a major objective of national policy. In consequence,
50.

91 See Financing Africu's Recovery, Report and Recommendations of
the Advisory Group on Financia! Flows to Africa, United Nations,
February 1988.

Role of the African countries

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

44

the African countries should place greater emphasis on population policies and programmes, including the Kilimanjaro Programme of
Action. 89
51. The participation of people in t he recovery and developmen t process should continue to be broadened and made more effective, particularly through promoting increased access to development resources and
benefits, creating favourable conditions for decentralized decisionmaking, encouraging greater entrepreneurship al ali levels and promoting individual initiative and prívate enterprise.
52. African countries and their development partners should give
particular importance to human resources development, especially by integrating the human dimension in the design and implementation of
structural adjustment programmes. As stated in the Programme of Action, the role and contribution of women in the development process are
of crucial importance. However, women often remain al the periphery of
economic systems and decision-making proccsses. There is thus an urgent need to strengthen the participation of women in ali areas of the
economy and at all levels of development planning and implementation.
Moreover, African countries should allocate substantial resources to
make it possible for women to participate more fully as active economic
agents in development programmes, especially in rural areas.
5.

Policy reforms

53. African countries should continue to pursue the balanced development of ali sectors of their economy. Particular attention should be
given to domestic economic management, the effective mobilization and
utilization of domestic resources, in particular through the encouragement of savings, and action to contain or reverse capital flight with the
support of the international community and to provide an environment
conducive to direct investment. Special attention should be given to the
rationalization of public investment policies, the development and effective implementation of appropriate human resources and population
policies, industrial development, the improvement of international competitiveness and the diversification of production.
54. Structural adjustment programmes should be designed in such a
way as to mitigate their adverse socio-economic effects, ensure that the
human dimension is integrated in them, further improve the well-being
of the poor and disadvantaged in A frican societies, notably through redirecting social and developmental expenditures, and make short-term
stabilization and adjustment measures compatible with and built into
long-term structural transformation.
55. Bearing in mind that they have the central role to play in the design and implementation oftheir adjustment programmes, African Governments, with the support of their development partners, should give
particular attention to the following so that adjustment programmes are
based on a realistic and pragmatic approach of the prohlcms of each
country:
(a) In designing economic structural adjustment programmes, the
following should be taken into account:

(i)

The need for adjustment programmes to be realistic and consistent with projected financia) resources and the externa[ and interna[ environment;

(ii)

Harmonization of the programme with long-term objectives
and strategies, with particular, continued emphasis on selfsustaining economic development and growth;

(iii)

Provision of compensatory programmes to minimize the adverse effects of redeployment of labour and the social costs of
adjustment to the poor;

(iv)

Social infrastructure and human resource development, including environmental, cultural and political concerns;

(v)

A pragmatic approach to the respective roles of the public and
prívate sectors;

(b) Social indicators need to be developed to monitor the impact of
these programmes on the population;

(e) African countries should increase their efforts in the search for a
viable conceptual and practica! framework for economic structural adjustment programmes in keeping with the long-term development objectives and strategies al the national, subregional and regional levels;
(d) It is essential that the process ofreform be implemented as soon
as possible by those countries that have not yet done so and sustained and
supported by those that have already started it.

Trade
56. African countries need to make special efforts in order to make
African products more competitive in international markets, and to
adopt appropriate policies and reinforce mechanisms to expand and
diversify their exports.
57. Decisions on diversification are primarily the responsibility of
African countries. These decisions should take into account the agricultura[, industrial and other development objectives. Horizontal and vertical diversification oftheir economies, as well as increased participation in
the processing, marketing and distribution of their commodities are longterm development objectives towards which African countries need to
make further efforts in the context of intensified international cooperat10n bctween producers and consumers.
6.

58. Adequate structures should be established or improved in order
to promote the transfer, adoption, adaptation and the application of appropriate technologies, the development of communication infrastructure and the improvement of marketing networks and thus form a solid
base for reinforcing the efficiency of exports.
59. African Governments should enhance their participation in ali
majar international trade negotiations, notably the Uruguay Round of
multilateral trade negotiations, so as to better achieve a reduction in tariff
and non-tariff barriers that have a negative impact on their ability to export.
7.

Economic co-operation and integrarion
60. For the effective implementation of the Programme of Action,
African countries should intensify their efforts towards economic cooperation and integration in accordance with the objectives of the Lagos
Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the
Economic Development of Africa, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its second
extraordinary session, held at Lagos on 28 and 29 April 1980. 92 Among
the measures that should be taken are the following:
(a) Strengthening and rationalization of existing subregional groupings, t he creation, as appropriate, of new ones and their effective utilization for co-ordinated planning and development at the subregional level;
(b) lmplementation of measures for the co-ordination of economic
and social policies subregionally, as well as for joint planning and development of multicountry projects in key economic sectors;
(e) Promotion ofintra-African trade in primary and processed commodities;
(d) Promotion of domestic policies that encourage the movement of
goods, skills and capital among the African countries.

8.

Peace and stability

61. Every effort must be made to achieve political settlements of international and regional conflicts so that scarce resources can be directed
towards economic recovery and development. In this context, A frican
countries should, with the support of the international community, intensify their efforts to end t he acts of aggression and destabilization of the
apartheid régime in South Africa, which is the single most destructive
form of conflict in the region.
B.
1.

Role of the international community

Role of other countric,

(a) Resource jiows
62. Financia! flows to Africa, in particular concessional flows,
should be increased substantially, especially to sub-Saharan African
countries, and provided on a continuous, predictable, assured and fastdisbursing basis, as appropriate. Such an increase in resources for Africa
would be facilitated if ali developed countries allocated O. 7 per cent of
their gross domestic product to official development assistance.
63. Most resource flows to Africa will continue to be provided
through official bilateral assistance and by multilateral institutions, but
flows of prívate capital should also be encouraged. The following actions
are particularly relevan!:
(a) Donar countries, particularly those whose assistance to Africa
has decreased in the past two years or is al a low leve!, should aim to increase their official development assistance to Africa in real terms. These

n A/S-11/14, annex l.

11.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

resources should be provided 011 a sustained and fast-disbursing basis and
directed to the priorities of recovery and development:
(b) Bilateral co-financing funds pledged under the World Bank·s
Special Programme of Assistance for low-income, debt-distressed countries should be made available as s0011 as possible, and donors should
expedite the disbursement of the resources that they have agreed to provide for this purpose;
(e) The agreed commitments to an increase in the capital of the
World Bank, to the fifth replenishment of the African Development
Fund and to the eighth replenishment of the International Development
Association should be fulfilled without delay. In addition, negotiations
on the third replenishment of the Intemational Fund for Agricultura)
Development should be concluded promptly, and those on a ninth replenishment ofthe International Development Association should be undertaken as soon as pos~ible:
(el) Efforts should be continued to improve the quality of bilateral
flows, particularly through more rapid disbursement of assistance already pledged and increased concessionality, meeting the recurren! local
costs of programmes and projects, using local equipment, indigenous
competence and expertise and improving procedures, guidelines and formats for the procurement of equipment;
(e) The co-ordination of donor programmes, undertaken in close cooperation with the recipient countries, should be improved further. The
important role of the consultative groups and round-table meetings in
this regard should be enhanced.
(b)

the international community to find lasting, durable and growth-oriented
solutions that cover various categories of debt, various creditors and
various debtor countries and that respond to Africa's development
needs. Recognizing the major contribution that progress in this area
would make to the success of the Programme of Action, ongoing initiatives, including those agreed upon at the economic summit meeting held
at Toronto from 19 to 21 June 1988, 90 should be pursued urgently, with
the following being taken into account:
(a)

Particular attention should be given to the following:

(a) The mid-term review ofthe Uruguay Round ofmultilateral trade
negotiations scheduled for December 1988 should give a new impulse to
the negotiations in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, in
which the concerns of African countries should be given particular attention. Ali countries involved in the Uruguay Round should endeavour to
improve the international trading environment, particularly as it concerns African exports. This applies especially to measures affecting processed and non-traditional exports because these offer the greatest hope
for Africa to increase and diversify its export base in the longer run.
There is need for greater liberalization of trade in agricultura! products,
and special attention should be given to the provisions of existing régimes
concerning trade in tropical products of interest to Afncan countries. In
this connection, the Uruguay Round should be used to develop improved
discipline and rules, addressing thc problems of market access, subsidies
that directly or indirectly affect trade and the harmonization of health
and sanitary standards;
(b) Ongoing initiatives to make the Common Fund for Commodities
fully operational should be completed in the shortest possible time, bearing in mind that a number of developmental programmes have already
been approved or considered by producers and consumers, for possible financing under its Second Account;
(e) Programmes for the stabilization of expon earnings of African
countries, along the lines of the Stabex and Sysmin, should be considered
by other countries;
(d) The Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility of the
International Monetary Fund should have an enhanced role in responding to Africa's short-term externa! contingency needs;
(e) Within the context of the Programme of Action, the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations should consult with the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, other relevant organizations
and interested Governments with a view to establishing a group of experts to undertake an in-depth assessment of the question of African
commodities and the scope for export diversification.
(c)

Externa/ debt

66. Many countries have taken measures to reduce the burden of
Africa's externa! debt, and such action should be continued, in order to
limit the burden that debt imposes 011 recovery, reform and development
of the African countries. Debt rescheduling should be supplemented by
other multilateral and bilateral measures. Every effort should be made by

Official bilateral debt

(i)

Non-concessional officially guaranteed debt and debt-service
payments of low-income African countries should be reschedukd on more generous terms;

(ii)

Creditor countries· efforts to write off or otherwise remove the
burden of official development assistance loans, inter alia, by
repayment in local currencies, of low-income countries pursuing structural adjustment programmes, should be continued;

(iii)

In addition, donor countries should increase the grant element
in their future assistance to poorer African countries.

(b)

Multilateral debl

(i)

Every effort should be made to ensure the speedy and full implementation of the initiatives of international financia! institutions, especially the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility
of the lnternational Monetary Fund, in order to ensure that
necessary concessional resource flows are available to lowincome countries in Africa that are undertaking structural adjustment;

(ii)

The proposal to estahlish a mechanism, financed by voluntary
contributions, to alleviate, on a concessional basis, the outstanding World Bank debt oflow-income countries that are pursuing
reform measures should also be considered urgently.

(e)

Commercial loans and credits

Trade and commod,ties

64. An increase in Africa·s export earnings anda reduction in the adverse impact on African economies of year-to-year fluctuations in those
earnings would both contribute to the attainment of sustained noninflationary growth and assist African countries in their efforts to implement the Programme of Action. These improvements in export earnings
would be facilitated by an international environment more favourable to
African exports and by continued efforts to diversify exports.
65.

45

Various new methods of reducing the commercial debt of developing
countries have been developed. The application ofthese methods to ease
the commercial debt of African countries should be promoted.
67. The common position of Africa on addressing the problem of the
continent 011 externa! debt adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its third extraordinary session, held at Addis Ababa on 30 November and I December 1987, 25 should be taken account of and seriously considered by the
international community.
(d)

Supporting reform within a broad development framework

68. African countries have the responsibility for formulating and implementing the economic reforms that form part of the process of recovery and longer-term development. In supporting these reforms, Africa's
international partners should keep in mind this imperative for longerterm economic and social development. In this context, the human dimension should be a central concern. lntensified efforts should be made
by ali parties lo develop and use appropriate indicators to measure and
monitor closely the improvement of conditions of human well-being as
reforms proceed. Instruments should also be developed to provide early
warning of deteriorating human conditions.
2.

Economic co-operation and integrat,on

69. Special efforts should be made by the international community to
support ongoing efforts of African countries to strengthen co-operation
and the rapid achievement of economic integration in the region. International assistance to national projects should be complemented by
greater support for regional and subregional projects, particularly in the
priori! y sectors.
3.

lmpact of destabilization po/icies of South Africa

70. Recovery and development efforts in the countries of the southern African subregion continue to be frustrated by acts of aggression and
destabilization by the South African régime. The international community as a whole should exert greater pressure 011 the apartheid régime
to abolish its abhorrent policies and immediately stop its acts of destabilization and aggression in the region. In the absence of an end to these acts
of destabilization, increased assistance should be given to the member
countries of the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference in order to compensa te for the costs of destabilization, to allow these
countries to implement their recovery and development programmes ef-

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

46

fectively and to strengthen co-operation among them so that they can
reduce their dependence on South Africa. Furthermore, provisions of reliefassistance should be expanded to include the rehabilitation ofpopulations affected by emergency situations in order to restore, in ter alía, their
productive capacities. In particular, contributions to the Action for Resisting Invasion, Colonialism and Apartheid Fund and United Nations
funds and other means to support the victims of apartheid and the frontline States should be continued and be increased, where possible.
4.

Human resources
71. Responsibility for the development, planning and utilization of
their human resources falls first and foremost on the African countries.
The international community should support their efforts by providing
the necessary financia! and technical assistance to promote their human
resources development.
5.

South-South co-operation

72. South-South co-operation in supporting the implementation of
the Programme of Action should be enhanced. Action already initiated
in the agricultura! sector should be intensified, and additional projects
should be identified to assist African countries, either individually or collectively, in improving the production of staple food items. Particular
emphasis should be placed on technological co-operation, especially in
agro-related and consumer-goods industries, to enable Africa to benefit
from the expertise and experience of other, more advanced developing
countries. The same obtains for the exchange of experience and skills in
the development of human resources. To achieve these objectives, individual countries and subregional and regional groupings in Africa and
other developing regions should agree on specific plans of action, with
time-bound and sectoral targets.
6.

Support by the United Nations system

73. Co-operation and co-ordination among the various organizations
of the United Nations system in the implementation and monitoring of
the Programme of Action should be further strengthened. In order to ensure the capacity of the Secretary-General to carry out his responsibilities with regard to the Programme of Action, the secretariats of the
United Nations Steering Committee and ofthe Inter-Agency Task Force
should be given appropriate support for the duration of the Programme.
Adequate funding, both budgetary and extrabudgetary, should be provided for this purpose.
74. At the national leve], further efforts to improve co-ordination
within the United Nations system should be taken in the context of the
country-programming framework ofthe United Nations and the role of
the residen! co-ordinator. In the programmes ofthe United Nations system, particular emphasis should be placed on the priority sectors for the
recovery and development of Africa.
75. In view ofthe importan! role ofnon-governmental organizations
in mobilizing and making the public more aware as regards development,
the United Nations system should increase its co-operation with nongovernmental organizations for the implementation of the Programme of
Action.

43/45.

Implementation ofthe Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, 93
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 2621 (XXV)
of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action
for the full implementation ofthe Declaration, and 35/118
of 11 December 1980, the annex to which contains the
Plan of Action for the Full Jmplementation of the Decla93 Official Records ol the General 111-.,embly. Forty-third Session.
Supplement No. 23 (A/43/2-1).

ration, as well as 40/56 of 2 December 1985 on the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration,
Recalling all its previous resolutions concerning the implementation of the Declaration, in particular resolution
42/71 of 4 December 1987, as well as the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Recalling its resolution S-14/1 of 20 September 1986 on
the question of Namibia and taking into account the Declaration adopted by the World Conference on Sanctions
against Racist South Africa, 94 and the Declaration of the
International Conference for the Immediate Independence of Namibia and the Programme of Action on Namibia adopted by the Conference, 95
Condemning the continued colonialist and racist repression of Africans, particularly in Namibia, by the Government of South Africa through its persistent, illegal occupation of the international Territory, and its intransigent
attitude towards all efforts being made to bring about an
internationally acceptable solution to the situation obtaining in the Territory,
Deeply conscious ofthe urgent need to take all necessary
measures to eliminate forthwith the last vestiges of colonialism, particularly in respect of Namibia where desperate
attempts by South Africa to perpetuate its illegal occupation have brought untold suffering and bloodshed to the
people,
Strongly condemning the policies of those States which,
in defiance of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, have continued to collaborate with the Government
of South Africa in its domination of the people of Namibia,
Reiterating its conviction that the total eradication of racial discrimination, apartheid and violations of the basic
human rights of the peoples of colonial Territories will be
achieved most expeditiously by the faithful and complete
implementation of the Declaration, particularly in Namibia, and by the speediest possible complete elimination
of the presence of the illegal occupying régime therefrom,
Conscious that the success of national liberation struggles and the resultant international situation have provided the international community with a unique opportunity to make a decisive contribution towards the total
elimination of colonialism in all its forros and manifestations in Africa,
Noting with satisfaction the work accomplished by the
Special Committee with a view to securing the effective
and complete implementation of the Declaration contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and
other relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
Noting also with satisfaction the co-operation and active
participation of the administering Powers concerned in
the relevant work of the Special Committee, as well as
their continued readiness to receive United Nations visiting missions in the Territories under their administration,
Stressing the importance of the participation of the administering Powers in the related work of the Special
Committee and noting with concern the negative impact
which the non-participation of certain administering Powers has had on the work of the Special Committee, depriv-

94
Report of the World Conference on Sanctions against Racist South
A/rica, Paris, 16-20 June 1986 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.86.1.23), chap. IX.
95 Report of the Internationa/ Conference far the Immediate
lndepe11de11ce of Namibia. Vienna. 7-11 Ju/y 1986 (United Nations
puhlication, Sales No. E.86.1.16 and addendum), part III, chaps. I and

11.
