s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

•

Distr.
GENERAL
S/25091
11 January 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the
Council, at its 3162nd meeting, held on 11 January 1993, in connection with
the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation between Iraq
and Kuwait":
"The Security Council notes that there have been a number of recent
actions by Iraq as part of its pattern of flouting relevant Security
Council resolutions. One was the series of border incidents involving
the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM); another was
the incident concerning the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM)
and UNIKOM flights.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the incidents reported
in the Secretary~General's special report of 10 January 1993 on UNIKOM
(S/25085). The Security Council recalls the provisions of resolution
687 (1991) that established the Demilitarized Zone between Iraq and
Kuwait and demanded that both countries respect the inviolability of the
international boundary between them. It reaffirms that the boundary was
at the very core of the conflict and that, in resolutions 687 (1991) and
773 (1991), it guaranteed the inviolability of the boundary and undertook
to ~ake as appropriate all necessary measures to that end in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations.
"The Council condemns the action taken by Iraq on 10 January 1993 to
remove equipment by force from the Kuwaiti side of the demilitarized zone
without prior consultation with UNIKOM, and through UNIKOM with the
Kuwaiti authorities, as set out in the letter of 8 January 1993 from the
President of the Security Council to the Secretary-General. In
particular, the Council draws attention to the removal by Iraq of four
HY-2G anti-ship missiles and other military equipment from the six
bunkers in the former Iraqi naval base at Umm Qasr on Kuwaiti territory,
in spite of the objections of UNIKOM and their efforts to prevent this.
This action is a direct challenge to the authority of UNIKOM and amounts
93-01682

3655c (E)

110193

110193

I • ••.

S/25091
English
Page 2

to clear cut defiance by Iraq of the Council, which stipulated in the
letter of 3 November 1992 from the President of the Council to the
Secretary-General that the military equipment in the six bunkers should
be destroyed by or under the supervision of UNIKOM. The Council demands
that the anti-ship missiles and other military equipment removed by force
from the six bunkers at Umm Qasr in Kuwaiti territory be returned
immediately to the custody of UNIKOM for destruction, as previously
decided.
"The Council also condemns further Iraqi intrusions into the Kuwaiti
side of the demilitarized zone on 11 January 1993.
It demands that any
future retrieval mission be in accordance with the terms set out in the
letter of 8 January 199~ from the President of the Council to the
Secretary-General. On the UNIKOM facilities at Camp Khor, the Council
stresses that the land and premises occupied by UNIKOM shall be inviolate
and subject to the exclusive control and authority of the United Nations.
"The Council invites the Secretary-General, as a first step, to
explore on an urgent basis the possibilities for restoring UNIKOM to its
full strength and to consider in an emergency such as this the need for
rapid reinforcement as set out in paragraph 18 of his report of
12 June 1991 (S/22692), as well as any other suggestions that he might
have to enhance the effectiveness of UNIKOM, and to report back to the
Council.
"The Council is also alarmed by Iraq's refusal to allow the United
Nations to transport its Special Commission (UNSCOM) and UNIKOM personnel
into Iraqi territory using its own aircraft.
In this connection the
Council reiterates the demand in its statement of 8 January 1993 that
Iraq permit UNSCOM and UNIKOM to use their own aircraft to transport
their personnel into Iraq.
It rejects the arguments contained in the
letter of 9 January 1993 from the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Iraq to
the President of the Security Council (S/25086).
"These latest developments concerning the activities of UNIKOM and
UNSCOM constitute further material breaches of resolution 687 (1991),
which established the cease-fire and provided the conditions essential
for the restoration of peace and security in the region, as well as other
relevant resolutions and agreements. The Council demands that Iraq
cooperate fully with UNIKOM, UNSCOM and other United Nations agencies in
carrying out their mandates, and again warns Iraq of the serious
consequences that will flow from such contin~ed defiance. The Council
will remain actively seized of the matter."
