United Nations

S/PV.6165

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6165th meeting
Wednesday, 22 July 2009, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Puente
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Çorman
Lord Malloch-Brown
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath
of conflict (S/2009/304)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-41769 (E)

*0941769*

S/PV.6165

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (S/2009/304)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Bangladesh, Brazil,
Burundi, Canada, the Central African Republic, Egypt,
Germany, Guatemala, India, Italy, Morocco, New
Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, the Republic of
Korea, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand and Uruguay, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I wish to extend a
warm welcome to His Excellency Lord MallochBrown, United Kingdom Minister for Africa, Asia and
the United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Ebrahim Ismail
Ebrahim, Deputy Minister for International Relations
and Cooperation of South Africa; His Excellency JeanFrancis Bozizé, Minister Delegate at the Presidency of
the Central African Republic in charge of National
Defence, Veterans Affairs, Victims of War,
Disarmament and Restructuring of the Army; and His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Somalia.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bozizé
(Central African Republic), Mr. Omaar
(Somalia), Mr. Ebrahim (South Africa) and the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
2

agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Heraldo Muñoz, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Chile;
Mr. Jordan Ryan, Assistant Administrator and Director
of the Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery at the
United Nations Development Programme; and
Mr. Alastair McKechnie, Director of the Fragile and
Conflict-Affected Countries Group at the World Bank.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/304, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda.
Let me begin by thanking Council members for
participating in this high-level meeting to focus on the
important issue of post-conflict peacebuilding.
Members of the Council will recall that the Security
Council, in May last year, requested the SecretaryGeneral, the Peacebuilding Commission, international
and regional organizations and Member States to
consider how to support countries affected by conflict
to secure sustainable peace in a faster and more
effective way. I would therefore like to thank the
Secretary-General for the report he has prepared, which
he will be presenting today.
The task before us is to consider and refine
strategies through which the United Nations and the
international community can effectively support
countries emerging from conflict to move towards
sustainable peace, reconstruction, economic recovery
and development.
Post-conflict peacebuilding is premised on the
simple fact that without peace development is not
possible, and yet without development peace is not
durable. There is need to deliver tangible peace
dividends, including the provision of basic services and
the improvement of the standard of living of the
population.

09-41769

S/PV.6165

In accordance with current practice and
framework, peacebuilding activities are not envisaged
in countries that are still in conflict situations. The
Security Council needs to address the critical issue of
the early consideration of peacebuilding activities right
from the peacemaking and peacekeeping stages.
In any peacebuilding endeavour, national
leadership and ownership are of paramount importance.
National authorities must take the primary
responsibility for re-establishing the key institutions of
governance and economic recovery, with the support of
the United Nations and international partners. This
requires identifying key priorities, developing and
agreeing on a national strategy to address them through
a widely consultative process, and mobilizing the
requisite political, financial and technical support in a
coordinated manner.
Our experience in Uganda illustrates the
importance of identifying national priorities based on
our own unique situation and conditions. We decided
that it was important to address post-conflict
peacebuilding, starting from 1986, in a sequenced
manner, beginning with the most urgent and critical
elements. These included efforts to guarantee the
security of life and property; embarking on national
reconciliation and unity by establishing a broad-based
Government; establishing a human rights commission
to investigate human rights abuses in the country; and
introducing and consolidating the concept of popular
democracy.
Other priorities included security sector reform
by, inter alia, integrating all former fighting forces into
a new national army and granting amnesty to most of
them. We launched and executed a nationally agreed
minimum recovery programme and then embarked on a
process of constitutional reform through countrywide
consultations, culminating in the promulgation of a
new national Constitution in 1995.
Peacebuilding is a shared responsibility in which
the United Nations, subregional and regional
organizations and the wider international community
have a critical role to play. It does not really matter
where conflict situations arise — be it in the Balkans,
Asia, Latin America or Africa. The role of regional
approaches to solving problems is key because regions
have more intimate knowledge of specific situations.
Experience in Africa, and in the Great Lakes region in

09-41769

particular, shows
successful.

that

regional

efforts

can

be

The Regional Peace Initiative on Burundi,
chaired by Uganda and facilitated by South Africa, is a
good example in that regard. The knowledge and clear
understanding of the political and social dynamics that
the regional leaders brought to the peace process in
Burundi were critical to resolving the conflict. Burundi
is now making steady progress in post-conflict
peacebuilding with the support of the East African
Community, the African Union, the United Nations and
international partners.
The Economic Community of West African States
played a positive role in Liberia, while the African
Union, through the African Union Mission in Somalia,
is currently engaged in efforts to bring peace and
stability to Somalia. Regional organizations, such as
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the
Organization of American States, the European Union
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe have also made substantial contributions to
peacebuilding.
The regional organizations in Africa have the
necessary human resources, but what they clearly lack
are the financial resources. That is where the United
Nations and the international community can be of
great help. The challenge is how the United Nations
can address issues of international peace and security
meaningfully and remain relevant. Uganda therefore
calls upon the United Nations and international
partners to support regional and subregional efforts to
strengthen their capacities in peacebuilding.
Post-conflict peacebuilding activities require
adequate, flexible and predictable funding. There is
urgent need for the United Nations system to ensure
greater coherence in peacemaking, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development activities. We therefore
call upon the United Nations to strengthen further its
strategic partnerships with the World Bank and other
financial institutions. We are encouraged by the
initiatives for flexible funding being undertaken by the
United Nations through the Peacebuilding Fund and the
launching of the in-country multi-donor trust funds.
The United Nations should also focus more on
implementation of the concepts of a joint United
Nations vision and integrated missions in supporting
peacebuilding activities.

3

S/PV.6165

Finally, we thank all delegations for their
contribution to the draft presidential statement as an
outcome of our deliberations.
I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and invite him to
take the floor.
The Secretary-General: First of all, I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for taking time to preside
over this meeting on a subject of great importance to
the United Nations.
In May last year, the Security Council requested a
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict. I am pleased to present my report
(S/2009/304). It is the product of intensive, wideranging consultations. It sets out an approach to
peacebuilding that is better resourced, managed and
coordinated. The Peacebuilding Commission discussed
it last week. I welcome its commitment to championing
this important agenda.
Building peace is about much more than ending
war. It is about putting in place the institutions and
trust that will carry people forward into a peaceful
future. We often have a limited window of opportunity
in which to do this. The report focuses on that crucial
two-year period when conflict has ended but insecurity
often persists and peace is fragile. If peace is to be
sustainable, the international community must make
the most of that moment and provide the right support
at the right time.
Decades of international experience have taught
us that, while every case is unique, certain types of
support are almost always needed. Time and again,
war-ravaged people have asked us to help them
establish security and safety, restore basic services and
core Government functions, support a political
transition and jump-start economic recovery.
These are not easy tasks. I have seen the
difficulties first hand. I have travelled to many
countries emerging from conflict, including the Sudan,
Haiti, Liberia and Timor-Leste. I have seen the costs of
a slow or inadequate response to urgent post-conflict
needs. Yet, I have also seen the profound difference
that a well-planned and managed effort can make.

4

Let me highlight
messages of my report.

the

five

interconnected

The first pertains to national ownership. Peace
will not take root if it comes from outside. Building
peace is primarily a national challenge and
responsibility. The United Nations and the international
community should play a catalytic and supporting role.
The second message pertains to international
leadership. Member States expect the United Nations
to lead the international community. I have created a
senior-level mechanism that will ensure that the right
leadership and support teams are in place as early as
possible.
The third message concerns coherence. Effective
peacebuilding requires input from all parts of the
United Nations system and key partners. Peacebuilding
is not separate from mediation, peacekeeping or
development aid. It is all of these working together.
The fourth refers to a common strategy.
Immediately after conflict, everything feels urgent and
there are many pressing needs. We need to align behind
a shared approach with realistic priorities against
which national and international actors can allocate
scarce resources.
The fifth message concerns predictable and
credible delivery. Member States need to help ensure
that we have sufficient international capacity to
respond rapidly and flexibly to the most urgent needs:
basic safety, security and services; strengthening the
rule of law; supporting political processes; and
revitalizing the economy.
To that end, we need a clearer understanding of
responsibilities within the United Nations, outlining
who will respond in each of these key areas. We also
need a deeper and more diverse pool of international
civilian expertise. We need prepositioned pooled
funding, such as the Peacebuilding Fund, to jump-start
action, followed by faster funding from other sources.
And we need more and better strategic partnerships
with the World Bank, regional organizations, civil
society and the private sector.
Member States, for their part, have a crucial part
to play. I urge them to speak with one voice across
different multilateral forums and to align bilateral
support with the common strategy in each country.

09-41769

S/PV.6165

Almost a decade ago, in its debate on the theme
“No exit without strategy”, the Security Council
articulated the many challenges associated with the
later stages of peacebuilding, when it is time to wind
down an international peace operation. In Sierra Leone,
as was discussed in this Chamber very recently, we
have seen many of the “no exit” lessons being applied.
In asking for the report before us, the Council
recognized that it also needs to support peacebuilding
more effectively from the outset. This requires the
engagement and coordination of many different actors,
and it requires adequate funding. Some key United
Nations actors face serious challenges in securing
timely financing.
I encourage the Council to look carefully at these
issues as they pertain to existing and future mandates,
and as part of initiatives already under way to review
peacekeeping mandates. I also encourage members, in
the context of next year’s review of the Peacebuilding
Commission, to consider how they can make more
effective use of that body.
My current report is part of a series of initiatives,
including my recent report on mediation and the
ongoing work on peacekeeping. These efforts share a
common goal — to enable the United Nations and its
international partners to respond more effectively to
countries in crisis in ways that are better tailored to
needs on the ground.
I am determined to do my part. I am committed to
driving the necessary changes through the United
Nations system, but I need the Security Council’s
support and commitment if we are to achieve real
change. I look forward to working with Council
members to meet these challenges.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Muñoz.
Mr. Muñoz: I thank you, Sir, for inviting me to
take part in this discussion of the Secretary-General’s
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (S/2009/304). The Peacebuilding Commission
met on 13 July to discuss the report. I would like to
share with the Council today my summary of those
discussions.
The Peacebuilding Commission welcomed the
report and endorsed the Secretary-General’s approach
and recommendations. The preparation of the report

09-41769

usefully brought together the many parts of the United
Nations that deal with peacebuilding and highlighted a
common understanding of the importance of
peacebuilding in the United Nations system. We were
pleased that the broad consultation process allowed the
Commission to play a significant role in formulating
the report.
Members of the Commission focused on some
key points. National ownership is the cornerstone of
peacebuilding. However, the commitment to national
ownership as a key principle of peacebuilding will
remain merely an abstract concept unless it is
accompanied from the very beginning by capacitybuilding, starting with a clear understanding of existing
capacities on the ground. National capacity-building
must start immediately after the end of conflict, taking
advantage of that narrow window of opportunity to lay
the foundations for sustainable peace and show some
peace dividends. It must be part of the entry, not the
exit strategy.
Another crucial piece of the early peacebuilding
puzzle is an agreed common strategy that is nationally
owned and internationally supported, including —
depending on the country’s concrete reality — basic
safety and security, political processes, basic services,
core Government functions and early economic
revitalization. In that effort, the United Nations staff
in-country must work closely with the Peacebuilding
Commission so as to ensure proper coordination and
avoid duplication.
The Secretary-General’s agenda for action
proposes stronger, more effective and better supported
United Nations leadership on the ground and the
creation, as he has reported to us today, of a seniorlevel mechanism at Headquarters that will ensure that
the right leadership and support teams are in place as
early as possible. We welcome this suggestion.
Predictable international support is needed for
successful peacebuilding. One essential element is
greater clarity of lead roles and responsibilities within
the United Nations, and enhanced coordination with
other key players, such as the World Bank. The
Commission welcomes the progress so far and looks
forward to further advances.
Civilian experts are an important peacebuilding
resource. Country rosters of pre-vetted civilian
experts — not least from the global South — could
help support the quick delivery of services.

5

S/PV.6165

International experts must complement and not replace
national expertise. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal for a review that would broaden and
deepen the global pool of expertise and enhance
interoperability across rosters. We also support his call
regarding the United Nations Volunteers Programme.
The diaspora may also be a significant resource in
these areas.

The Peacebuilding Commission’s 2010 review
will allow for further reflection on the role of the
Commission and how it might better exercise its
advisory role. Improving the working methods of the
Commission is a goal on our agenda. In particular, we
are exploring innovative, lighter and more flexible
ways to engage with countries that may seek the
Commission’s advice.

We share the Secretary-General’s hope that
donors will be bold and innovative in establishing
flexible, rapid and predictable funding for
peacebuilding. We are satisfied with Peacebuilding
Fund pledges and funding, and we encourage the
Secretary-General to appeal to non-traditional donors,
including middle-income countries and the private
sector.

I have one final reflection. The report stresses the
need for early and continued emphasis on coordination
and coherence, but a realistic approach will show that
this is a most difficult task among multilateral actors,
bilateral donors and civil society, and even within the
United Nations system. Institutional positioning and
turf disputes do not help peacebuilding or national
Governments, and efforts to minimize them should
continue.

Pooled funding mechanisms, such as the countrylevel multi-donor trust funds, should be established,
paying particular attention to the needs of women and
historical gender imbalances. Regional organizations
have increasingly been at the forefront of peace
processes; the challenge ahead includes strengthening
partnerships with regional actors, as well as with
bilateral donors, civil society and international
financial institutions, particularly the World Bank.
Many of the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral’s report are addressed to the United Nations.
We therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s early
initiation of an implementation plan involving all the
relevant parts of the Organization. We recognize that
the Peacebuilding Support Office will play an
important role in this regard.
The Secretary-General’s report poses several
challenges for the Peacebuilding Commission. Member
States recognize that peacekeepers are early
peacebuilders. Peacebuilding should therefore come
into play early on in the Security Council’s
consideration of post-conflict situations. The
mainstreaming of peacebuilding into peacekeeping
operations and the enhancement of the civilian
components of peacebuilding operations are a must.
The Security Council should consider more proactively
the advice of the Commission, not because the
Commission is better qualified than the Council for
such a task, but only because the Commission will
emphasize the linkage between security and
development, as well as the longer-term view
contributing to sustainable peace.

6

Since
many
of
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations are addressed to the United Nations
system, we believe that he should be invited to report
back to the Security Council, in consultation with the
Peacebuilding Commission, on their implementation.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate the
Commission’s strong support for the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations. Attention must now turn
to their rapid implementation. The people in postconflict countries will benefit if we move forward to
action.
The President: I thank Mr. Muñoz for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jordan Ryan.
Mr. Ryan: I thank you, Sir, for inviting the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to
address the Council on this important report
(S/2009/304). We in UNDP warmly welcome the
report, as well as this opportunity to add the
perspective of UNDP to the statement of the SecretaryGeneral.
Under the leadership of UNDP Administrator
Miss Helen Clark, we are committed to working with
partners both within and outside the United Nations
system to ensure the smooth and effective
implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report, under the guidance of the SecretaryGeneral. The Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Support Office will play an important

09-41769

S/PV.6165

role in facilitating the follow-up process, and UNDP
pledges its close cooperation with both.
UNDP contributes to peacebuilding through our
presence in all conflict-affected countries, including
countries going through conflict, countries that have
recently emerged from conflict and countries that are
moving into a longer-term recovery.
Many post-conflict countries are struggling to
make progress towards the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), and effective and quick peacebuilding
action is essential if countries are to succeed in their
MDG effort. Development of national capacities must
remain a core peacebuilding objective.
In moving the peacebuilding agenda forward, we
must strive to effectively link short-term peacebuilding
activities with longer-term recovery and development.
We also need to remember that peacebuilding does not
start from scratch when a conflict is over. It should
always build on existing national capacities and draw
on the expertise of the in-country United Nations
presence, including the humanitarian and development
actors.
At the country level, United Nations funds and
programmes work together for peacebuilding under the
leadership of a resident coordinator. When the Security
Council provides a mandate, the United Nations
country team works with other system partners as part
of an integrated mission.
The Secretary-General’s report suggests new
steps to take the integration process forward and to
strengthen the coordination and accountability of the
United Nations country presence. The report’s
emphasis is rightly focused on the need for stronger
and more coherent United Nations leadership teams,
with the right support staff, to plan and coordinate the
joint effort.
Women and youth require special attention.
Peacebuilding efforts should make sure that they
benefit from peace dividends and that they are fully
engaged in planning and decision-making processes. In
this respect, UNDP is currently deploying Senior
gender advisers in 10 post-conflict countries. They will
support the Organization’s system-wide efforts to
implement Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008) in an effort to stop sexual violence
against women.

09-41769

The World Bank is an important partner for the
United Nations in post-conflict situations. We have
gained significant experience working together on the
ground in a number of post-conflict countries, but we
can do even better based on recognition of each other’s
strengths and a continued commitment to putting
global agreements for cooperation into practice at the
country level.
An effective United Nations response will require
active support from Member States, including the
necessary funding. With this support, we in the United
Nations will do our utmost, under the leadership of the
Secretary-General, to match expectations of quick and
effective implementation of peacebuilding activities.
UNDP looks forward to contributing actively to this
effort as part of the implementation of the
recommendations of this report.
The President: I thank Mr. Ryan for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Alastair McKechnie.
Mr. McKechnie: The President of the World
Bank, Mr. Robert Zoellick, is unfortunately unable to
be here today, and I wish to transmit his greetings and
convey his appreciation for this important report and
for inviting the World Bank to address the Council.
The report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) recognizes that the efforts of the
international community immediately post-conflict
have been less than fully effective.
The World Bank was deeply involved in the
preparation of the report. We welcome its findings. We
applaud the critical leadership role that the United
Nations can provide in post-conflict situations. We
support the report’s efforts to resolve the inherent
tensions that arise between the need for speed in
responding to fragile situations and the need for
compliance with a coherent strategy that is nationally
owned.
Such tensions often result from different
perceptions of priorities by the international
community and partner countries, which paradoxically
may want a greater emphasis on building their
institutions and sustainable development that reduces
poverty. We should not forget also the demands for
quality, the effectiveness of our support, and the need
for financial accountability to maintain long-term,
predictable financial support.

7

S/PV.6165

The report rightly recognizes that we should seek
the views of the partner countries on what they
consider to be their priorities. Often we will find that
the highest priorities are personal security, justice and
the ending of impunity, not the easier public services
that the international community can readily provide.
There is also a need for clear and agreed priorities
around which recovery efforts can coalesce.
But the inevitable challenge remains: how can
priorities be set when everything seems to be a
priority? We support the recommendations of the report
for more effective planning based on a post-conflict
needs assessment. However, we would suggest the
following five points when setting priorities.
First, priorities should be driven by country
demand, not by what we think is best or what we are
able to deliver. Secondly, they should provide some
short-term results, preferably consistent with mid-term
priorities and, at the same time, should lay the basis for
sustainable development, growth and employment.
Thirdly, they should aim to strengthen the legitimate
authority of the State by enabling it to set and enforce
rules and laws, manage its budget, deliver services
effectively and embody national traditions and values.
Fourthly, priorities should not aim to replace the State
but to be its facilitator and enabler. And fifthly, they
should consider an exit strategy, namely, how to
transfer responsibility to the legitimate State as early as
possible.
The Paris Declaration and the Accra Agenda for
Action articulate a framework for delivering aid.
Experience has shown us that aid is most effective and
most supportive of State-building when it is provided
under national leadership and through country systems.
In the context of peacebuilding, how do we
increase our effectiveness? Effectiveness is often as
much about how foreign assistance is provided as it is
about the volume of that aid. Experience suggests some
guidelines for effectiveness. First is to tailor our
assistance to the country context. Second is to avoid
taking a linear approach to our response, as support for
State-building needs to take place during the
peacekeeping phase, not only after it. Third is to
develop institutions and policies and the preparation of
investment in parallel with peacebuilding. Fourth is to
sequence reforms for economic stability with political
cycles, to avoid triggering governance crises that will
make economic reform impossible. And fifth is to

8

reduce the administrative burden that donors impose on
weak States by aggregating projects into national
programmes and pooling finance through trust funds.
Finally, we need to recognize and manage risks,
not only the risks that money will be misappropriated
but also the risk that peace fails because we are too
bureaucratic and too slow. There are ways to manage
risks in high-corruption environments, including by
contracting fiduciary agents and giving voice to
citizens. But we need to recognize that things will go
wrong and deal with problems quickly and decisively.
The report refers to the agreements signed last
year between the Secretary-General and the President
of the World Bank to strengthen our partnerships in
post-crisis situations. That is supported by a fiduciary
principles accord that has now been signed with
11 United Nations agencies to facilitate the timely
transfer of financial resources under trust funds
administered either by the World Bank or the United
Nations Development Group, when that is appropriate
in the country context.
We see synergies and complementarities in the
operation of the World Bank’s State- and Peacebuilding Fund and the United Nations Peacebuilding
Fund. Both instruments provide predictable, adaptive
and responsive financing mechanisms specifically
tailored to meet the needs of countries emerging from
conflict. But the United Nations and the Bank are only
elements of a wider set of agencies that work to assist
countries recovering from conflict. Last year, the
European
Commission,
the
United
Nations
Development Group and the Bank issued a joint
declaration on how they will provide assistance and
support in post-crisis situations and plan recovery
efforts.
Greater coherence requires strengthening other
partnerships as well, particularly with regional and
bilateral
political,
security
and
development
organizations. The demand for speed and effectiveness
dictates that international cooperation is centred and
anchored in the field at the country level. Context
matters, and time and directives from the centre may
fail to capture the realities of a dynamic post-conflict
environment. We therefore endorse the proposal that
the integration steering group explore the development
of mutual accountability measures at the country level.
We hope that those efforts will encourage greater
acknowledgement by other international actors that aid

09-41769

S/PV.6165

effectiveness is born of coherency, coordination and
joint mechanisms for funding and implementation.
While Government leadership is a critical
ingredient in guiding post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction efforts, so too is the ability of the
international community to coordinate its response. In
most post-conflict situations, it is the office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General that
offers the key to that coordination. The wider the
leadership role provided by the Special Representative
for the international effort, the greater the level of
delegation by agencies to senior management in the
field and the better aligned agency support is to the
demand of those officials. The more funding for United
Nations agencies that is programmed through the office
of the Special Representative, the more likely we are to
achieve the levels of coherence, coordination and
effectiveness we seek.
The World Bank is ready to consider more formal
roles within the specialized missions, including staff
secondments or better integration of conventional aid
coordination mechanisms. The World Bank also stands
ready to participate in joint consultations and planning
on post-crisis and crisis-affected countries, so as to
ensure early and effective preparations of our joint
response. Let me add that we are currently working on
an exchange of staff between the United Nations and
World Bank headquarters to strengthen our joint
response to situations of fragility and conflict.
The international community should also
recognize comparative advantages arising from
different mandates and capacities. Division of labour
will depend upon what the country requires and the
capacity of organizations to respond. The agreements
between the United Nations and the World Bank set out
the process for quickly agreeing our responsibilities.
The report also highlights one of the most
difficult areas of development and proposes new ways
of working, such as the establishment of deployable
civilian capacity, which will be challenging to
implement. The report card on the quality of
coordination by the international community is mixed.
We should not confuse capacity building with technical
assistance. In his report, the Secretary-General
challenges us to do better.
Going forward, we need to recognize how little
we know about the effectiveness of the instruments we
have to avoid a relapse into violent conflict. We need

09-41769

to learn as we go forward. We encourage that the
impact of the innovations set out in this report be
monitored and evaluated, and that we commit to
continue to seek out new ways to improve our speed
and effectiveness.
The current budgetary constraints faced by donor
countries as a consequence of the global financial crisis
must be seen as an opportunity to rationalize the
international community’s interventions and make
them more effective. We now need to move forward
expeditiously to support country efforts to consolidate
peace and to lay the foundation for development that
reduces poverty. We need to continue our work
together to make that happen.
The President: I thank Mr. McKechnie for his
briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes,
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Lord Malloch-Brown (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Muñoz, Alistair McKechnie and Jordan Ryan for their
briefings this morning. I am delighted to be able to
take part in this debate myself. This is an issue in
which I have been closely involved, both when
working at the United Nations, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the World Bank
and now as a Minister in the British Government. This
is an issue in which I hope the United Kingdom has
been able to lead. Today’s debate follows the initiative
of my Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary last year
to press for real improvement in the response of the
United Nations to post-conflict situations.
I am also delighted that we have as Council
President today someone who is both a personal friend
and a representative of a country that has done so much
hard work and has so much experience to share on this
issue. I think having you in the chair, Mr. President, is
an eloquent reminder that we have got to intensify our
efforts to prevent and reduce conflict worldwide,

9

S/PV.6165

because countries affected by conflict face a tragic
human cost. They account for a third of the people
living in extreme poverty, half the children not in
primary school and half the children who die before
their fifth birthday.
As we know to our cost, ungoverned spaces, such
as those in Afghanistan or Somalia, offer safe havens
for international crime or terrorism. Today United
Kingdom and Ugandan soldiers, as well as those of
other Member States, are laying down their lives to
build peace in these countries. United Nations
peacekeepers play an indispensable role, providing
space for peace agreements to take hold and protecting
the most vulnerable. We will chair a Security Council
debate next month, as part of our joint initiative with
France, to look at how we can enhance the
effectiveness of peacekeeping.
But peacekeeping alone is not enough. A third of
countries fall back into conflict within five years of a
peace agreement being reached, so it is critical that we
improve the effectiveness of peacebuilding. We know
what needs to happen in countries emerging from
conflict — the economy needs to be revitalized,
creating jobs that give an alternative to violence and
crime. Basic services need to be kick-started, and
police, courts and prisons need to be re-established so
that everyone has access to accountable and affordable
justice.
In other words, we need to help reconstitute the
basic functions of a viable State, and that needs to
happen quickly. There is a critical window of perhaps
24 months after a peace agreement is signed.
Experience shows that if we do not get it right during
that period, the risk of a return to conflict increases
dramatically.
We too strongly welcome the Secretary-General’s
report on peacebuilding (S/2009/304). Building on that
report, I would identify five priorities for action in the
coming months. We have heard something of these
already.
First, we must get clarity as to the roles and
responsibilities of the United Nations and the World
Bank so that there is accountability for what happens
on the ground. Second, we must launch a review of
civilian capacities, to give us a better idea of where the
gaps are and how these experts can be deployed more
rapidly to build national capacities. Thirdly, effective
and accountable senior United Nations leadership must

10

be deployed from the outset, to corral international
actors and drive delivery of assistance. Fourthly, access
to rapid and flexible financing must be improved,
including through the Peacebuilding Fund and
multi-donor trust funds. Fifthly, we must build on the
achievements so far of the Peacebuilding Commission.
It should focus on addressing barriers to peacebuilding,
ensuring that international efforts are better
harmonized, and mobilizing additional resources.
The Secretary-General’s report gives us a
framework for a better-led, more coherent, faster and
more predictable international response to immediate
post-conflict situations, but the real test will be
delivery on the ground. A recent United Kingdom
White Paper — “Building our Common Future” —
underlines our commitment to working with the United
Nations, the World Bank and other Member States to
help make this happen. The Secretary-General has a
critical role to play. We applaud his leadership. I urge
Member States to rally behind his agenda for action.
We cannot afford to lose this opportunity. The human
costs are simply too great.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, my delegation wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this meeting on an
important subject, one close to us all. We welcome
your presence here with us, and we also welcome the
presence of the Secretary-General.
Permit me to make a few remarks. I wish first to
thank the Secretariat, and the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2009/304), which certainly provides the most
in-depth thinking to date on the matter of post-conflict
peacebuilding. That is a major area of work for the
United Nations, with great potential, comparable to
that of the tool that we have used so far, namely,
peacekeeping.
However, we are only at the very beginning of
this process. The report marks an essential step in
thinking about improving the United Nations capacity
to respond to the challenges of peacebuilding. Today,
we need to pursue our thoughts and our concrete
actions.
I would like to focus on two challenges. The first
is that we are not yet strategic enough. A greater
analytical effort is needed. Before we can begin to
check the cycle of violence and conflict, we must be
able to analyze the causes and factors. That approach is
also true for conflict prevention.

09-41769

S/PV.6165

Then we need to identify priorities. After
emerging from a conflict, that is not simply a rule for
action; it is the only way to move forward. On that
point we welcome the recommendations in the report
to make the assessments carried out by the Secretariat
teams more political and to follow a logical sequence
in order to be available more quickly. I wish to stress
that it is only by working on a limited number of
priorities that we will be effective; I think that is a
comment everyone shares.
Finally, we need to be consistently opportunistic,
in the good sense of the word; we must be rapid, agile
and flexible. It is at the deployment of an operation, or
even before, that we must begin to sketch out a
peacebuilding strategy. The recommendations set out in
the report to allow the deployment of civilian
personnel and competent specialized teams along with
the special representatives on the ground make good
sense, and we hope they can be carried out.
The second challenge, as we see it, is that we are
not yet fully mobilized. There is progress to be made in
this area.
The United Nations has a central role to play in
peacebuilding, because it alone has all of the
instruments — political, military, humanitarian and
development — on which we can base an effective
strategy. But the United Nations is still quite
fragmented in its interventions. Here also, the
Secretary-General’s recommendations are aimed at
improving consistency in our response to these
challenges, and we welcome this. We have some clear
examples already, in Sierra Leone or the Central
African Republic.
Setting up financial mechanisms adapted to the
challenges of peacebuilding is even more necessary
now, because the actions required surpass the capacity
of a small number of actors. The Peacebuilding Fund
by itself cannot fully play its role if mobilization by the
international community is not assured. There is a role
that the Peacebuilding Commission has already begun
to play for the four countries on its agenda. It has
broadened its donor base and is reaching out to nontraditional donors, even the private sector.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that a
rapid intervention by the international community
during the immediate post-conflict phase draws on the
same care for effectiveness that has led France, with
the United Kingdom, to propose discussion in the

09-41769

Security Council on follow-up to and improvement of
peacekeeping. The same principles apply: the need for
better follow-up, and use of indicators and milestones.
We hope that peacebuilding will now be clearly
understood as a dimension of peacekeeping, and not
simply as the next stage. The requirement for
effectiveness is the condition for a lasting commitment
by the international community to help countries
emerging from crisis.
To conclude, I will say that France fully supports
the draft presidential statement submitted to us.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over today’s important
debate. I wish to thank the Secretary-General for
personally presenting the very important report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304). We are also grateful to the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the representatives of
the United Nations Development Programme and the
World Bank for their very useful perspectives. I am
particularly pleased that in today’s debate the United
Nations system as a whole is according high priority to
the issue of post-conflict stabilization.
Over the course of its history, the United Nations
has been faced with a multitude of challenges. Despite
its best efforts, however, conflicts have not been
brought to an end. Worst of all, peace agreements are
often broken within a few years’ time, leaving the most
vulnerable groups of people trapped in a vicious circle
of misery and conflict.
The United Nations has mobilized to reverse that
situation, using several instruments. First, by deploying
peacekeeping operations and extending humanitarian
and development assistance, the United Nations has
contributed to preventing the recurrence of misery and
conflict in many parts of the world. Lately, the
Peacebuilding Commission has promoted integrated
support, but usually well after a peace agreement has
been signed and peacekeepers have left the country.
So there is clearly a gap that is not being fully
met by those existing instruments. In a society just
emerging from conflict, there is a high expectation of
safer and better livelihoods, but we have learned the
hard lesson that a high price must be paid later because
of the failure to take opportunities at the optimal time.
It was against that backdrop that the very
important report of the Secretary-General before us

11

S/PV.6165

was requested by the Security Council. Today, I should
like to highlight a few points of a general nature that
are particularly relevant to the work of the Council.
My first point concerns the Council’s relationship
with peacekeeping operations. Today, when we discuss
the immediate aftermath of a conflict as being up to
24 months after the signing of a peace agreement, it is
important to clearly understand the relationship
between peacekeeping operations and what we are
talking about — peacebuilding. When a peace
agreement results from United Nations peacemaking
efforts, the security situation is still very fragile, so the
agreement is frequently followed by the deployment of
a United Nations peacekeeping operation mandated by
the Security Council. In this case, we must explore
more precisely to what extent the mandate of a
Council-mandated peacekeeping operation could be
expanded to include peacebuilding activities such as,
inter
alia,
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration, democratic governance, the rule of law
and support for capacity-building.
Recently — particularly over the past eight or
nine years, I believe — the Council has authorized
some of those activities in recent mandates of
peacekeeping operations. But clearly, there is a limit to
the degree to which a peacekeeping operation itself can
carry out all of those peacebuilding activities, given the
range
of
expertise,
implementing
agencies,
backstopping authority at Headquarters and financing
methods needed.
On the other hand, if some of these peacebuilding
activities are carried out by other entities — whether
they be United Nations entities or others — in parallel
with the peacekeeping operation, we need to consider
how the mission can better harmonize and coordinate
with those other activities. Therefore, the Council’s
comprehensive review of the effective implementation
of peacekeeping operations — including through the
ongoing work of the Working Group of the Whole on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations — is
important. We commend the Secretariat’s initiatives,
such as the New Horizon project, which is very useful.
They are all integral parts of the United Nations effort
aimed at ensuring stronger and more coherent
responses to international threats.
the

12

I should also like to stress that it is important for
Council to acknowledge that peacekeeping

operations and peacebuilding should be pursued not in
sequence, but simultaneously.
My second point concerns strategy and
leadership. One of the characteristics of post-conflict
peacebuilding — unlike peacekeeping operations — is
the need for active participation by a diverse range of
experts and many actors and for programmes involving
various methods of work and financing. Therefore, it is
indispensable that various United Nations organs and
other stakeholders work in a coordinated and coherent
fashion from the very outset.
In promoting partnership, national leaders and
diverse partners must share a common vision of what
they are working together to achieve in order to avoid a
relapse into conflict. National ownership is of the very
first order, as everyone has stressed so far. However,
we must recognize that, in the immediate aftermath of
conflict, national capacity is very limited. Therefore,
with full respect for the country’s ownership, the
United Nations is expected to take a leading role and to
adopt an action-oriented approach, initially with a
streamlined priority plan and subsequently with an
integrated strategy. We must be flexible in its
sequencing and simplify planning and prioritize
projects for speedy action. It is essential to produce a
tangible, visible outcome in order to gain the
confidence of the local population, even before an
elaborate integrated strategy is in place.
To pursue a common vision and coherence among
various players, we need strong leadership. The most
senior United Nations representative in the field is
usually tasked with the challenges of bringing the
partners to the table and mobilizing resources. It is
equally important to ensure that field representatives
receive coordinated guidance and support from
Headquarters. Therefore, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative to strengthen his senior-level
coordinating mechanism at Headquarters. The
responsibilities of the lead department and the role of
other departments, programmes and funds at
Headquarters should be clearly defined so as to
maximize impacts and resources.
My
third
point
concerns
implementing
capacity — people and money. In order to implement
peacebuilding efforts according to a vision or a priority
plan, we need to strengthen implementation capacity.
Here, civilians with experience in a wide range of
specialized areas are essential. Recommendations such

09-41769

S/PV.6165

as a standing capacity for a quick-reaction team — as
mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report — creating
a roster and training are important and deserve detailed
examination and implementation on a priority basis.
The United Nations should also tap into the knowledge
and expertise of particular Member States, especially
those in the developing world. For its part, Japan
initiated a training programme for Asian peacebuilding
experts at the Hiroshima Peacebuilders Centre three
years ago. We are ready to support United Nations
efforts in this area.
Mobilizing additional resources is vitally
important. The recommendations that a new type of
multi-donor trust fund — either country-specific or
general-purpose — be created and that the terms of
reference of the Peacebuilding Fund be expanded need
careful review in terms of their feasibility. In the
current situation, in which the peacekeeping budget is
consuming so many resources, and in the light of the
substantial resource requirements in the immediate
aftermath of conflict — here, we are talking about a
different magnitude of resources — we all need to
think creatively and to make the best possible use of
existing channels, including international financial
institutions such as the World Bank and regional
development banks. The creation of new financial
mechanisms needs to be attractive from the donors’
point of view. We also need to identify non-traditional
partners and expand the donor base.
Finally, the Peacebuilding Commission has
definitely played an extremely important role in
mobilizing support for four specific countries
designated by the Security Council. They are making
serious efforts — in most cases, after the peacekeeping
operation in question has been completed. The strength
and comparative advantage of the Peacebuilding
Commission is its convening and coordinating power,
which is based on an elaborate integrated strategy. I
believe that what is now necessary is to consolidate the
Commission’s achievements, rather than to expand its
responsibilities beyond its capacity.
Of course, Japan is open to the idea of examining
how the Peacebuilding Commission can make a
difference in the early phase of post-conflict recovery.
But we need to realize that peacebuilding activities in
the immediate aftermath of conflict require different
methods of work and support mechanisms — not only
on the ground, but also at Headquarters — from those
that have been employed over the past several years.

09-41769

We should also recognize that, in the situation under
consideration, peacekeeping operations are most often
being deployed in parallel. Therefore, I believe that, as
the parent body, the Security Council has the
responsibility to play its useful role of tasking the
Peacebuilding Commission with providing advice and
assistance on specific aspects of peacebuilding
challenges.
In conclusion, we very much hope to take
advantage of this opportunity and that the United
Nations will strengthen its response to post-conflict
early recovery.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America):
Mr. President, the United States welcomes your
presence today and expresses its gratitude for this
opportunity to discuss peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comments and Ambassador
Muñoz, Mr. Ryan and Mr. McKechnie for their
briefings. In addition, we express our appreciation to
United Nations staff worldwide who are working to
help countries make the difficult transition from
conflict to peace.
Too many populations that have endured the
hardships of conflict experience persistent violence and
instability. They often lack the conditions necessary to
restore governance, restart economies and rebuild
communities. Shoring up peace processes at risk can
often take attention from the wider efforts needed to
put countries on a steady path to long-term stability
and development.
The overarching objective of our peacebuilding
efforts must be to assist local authorities to develop the
capacity to manage their own transitions to recovery.
This means helping them restart basic functions of
governance, establish the conditions for economic
recover and create a secure environment in which
affected populations can begin to rebuild shattered
lives.
While other actors besides the United Nations
have a role in peacebuilding, an effective United
Nations can provide an unparalleled platform for unity
of effort and overall success. The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2009/304) provides a clear road map for the
United Nations system to ensure that its assistance is
well conceived, well led and sufficiently resourced. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s personal commitment

13

S/PV.6165

to ensuring an improved United Nations response in
post-conflict situations.

States believes that now is the time to move forward on
these issues in a more integrated way.

The United States strongly supports the report’s
recommendations on strategy, leadership and
accountability, which are essential to delivering critical
support to national authorities, and we agree that
effective civilian capacity and response should be at
the core of international efforts to support sustainable
peace. We welcome the report’s emphasis on the need
for rapid deployment of high-quality leadership and
multidisciplinary teams to backstop it, and we
particularly welcome the emphasis on Southern
capacity, an undertapped and invaluable resource.

Finally, we also are fully supportive of the draft
presidential statement submitted by the delegation of
Uganda.

Let me also underscore the important contribution
of women to post-conflict recovery and the need to
involve women more actively in the essential tasks of
rebuilding communities and lives.
The Secretary-General’s report also makes a
number of observations regarding financing postconflict activities. The United States agrees that early
and flexible assistance is crucial. We also support the
call to revitalize efforts to strengthen cooperation in
peacebuilding between the United Nations and
international financial institutions. The division of
labour within the United Nations system and between
the United Nations and other key partners continues to
be a high priority for us, and we stress the need to
make progress in this area.
Efforts to build national capacity must start early.
Capacity-building cannot be delayed until the day an
international security presence departs. Early and
sustained
attention
to
the
requirements
of
peacebuilding must occur alongside peacekeeping in
order to ensure a successful transition to a durable
peace. To that end, we welcome early dialogue with the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The United States will work to ensure that the
Council takes earlier account of peacebuilding in
decision-making on peace operations and in reviewing
mandates. We have already expressed our intention to
consider critical peacebuilding requirements when we
review peacekeeping missions in Liberia and Haiti this
coming autumn.
Council members will soon have had the
opportunity to consider questions related to mediation,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping, including the New
Horizon initiative of the United Nations. The United

14

Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes your presence, Mr. President, at
this important meeting of the Security Council. We
thank the Secretary-General for introducing his very
important report (S/2009/304), which brings together
analysis and experience gathered over the past two
decades in countries emerging from conflict. We also
welcome Ambassador Heraldo Muñoz, Mr. Jordan
Ryan and Mr. Alastair McKechnie.
My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General
that the period immediately following the cessation of
hostilities is a vital time for laying the foundations of
true peacebuilding. In that initial phase, cooperation
and coordination among lead actors is essential in
order to promote coherent, comprehensive strategies
and plans of action. Obviously, priorities must be
established during that crucial post-conflict phase.
Then, once there has been progress on security and on
meeting the basic needs of the population, it is
essential to take steps to restore legitimate government
institutions seen as representative of all national
groups, and to introduce political, legal, economic and
administrative reforms making possible a properly
functioning and harmonious relationship between the
State and society.
Mexico has always stressed that national
ownership is key to peacebuilding efforts. For that
reason, along with the need for collective support by
international actors, measures must be fundamentally
aimed at strengthening and promoting national
leadership and ownership, without ignoring an
appropriate balance between promoting local
responsibility and promoting international support, as
the Secretary-General points out.
In that regard, the development of political efforts
towards reconciliation is of particular importance.
Trust and national reconciliation are key elements in
defining a framework for action which incorporates
priorities set by the local actors themselves, has the
support of international teams and includes a
comprehensive view of the role of the United Nations
in the political, humanitarian, security and
development spheres.

09-41769

S/PV.6165

The agenda outlined by the Secretary-General
highlights the importance of improving coherence and
coordination,
clearly
defining
functions
and
responsibilities, promoting national capacity, ensuring
predictable resources, preparing studies on a country’s
needs and situation, and ensuring accountability. We
believe that those areas are crucial for improving the
response of the United Nations in its reconstruction
activities. Mexico supports measures aimed at attaining
those objectives and supports the Secretary-General’s
initiative on seeking appropriately qualified personnel
to carry out the complex tasks needed for the
Organization’s activities both at Headquarters and on
the ground, making use in particular of permanent staff
members and specialized peacebuilding professionals.

enhance and broaden its advisory role in countries on
its agenda and to ensure timely follow-up with respect
to progress in implementing Strategic Frameworks for
Peacebuilding. My country believes that the
Commission must play a central role, in coordination
with other United Nations actors, in implementing the
recommendations of the Secretary-General. In our
view, it is not only the Security Council that must be
more proactive in seeking the advice of the
Peacebuilding Commission; the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council must do the same, in
terms of coherence, greater mobilization of resources
and coordination of efforts with entities outside the
system, along with working with local actors to devise
and implement peacebuilding strategies.

The initiatives regarding the recruitment of
trained personnel from the Southern Hemisphere and
regarding the participation of women — whose
involvement in peacebuilding tasks, we believe, is
essential — merit particular mention. Mexico supports
the report’s well-considered proposal to create a seniorlevel mechanism ensuring that both managers and
regional support teams will be ready to support postconflict activities. We propose that such a team could
be headed by an eminent individual from the South; we
look forward to hearing more specific information
about the membership and functions of this
mechanism.

Mexico has participated in Lebanon, Timor-Leste,
Haiti, Iraq and Bosnia and Herzegovina, assisting those
Governments in their electoral institution-building
efforts. We have also put forward proposals for
electoral cooperation within the framework of the
peacebuilding strategies for Guinea-Bissau and
Burundi. Mexico will continue to make a contribution
to peace efforts in countries in the immediate postconflict phase by providing technical assistance and
training of decision makers in the electoral sphere
when such assistance is requested.

My delegation sees the Partnership Framework
Agreement signed with the World Bank as a very
positive step forward; this will make possible improved
strategic coordination and enhanced impact of
collective endeavours.
With respect to donors, we agree with the
Secretary-General that measures should be taken to
find solutions that will establish flexible, rapid,
predictable and more risk-tolerant funding modalities.
In that regard, it would also be appropriate to
encourage donors to disburse resources in accordance
with the timetables that have been set, so that funding
will arrive on time for strategies that are already being
implemented.
Mexico believes that the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission is crucial for a coherent
and
comprehensive
approach
to
promoting
reconstruction in the immediate aftermath of conflict.
My
country
recognizes
the
Commission’s
achievements to date and encourages it to continue to

09-41769

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
express its support for the draft presidential statement
put forward by the Ugandan delegation.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Mr. President, allow me to
begin by welcoming you here with us and thanking you
for chairing this meeting. We also thank your
delegation for organizing this debate, which has
focused our attention on a topic that not only deserves
the sustained attention of the Security Council but also
needs to be approached in a coherent and coordinated
manner. Let me also thank the Secretary-General for
being here with us and for his remarks in which he
presented us with concrete steps for moving forward on
actions charted by the presidential statement that the
Council adopted last year (S/PRST/2008/16) under the
United Kingdom presidency. We would also like, of
course, to thank Ambassador Muñoz and the
representatives of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the World Bank for their
contributions today.
While Croatia aligns itself with the statement to
be made on behalf of the European Union, allow me to

15

S/PV.6165

add some further remarks in our national capacity.
Post-conflict reconstruction and stabilization has been
recognized as critical in laying the foundations for
lasting and sustainable peace. The early success of
peacebuilding efforts is undoubtedly a matter of
collective interest, as failed peacebuilding risks
bringing about a definite backlash and the return to
violence and new wars. Given that the window for
action in a post-conflict period may not be longer than
a few — approximately two — years, it is
indispensable that those involved in peacebuilding be
ready to start immediately and offer rapid support to
national authorities alongside a peacekeeping
deployment. Clear goals, effective leadership and
coordination, adequate resources and an appropriate
mandate are required in order to be able to rapidly
provide basic security and early peace dividends as
well as to build confidence in a political process and
expand core national capacity in a highly volatile
environment.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
before us (S/2009/304) as making an important
contribution to coherence and the integration of efforts
on a practical level by identifying challenges and
spelling out a number of concrete steps to develop and
improve United Nations capabilities in support of
national efforts to end war and secure a sustainable
peace. We particularly welcome the five points stressed
by the Secretary-General and offer our full support in
that respect.
Croatia is pleased to see that the approach taken
by the Secretary-General has prominently endorsed the
concept of national ownership of the peacebuilding
effort. Our own experience during the war imposed on
Croatia in the 1990s, when a number of United Nations
missions and agencies operated on the ground, led us
to conclude that external actors may have come with
the best of intentions, but in some cases were not able
to understand the real needs of the population or
cooperate effectively with each other or with the local
institutions involved. External actors alone may
sometimes be ill-equipped to rebuild the institutions of
a war-torn State. Peacebuilding efforts anchored at the
country level are inextricably linked to their legitimacy
and sustainability. National actors need to be part of an
early peace dividend.
It is our view that the key demand regarding
peace operations in general is sustainability. As the
Secretary-General mentions in his report, peace

16

operations are not quick fixes. There can be early
windows of opportunity during which peace can be
achievable, but there is also a series of small practical
movements and undertakings — the so-called everyday
life of a peace operation — which have to be given our
full attention.
We have to build upon early successes and
achievements in the field; we have no right to be
discouraged by the obstacles and setbacks that we will
inevitably face. Likewise, we believe that capacitybuilding is crucial and might easily be the most
fundamental issue in peacekeeping. We should also
factor in the unavoidable issue of spoilers, against
whom we have to fight with patience and resilience.
For Croatia, the centrepiece of international
peacebuilding efforts continues to be found in the
United Nations architecture, notably in the
Peacebuilding Commission, which, together with the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding
Fund, represents the key mechanism to ensure greater
coherence in international efforts, including on one of
the key issues: the sustainable financing of
peacebuilding. As the principal organ for maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council
is well-placed to provide suggestions for integrated
peacebuilding and to offer guidance in situations on its
agenda.
While the United Nations is increasingly
expected to play a leadership role in the field, it is
often just one among many actors on the ground. The
report rightly points out the need to build strategic
partnerships, notably with the World Bank. Such
partnerships need to be based on recognizing the clear
comparative advantages provided by different actors on
the international, regional and subregional level, while
integrating the peacemaking, peacekeeping and
development spheres. This in turn underscores the need
for greater clarity in delineating the role and
responsibilities of different actors, both within and
outside the United Nations, and the need to have welldefined mandates that are complementary, mutually
reinforcing and achievable.
Croatia is grateful to the Secretary-General for
presenting a concrete agenda for action aimed at
strengthening United Nations responsiveness in the
immediate aftermath of conflict, based on effective
leadership, enhanced coordination and accountability
and predictable civilian deployment and financing. We

09-41769

S/PV.6165

support the agenda and, in particular, its
recommendations aimed at strengthening effective and
accountable senior United Nations leadership on the
ground as well as those promoting integrated planning
and common assessments and the strategic
consolidation of competing individual agendas.
At all times, local actors and the development of
their capacities need to remain at the heart of the
process. In order to meet peacebuilding priorities, the
United Nations has to provide for the deployment of
civilian experts, and we welcome the steps proposed by
the Secretary-General aimed at expanding and
improving existing capacities. We also recognize that
success largely depends on reliable funding
mechanisms and support.
Croatia believes that the text of the draft
presidential statement we are to adopt today reflects
the main messages of this debate, and it has our
support. We see efforts aimed at enhancing
responsiveness in post-conflict environments by
adopting a more coherent, effective and focused
approach as part and parcel of the wider effort to
strengthen the ability of the United Nations to play its
role to the fullest extent in conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, in an
integrated and coherent manner.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by thanking the Secretary-General
for introducing his report on peacebuilding
(S/2009/304) and for his presence here. We would also
like to thank Lord Malloch-Brown, Ambassador
Muñoz, Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Mr. Ryan and Mr. McKechnie for their participation in
our debate and for their contributions.
Costa Rica believes that peacebuilding is not just
an ingredient that we should think of when we are
preparing to end a peacekeeping operation. It is
actually an objective that we should bear in mind
whenever we are preparing for the United Nations to
intervene, as has been repeatedly recalled here today.
We advocate that the international community include
that aspect from the earliest stages of a peacekeeping
operation. If the international community, led by the
United Nations system, acts rapidly, coherently and
effectively, it will significantly increase the
possibilities of building peace and laying the
foundations for sustainable development.

09-41769

We must always bear in mind the fact that
peacebuilding is, first and foremost, a national
responsibility that naturally requires the primary
participation of national actors to build sustainable and
lasting peace. Consequently, peacebuilding must be
centred on building up national capacities.
Strengthening the authorities so that they exercise their
responsibility is the basis on which a society can build
coexistence, reconciliation and tolerance and generate
a common purpose as a nation.
However, that responsibility is also a shared one,
which the international community must actively
support, as the Secretary-General pointed out, under a
well-established international leadership capable of
coordinating a coherent effort within a common
strategy that produces tangible and credible results.
The United Nations must offer a rapid and
effective response to countries devastated by conflict,
which requires the augmentation of the existing
national capacities and a robust deployment that can
support national efforts in the most diverse tasks. The
effort of the international community quite often
focuses on the necessary presence of forces whose
objective is to end the violence. Costa Rica believes
that it is necessary to increase the contingents of
international civilian experts available to support the
most diverse development needs of national capacities
in all phases of the intervention.
Poverty and economic and social differences are
a threat to the sustainability of the achievements
reached during peacekeeping operations. Fighting
those threats means fostering economic growth and
fairness.
Economic
revitalization
and
early
employment generation, in particular for young people
and demobilized former combatants, are essential.
Women play a predominant role in those tasks,
since, in most cases, they have been the greatest
victims of the conflicts and their involvement is key to
the revitalization of the economy and the reconciliation
and peacebuilding processes. The United Nations must
do everything within its scope to protect them and their
children during the conflict phases and to encourage
their active participation in the peacebuilding and
peace consolidation tasks.
The issue of the sustainability of peace being
linked to economic growth will not yield the desired
success without the consideration of fairness. Public
policies and ethical practices that foster equal

17

S/PV.6165

opportunities, giving access to basic State services
such as education and health, are indispensable for
early peace dividends to arise in the process. In
addition, development cooperation, which must play a
relevant role in conflict prevention and peacebuilding,
as well as in establishing the foundations for
sustainable development, has an important place.
Reducing military spending is one of the most
effective ways to boost socio-economic development.
Costa Rica is a clear example of that. Redirecting our
military spending to sectors with social impact has
borne visible dividends for my country, even for the
most sceptical, guaranteed the population relatively
high levels of human development and increased our
contribution to peace and regional stability. If the
international community’s intervention encourages and
stimulates the decision of countries in post-conflict
situations to moderate their military spending and to
invest increasingly more in health, education and
housing and increasingly less in weapons and soldiers,
that step will undoubtedly open more opportunities for
greater peace dividends.
I wish to conclude by taking advantage of this
opportunity to praise the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission and of the Support Office of that
Commission. We believe the expertise that both those
bodies can contribute to be very valuable to the
drafting of mandates of the peacekeeping missions that
this Council authorizes.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his
commitment to this topic and for his report, which, in
our view, represents considerable progress in the area
of peacebuilding processes and, together with his plan
of action, constitutes the beginning of the
implementation of initiatives to promote a peace that is
seen not only as the lack of conflict but rather as a
lasting and sustainable peace based on reconciliation,
coexistence and tolerance and centred on the belief in
the country’s shared purpose to eradicate the causes
and the incentives of the conflict.
I wish to express the appreciation and the support
of my country for the work on the draft presidential
statement that the delegation of Uganda has put
forward for the conclusion of this debate.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for making a special
trip to New York to preside over today’s meeting. We
welcome the report of the Secretary-General

18

(S/2009/304) and wish to thank him for his presence
and his presentation. Our thanks also go to
Ambassador Muñoz and Mr. McKechnie for their
respective briefings.
Peacebuilding is a new concept that appeared
following the end of the cold war. In 1992, former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, in An
Agenda for Peace (S/24111), for the first time
introduced the concept of peacebuilding. That was
another milestone in the collective security system of
the United Nations following the establishment of
peacekeeping operations. It shows that the international
community has realized that the end of a conflict does
not necessarily mean the arrival of peace. Post-conflict
peacebuilding is highly relevant to durable peace and
security in countries that are emerging from conflict.
Over the past decade and before, the United
Nations has played a very significant role in postconflict peacebuilding with notable achievements and
has also accumulated rich experience. When the
Peacebuilding Commission was established in 2005,
that signalled a very important step forward in
peacebuilding.
However, the United Nations is also faced with
many challenges with regard to peacebuilding. Under
certain circumstances, national ownership is not fully
recognized, intervention in post-conflict peacebuilding
is not timely, financial contributions are inadequate and
multilateral and bilateral coordination are insufficient.
China supports the efforts to further strengthen
the capacity and leading role of the United Nations in
peacebuilding and the coordination and coherence of
peacebuilding activities.
I wish to make the following four points. First,
respect for national ownership is the cardinal principle
of post-conflict peacebuilding. The primary task of
peacebuilding is to restore the governance mechanisms
of the nations concerned. The nations involved and
their political leaders should put national interests
above everything else. They should respect and
effectively implement peace agreements and resolve
their differences through dialogue and consultation,
based on a commitment to national reconciliation,
democratic reconstruction and economic rehabilitation
and development.
When the international community is involved in
peacebuilding efforts, it should listen to the views of

09-41769

S/PV.6165

the Governments and peoples of the countries involved
and fully respect the political, cultural, legal and
religious traditions of the affected countries.
International assistance strategies should be tailored to
the specific needs of the countries affected and should
fully consider the priorities established by those
countries.
It is not possible for peacebuilding to have a onesize-fits-all standard. A peacebuilding strategy should
be tailored to the specific conditions of the affected
country. Attention should be paid to enhanced capacitybuilding and to the training of personnel during the
implementation of peacebuilding processes. Priority
should be given to existing personnel and expertise of
the countries affected.
Secondly, adequate funding is a fundamental
guarantee of effective post-conflict peacebuilding.
Post-conflict countries are mostly war-torn and in a
chaotic state, with inadequate governance and
development capacities. Swift and timely support and
assistance by the international community are
indispensable. The Peacebuilding Fund and other
bilateral and multilateral donors have played a very
important role and have provided many resources, but
they remain unable to meet genuine needs. China
supports improving the operation of the Peacebuilding
Fund, expediting disbursements and strengthening
outcome evaluation and accountability.
The Secretary-General has recommended that, in
the light of the special needs of the countries
concerned, donors should transform their thinking on
assistance in order to create a flexible, rapid assistance
model with predictable funding, and that they should
consider the establishment of innovative funding
channels such as country-specific funds. Those
recommendations merit serious consideration.
Thirdly, coordinated activities at different stages
of peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding are
necessary to create durable peace for the countries
affected. Conflicts in the world today are increasingly
complex and diverse. The objectives of peacebuilding
require
an
integrated
systematic
strategy.
Peacebuilding should be taken into account beginning
at the stage of peacemaking. Only when the security
situation has been stabilized, when a highly
representative Government is in place and when
national reconciliation is being promoted can the
environment for economic reconstruction and

09-41769

rehabilitation
exist.
Only
when
economic
reconstruction and rehabilitation are possible, can the
people share in the peace dividend and the peace
process be built on a solid political basis. Justice and
the rule of law are the necessary conditions for the
stability and development of countries and regions
emerging from conflict. But without development,
justice and the rule of law will only be castles in the
air. Combating impunity must be consistent with the
overall need for political dialogue and expedited
national reconciliation.
Fourthly,
strengthened
coordination
and
coherence among multilateral institutions and donor
countries is an important channel to create synergies
within the international community on post-conflict
peacebuilding. The United Nations should continue to
play a leading role in the area of peacebuilding and
should establish and coordinate stable and coordinated
relations with the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and other international partners and
fully consolidate assistance resources from the various
funds. United Nations agencies and entities should
have a clear division of responsibility to strengthen
cooperation. The Peacebuilding Commission, as the
primary body for coordinating United Nations
peacebuilding endeavours, should play a greater role in
coordinating international peacebuilding efforts.
At present, Africa is not only an important
continent for United Nations peacekeeping operations,
but also a focus of United Nations peacebuilding
efforts. The international community should strengthen
its assistance to peacebuilding in Africa in order to
help affected countries strengthen their peacebuilding,
rehabilitation and reconstruction capacities.
China supports a greater role in peacebuilding
efforts for the African Union. We call upon the
international community to continue to provide Africa
with assistance in order to help its countries emerge
from conflict and turbulence and achieve stability and
development.
The failure or success of peacebuilding efforts in
Africa will be a litmus test for United Nations
peacebuilding mechanisms. We hope that the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the Secretary-General and other
relevant entities and bodies will work together to
steadily scale up United Nations peacebuilding

19

S/PV.6165

capacity and make positive contributions to the
maintenance of world peace.
Mr. Codman (Turkey): First of all, Mr.
President, let me join previous speakers in welcoming
Your Excellency and commending the Ugandan
presidency for organizing this timely meeting on postconflict peacebuilding and preparing the draft
presidential statement, which we fully support. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
substantive report (S/2009/304) and briefing, which
included valuable assessments and recommendations
on how to develop United Nations activities pertaining
to post-conflict peacebuilding. I wish also to thank the
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Assistant Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and the representative of the
World Bank for their valuable contributions.
I will try not to repeat what has been said around
the table regarding the Secretary-General’s report. In
brief, we support the Secretary-General in his efforts to
streamline the response of the United Nations in the
immediate aftermath of conflict, and we share his ideas
with respect to the way forward. Yet, I would like to
emphasize and reiterate some issues which we deem
particularly important.
As experience shows, winning peace is often
more difficult than winning war. Peace processes in
their early stages are often fragile, and relapse into
conflict poses an even greater threat. Thus, the risk of
failure is very high if peace is not supported from day
one. In that respect, the first two years after the end of
a conflict are perhaps the most critical period, during
which we can either sow the seeds of a lasting peace or
set the course towards a dead end, albeit with good
intentions.

foremost, taking the necessary measures to ensure that
the entire United Nations system acts in unison
towards a single set of objectives and delivers as one.
Quick and effective results can be achieved only
through such a synergy of efforts. Thus, we welcome
and support the Secretary-General’s recommendations
towards that end.
That said, and notwithstanding its key leadership
responsibility, the United Nations is not the only actor
that can make a difference on the ground in the
immediate aftermath of a conflict. Indeed, given the
manifold and multifaceted challenges, effective
peacebuilding requires much broader international
support. Thus, the coherence and coordination of
international endeavours become key to helping
countries succeed in their efforts to construct and
implement a viable road map to peace. Indeed, echoing
the words of the Secretary-General,
“National authorities, the United Nations system
and other international partners can have a much
greater and earlier collective impact if we agree
on an early strategy with defined and sequenced
priorities, and align action and resources behind
that strategy” (S/2009/304, para. 6).
In other words, the strategy for building peace ought to
be devised as early as possible, should cover all aspects
of the requirements of the post-conflict situation, has to
be based on the common vision of national and
international partners alike, and must be well supported
by financial resources and technical expertise.

It is also a fact that tangible results in that period
can be achieved only if political, social, humanitarian
and economic considerations, as well as security needs,
are addressed in a holistic manner. In this context and
as was pointed out in the thematic debate held on
29 June under Turkey’s presidency of the Council,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are inseparable,
integral parts of a whole, and success can come only if
we treat them as such.

Additionally, priority-setting must reflect the
unique conditions and needs of the country, taking into
account the lessons learned from past experiences and
matching the existing capacities available to the task in
hand. The expertise and accumulated experience of the
World Bank and the United Nations Development
Programme, in particular, can be extremely helpful in
guiding post-conflict recovery and reconstruction. We
also believe that the rapidly progressing Peacebuilding
Commission could and should play an important role in
promoting an integrated approach to peacebuilding. We
therefore look forward to the review in 2010 with a
view to further enhancing its capacity and
effectiveness.

In the realm of peacebuilding, the United Nations
undoubtedly has a significant role to play. There is
ample room for improving the United Nations response
to post-conflict situations, including, first and

In the light of the foregoing, we agree with the
five-point agenda set out by the Secretary-General to
facilitate an earlier and more coherent response of the
wider international community that reflects all these

20

09-41769

S/PV.6165

core elements. In particular, we strongly support the
view that building national capacity and thus ensuring
national ownership is an essential priority and that it
has to be considered from the outset as the central
element of all peacebuilding efforts.

conflict, which represents a vital window of
opportunity to build and sustain peace. As Ambassador
Muñoz said, the time has come to move from words to
action, and Turkey is ready to assume its fair share in
this endeavour.

Indeed, we have to seize the rather limited
window of opportunity in the immediate aftermath of
conflict by responding rapidly and effectively in
support of the development of national capacities
across the entire spectrum, ranging from security to the
rule of law, from national reconciliation to electoral
processes, and from basic socio-economic services to
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons.

Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): I am pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over
this important meeting. Your brotherly country
launched this wise and timely initiative, and we are
extremely thankful to you for it. We also thank the
Secretary-General for introducing his valuable report
(S/2009/304),
and
the
Chairperson
of
the
Peacebuilding Commission and the representatives of
the United Nations Development Programme and the
World Bank for their important contributions.

Cognizant of the importance of delivering
substantial assistance in these key areas, Turkey
continues to focus its support in post-conflict societies
on these key deliverables. For instance, our policies
and programmes in Iraq and Afghanistan, where we
continue to undertake rather ambitious reconstruction
and development activities, are designed precisely for
that purpose. Turkey’s provincial reconstruction team
in Vardak, Afghanistan, in particular, is a good example
of our comprehensive and multifaceted approach,
placing national capacity-building at its core.
We also recognize the importance of rapidly
deployable civilian capacity to help achieve these key
deliverables, and we support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the pool of civilian experts be
broadened.
Finally, I would like to touch upon the issue of
financing. Better peacebuilding practices require better
financing. Thus, we recognize the need for more
flexible and predictable funding for post-conflict
peacebuilding
efforts.
In
this
context,
the
Peacebuilding Fund is setting a good example. Turkey
stands fully behind its commitments to the Fund and
makes its contributions to the Fund without caveat. We
also agree with the observations of the SecretaryGeneral that the country-level multi-donor trust funds
should be used more extensively and that the
partnership between the United Nations and the World
Bank must be further improved.
Before concluding, I would like to underline once
again Turkey’s continued commitment to supporting
the enhancement of the United Nations peacebuilding
efforts in every possible way, as well as our
determination to help ensure a well-coordinated
international response in the immediate aftermath of

09-41769

Over the past two decades, the United Nations
has done a great deal to prevent and resolve conflicts
and to maintain and build peace. While the
Organization has several achievements in this area to
its credit, efforts to ensure stability and economic
recovery, in particular in the aftermath of a ceasefire or
the signing of peace agreements, continue to face great
challenges. In-depth study is required to overcome the
difficulties and shortcomings and to determine the
most expeditious way to end a conflict, restore trust
among the various sectors of an affected society, and
implement programmes to promote economic recovery
and sustainable development.
In his report, the Secretary-General defines the
most important and urgent objectives for peacebuilding
in the immediate aftermath of conflict. These include
providing basic security, delivering peace dividends,
shoring up and building confidence in the political
process, and strengthening core national capacity to
lead peacebuilding efforts. I do not believe that anyone
can have any objection to those goals, but the great
challenge is how to respond effectively to those
priority goals.
In his report, the Secretary-General proposes a
plan for rapid response within the United Nations and
other actors in order to meet the following challenges:
first, to ensure rapid deployment of more effective and
more solidly structured United Nations teams;
secondly, to set priorities and ensure that resources are
available to implement them; thirdly, to provide United
Nations support for national ownership and developing
national capacity from the beginning; fourthly, to
strengthen and rationalize United Nations capacity to

21

S/PV.6165

identify staff, expertise and resources that can be
deployed
immediately
in
the
post-conflict
peacebuilding environment; and fifthly, to work with
donors to ensure that financing mechanisms function
more speedily and flexibly and are more risk-tolerant
and better aligned.
We thank the Secretary-General and other United
Nations departments for putting forward these
elements. However, we feel that it is clear that each of
those elements faces a number of challenges, which
will demand greater effectiveness, despite the
enormous efforts of the Secretariat and Member States
in recent years. I would like to focus on the two most
important challenges, which I believe are critical to
building and consolidating peace. These two challenges
are capacity-building and financing.
We all know that, in the aftermath of a conflict,
the institutions of a State have been dismantled. The
country lacks capacity and expertise on the ground.
The financial system is completely ineffective. The
sources of financing are not guaranteed. These
conditions make national Governments incapable of
carrying out their mission.
There is no doubt, then, that the first priority of
peacebuilding is to form a stable political system. This
requires building and developing essential capacities of
the State so that it can restore its legitimacy and
provide basic services to its citizens. This will promote
economic recovery and strengthen the labour market.
That is why we support the view that building such
capacity must be a prime element of any peacebuilding
effort from the very onset. We believe that such
capacity should be based primarily on available local
expertise, and after that on expertise provided by
countries that share the same culture, as well as by
regional and subregional organizations, whenever
possible.
Major international organizations should take full
advantage of local capacities in the given country. We
should avoid the excessive use of international staff so
that employment opportunities in the country in
question are not undermined. Two sectors where it is
important to strengthen capacity in post-conflict
peacebuilding are security and finance.
The first is linked to stability, security and
justice, which are key to restoring citizens’ trust in
their Government and convincing them that peace has
its dividends. The second sector is clearly linked to

22

State revenue and to its management. If there is no
effective financial or tax system, the State will not be
able to meet its obligations or provide basic services to
its citizens, and runs the risk of social instability and
relapse into conflict.
Reconstruction efforts face a number of obstacles
resulting from limited financing channelled through
weak and often inadequate mechanisms. It is therefore
necessary to find a way to make financing flexible,
predictable and rapid, as well as sufficient and timely.
We hope that the Partnership Framework Agreement
between the United Nations and the World Bank will
provide for effective management of multi-donor
funding and facilitate the use of that funding.
We also hope that the Peacebuilding Commission
will play a greater role in finding innovative ways to
secure funding for peacebuilding and to encourage
donors to provide speedier, more flexible and more
risk-tolerant funding. We believe the Peacebuilding
Fund can make a greater contribution to bridging the
gaps between pledged funding and available funding.
We welcome the workplan proposed by the
Secretary-General with regard to the United Nations
response in the early post-conflict phase. We reaffirm
the importance of the role to be played by the
Secretary-General’s representatives on the ground in
bringing together all influential actors in the aftermath
of a conflict, so that strategies and plans of action can
be adopted based on a national approach and tasks
prioritized and delimited. Financing must also be
provided from the outset.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: Mr. President, we highly
appreciate your presiding over this important meeting.
We express our thanks to the Ugandan presidency of
the Security Council for having organized this debate.
Let me also thank the Secretary-General for the
important presentation he made to us today. We also
welcome Ambassador Muñoz, Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and the representatives of
the World Bank and the United Nations Development
Programme for their contributions.
Austria associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union later in this meeting.
Let me say that seizing the window of
opportunity in the immediate aftermath of a conflict is
a crucial investment in order to lay the ground for

09-41769

S/PV.6165

long-term peace and stability. We concur with the
Secretary-General that it is essential for the
international community to ensure that a peacebuilding
perspective is in place from the very first days after the
cessation of a conflict. Peacebuilding efforts must be
undertaken and supported from the earliest stage
onwards, and as the representative of Japan and others
have said, they must go hand in hand with the possible
deployment of integrated peacekeeping missions.
In order for peacebuilding measures to prove
successful, national ownership must be at the centre of
all efforts. All peacebuilding efforts should therefore
draw upon existing national capacities, as the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission has already said, while
at the same time assisting with capacity deployment.
From our point of view, this should also include the
identification of opportunities for local private-sector
engagement. Let me add that local private-sector
engagement can also play a role when it comes to
procurement for United Nations peacekeeping.
The protection of civilians and effective
programmes for disarmament and demobilization and
reintegration must be key priorities in the immediate
aftermath of a conflict. There should be a clear focus
on the long-term reintegration of former combatants
and on the strengthening of the rule of law and
institutional reform, including security-sector reform.
Short-term peacebuilding measures must be undertaken
with a view to long-term peacebuilding. The
establishment of, and support for, effective and
independent justice and reconciliation mechanisms is
crucial. That will contribute to justice, long-term peace
and reconciliation in war-torn societies, thereby
helping to minimize the risk of future violations.
Austria believes that successful peacebuilding
can take place only if all the relevant actors are
included. I would therefore also like to express my
support for the comment made by the representative of
the United States. We need to acknowledge the vital
role played by women in re-establishing post-conflict
societies. Women have specific insight into the needs
of their societies, which is why their involvement in
peacebuilding efforts should be enhanced and the
provision of gender-specific funds ensured.
Enhanced coordination, not only within the
United Nations system but also with other international
partners, is a prerequisite for avoiding duplication and
ensuring the efficiency of peacebuilding efforts. It is

09-41769

essential to make maximum use of partners with a
comparative advantage on the ground. That is of course
very often particularly true of regional and subregional
organizations. For that very reason, we need to
intensify cooperation with them.
Furthermore, Austria supports the Secretary
General’s recommendation to strengthen the authority
of senior United Nations leadership on the ground as a
means of increasing accountability.
Austria also welcomes the crucial role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in addressing a country’s
post-conflict needs. We would like to underline the
necessity of involving the Peacebuilding Commission
from the outset. By promoting a coherent and
integrated approach that highlights the principles of
national ownership and regional cooperation, the
Commission provides valuable support for long-term
democratic consolidation and sustained economic
development. It is therefore best placed to develop an
international consensus on peacebuilding, which is
necessary to bridge the gap between early stabilization
and recovery efforts and longer-term development
planning. We attach great importance to building
further on the Commission’s accomplishments and
look forward to the refinement of its working methods
and tools in the context of the 2010 review.
To underline our commitment to the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Austria recently asked to
become a member in its country-specific configuration
for Sierra Leone. The Secretary-General has mentioned
that Sierra Leone is a showcase for cooperation and
synergy among United Nations actors on the ground in
the framework of peacebuilding. We are therefore
happy that our request has met with the Commission’s
approval. We will actively contribute to its work.
Finally, I would like to thank the Ugandan
presidency of the Security Council for preparing the
draft presidential statement, as well as to express our
full support for it.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like to welcome your presence among us today,
Mr. President, as well as to thank you for providing us
an opportunity once again to express ourselves on the
important issue of peacebuilding, which is the subject
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/304).
Before moving to the issue before us, allow me to
welcome the Secretary-General’s important statement,

23

S/PV.6165

as well as the outstanding statements delivered by our
special invitees.
We welcome the conclusions of the report of the
Secretary-General, which, let us recall, was explicitly
requested by the Security Council at the end of its
debate held on 20 May 2008 on this same issue.
Everyone agrees that the immediate post-conflict
period is a decisive moment in providing every
opportunity for the success of the peacebuilding
process — given, of course, that there a commitment
first on the part of national actors, who have the
primary responsibility in that regard, then on the part
of the international community.
National ownership is therefore crucial if a
peacebuilding process is to be viable. In particular, that
entails meaningful political commitment on the part of
all members of society, including the most vulnerable
and marginalized groups. The national dynamics must
nevertheless be accompanied by an effort by the
international community to provide support, especially
to overcome challenges associated with security,
socio-economic recovery and relaunching rule-of-law
institutions, which cannot be left solely up to postconflict countries.
We therefore agree with the Secretary-General in
emphasizing the crucial duty of the international
community to respond appropriately, quickly and
effectively in priority areas such as the security sector,
providing basic social services, re-establishing State
authority and revitalizing the economy. That should be
done while strengthening and supporting available
local, national, regional and international capacity on
the ground. Above all, after clearly identifying a
country’s specific priority needs, that entails
responding appropriately to the root causes of a
conflict in order to prevent the recurrence of hostilities.
Given their knowledge of the situation on the
ground, the involvement of regional and subregional
actors is also a major factor in the success of the
peacebuilding process. The participation of the
Economic Community of West African States in the
peacebuilding process in Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and
Sierra Leone and that of the Central African Economic
Community in the Central African Republic, as well as
the peacebuilding experience in Burundi, which was
led successfully by Uganda and South Africa, all attest
to the importance of that involvement.

24

The United Nations is called to play a leading
role in that joint effort. We would in particular like to
emphasize the need to pursue efforts to improve the
coordination and coherence of the Organization’s
actions in order to clearly identify responsibilities and
improve the predictability of international support.
We also support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation concerning the need to establish a
programme aimed at improving United Nations action
and facilitating that of other participants by making it
more coherent and timely. Ultimately, the goal is to
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations system to
provide expertise and staff who are ready to be
deployed quickly to the field to respond to the priority
needs of countries emerging from conflict.
Moreover, we would like to commend the
important role of the Peacebuilding Commission,
which is the best framework for coordinating the
efforts of the international community in the area of
peacebuilding. We also welcome its efforts to respond
to requests from countries emerging from conflict, in
particular with regard to mobilizing international
financial, material and logistical support. In that
regard, we also welcome the commitments made by the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
In conclusion, we express the hope that the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General and the positive contributions
emanating from various discussions at the
Peacebuilding Commission will make it possible to
redress the shortfalls in the collective response to postconflict challenges. We nevertheless trust that the
commitment and concerted efforts of the entire United
Nations system, along with those of the international
community, will help to make the peacebuilding
process more viable and effective, so as to ensure
lasting peace and development in countries emerging
from conflict.
We of course also support the draft presidential
statement that has been circulated by the delegation of
Uganda.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to see you, Mr. Minister,
presiding over the Security Council. We thank the
Secretary-General for preparing and presenting his
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (S/2009/304), a document richly deserving of
the most careful analysis and consideration.

09-41769

S/PV.6165

We share the approach to the criteria for
peacebuilding activities set out in the report. We agree
that it should be based on the principles of national
ownership and capacity-building in countries moving
towards peacebuilding, together with the development
of a peacebuilding strategy as soon as possible after the
settlement of a conflict. The task of the United Nations
is to coordinate international assistance and ensure
coherent synergy and efficiency in the efforts of
various international actors.
External assistance to post-conflict countries
should be aimed at building their national capacities.
The report provides an objective account of the
challenges facing peacebuilding activities. Quite
rightly, it includes such factors as the ways in which
international assistance is fragmented and inadequate,
the irrational division of labour among the various
participants in the peacebuilding process, and the
inadequacies of financial mechanisms.
The drive to enhance the efficiency of United
Nations efforts in post-conflict response is hampered
by systemic problems that are addressed with great
candour in the report. We welcome the fact that the
Secretary-General intends to promote initiatives aimed
at strengthening the Secretariat’s organizational
mechanisms
and
ensuring
their
coordinated
implementation. The report quite rightly states that
there should be a single methodology for assessing
countries’ needs during the post-conflict phase and that
national institutions should play the lead role in that
regard. We studied with interest the programme
developed by the Secretary-General to improve the
post-conflict response mechanism, and we consider
many of the related proposals to be reasonable and
appropriate.
In addition to the establishment of a standby team
and rosters of peacebuilding experts, national
capacities must be exploited to the utmost and
strengthened. We must encourage the creation of
rosters and of civilian standby teams by Member
States, regional organizations and international
financial institutions. The Secretary-General’s proposal
that such rosters be drawn up at the United Nations
level to create capacities for ensuring accountability
and reform in our human resources divisions should be
submitted for the consideration of Member States,
including for an assessment of their financial
implications. We support measures aimed at further
improving strategic coordination between the United

09-41769

Nations and the World Bank, an important partner of
the Organization on peacebuilding issues.
The Peacebuilding Commission plays the primary
role within the peacebuilding architecture. It is
required to coordinate international peacebuilding
activities, mobilize resources and monitor progress in
the implementation of national strategies. While we are
generally satisfied with the experience accumulated by
the Commission in this area thus far, its mechanisms
and working methods must be further adapted and
developed. Unfortunately, the report does not devote
sufficient attention to the Commission per se, although
the time is ripe to develop proposals to improve the
way in which it functions.
The Commission could be more actively engaged
in the processes of peacebuilding and socio-economic
transformation
currently
entrusted
to
many
peacekeeping operations. Given the increasing
complexity and multifunctionality of modern
peacekeeping mandates, it would be rational to assign
United Nations peacekeepers only to initial recovery
tasks, and for the capacities of the Commission,
regional
organizations,
international
financial
institutions and donors to be deployed in the
subsequent stages of post-conflict peacebuilding.
Of particular importance is the task of
strengthening the organic relationship between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council,
particularly on issues on the agendas of both entities.
We must also ensure timely exchanges of information
between them, as well as a clear division of labour and
complementarity. Clearly, this must be done in parallel
with the strengthening of the linkages among the
Commission, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council. We support General Assembly
resolution 63/282 on the revision of the terms of
reference for the Peacebuilding Fund. It is important to
continue to work to increase the Fund’s effectiveness
and transparency.
We are grateful to the delegation of Uganda for
preparing the draft presidential statement on postconflict peacebuilding, which has our full support.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
convening of this important thematic debate. I should
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
introducing his report on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304).

25

S/PV.6165

Since the inception of the Agenda for Peace
17 years ago, post-conflict peacebuilding has evolved
into an integral part of the collective efforts of the
international community to eliminate the prolonged
effects of conflicts and to support a smooth transition
to lasting peace and sustainable development.
The immediate post-conflict period is critical to
addressing a host of opportunities and the challenges of
disarming,
demobilizing
and
reintegrating
ex-combatants, strengthening the rule of law and
security sector reform, promoting inclusive dialogue
and reconciliation, supporting the return and
reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons, restoring Government functions and jumpstarting economic revitalization.
Over the longer term, substantive investments in
poverty reduction, hunger eradication, essential public
services,
employment
creation,
social parity,
institutional capacity-building and the Millennium
Development Goals, inter alia, will serve as linchpins
in tackling the root causes of conflicts and laying the
foundations for nation-building efforts. If those
recurring priorities are addressed in a timely manner,
the post-conflict journey towards lasting peace,
stability and prosperity can be much smoother.
The fast-moving and uncertain post-conflict
environment requires dovetailed support and
cooperation from the plethora of multilateral agencies
and international stakeholders concerned. In recent
years, the United Nations has been working diligently
to enhance its efficiency and effectiveness through
reform efforts related to the pillars of peace and
security, development, human rights, humanitarian
affairs and international law.
Standing at the very heart of the international
peacebuilding
architecture,
the
Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Peacebuilding Fund have played a central role as the
dedicated institutional mechanisms for focusing
attention, mobilizing resources and improving
coherence, while addressing critical gaps, needs and
priorities in countries emerging from conflict.
Given the fact that many conflicts have crossborder
dimensions,
regional
and
subregional
organizations have established support frameworks to
bring their comparative advantage in terms of
knowledge of specific local conditions to bear on the
work of peacebuilding. At this time of global resource

26

constraints, international financial institutions have
also worked to align funding decisions behind
immediate and medium-term peacebuilding and
recovery assistance.
Provided with differing mandates, guiding
principles, governance structures and financing
arrangements, United Nations agencies and other
partners involved early in the recovery of countries that
have experienced “hot” periods of crisis are challenged
by the overriding need to move forward and to ensure
clarity on roles and responsibilities, the rational
prioritization and division of labour, shared planning
and analysis, stronger partnerships and greater
accountability. It is imperative that their efforts be
coordinated and integrated so that all available
resources can be fully utilized. Simultaneously, any
unnecessary overlap or competition must be reduced
and economies of scale maintained.
In that regard, we welcome and look forward to
further concrete results in the implementation of the
Secretary-General’s agenda on strengthening and
supporting leadership teams in the field, promoting
earlier strategic coherence, reinforcing national
capacity from the outset, improving the ability to
provide rapid and predictable capacities, and enhancing
the speed, flexibility, amount and risk tolerance of
post-conflict financing.
Even with the best intentions, external assistance
to promote and strengthen war-to-peace stabilization
processes will likely be regarded as an imposition
unless the cardinal principles of respect for
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and
non-intervention in the internal affairs of States are
strictly followed and unless beneficiary host countries
are given ample space to determine policy options and
decision-making in the pursuit of their goals and
objectives.
As the legitimate masters and the biggest
beneficiaries of peacebuilding, local populations must
be empowered and involved in every step of this longterm endeavour. The entrance, implementation and exit
of international assistance should be tailored to and
driven by the specific needs and priorities of the
country in question, with the consent of local parties
and within the overall framework of maximally
drawing on and developing national ownership, selfresilience and self-reliance.

09-41769

S/PV.6165

In this regard, Viet Nam registers its steadfast
support for the cause of peacebuilding and stands ready
to share its related experience of capacity development
and international cooperation with all interested
stakeholders.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Ebrahim Ismail Ebrahim, Deputy
Minister for International Relations and Cooperation of
South Africa.
Mr. Ebrahim (South Africa): South Africa
wishes to express its appreciation to the Ugandan
presidency for organizing this important debate. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304).
This debate follows many robust consultations,
which sought to create a common plan and strategy to
effectively respond to challenges of post-conflict
peacebuilding. The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2005 as an intergovernmental body to
advise countries emerging from conflict was a direct
response by the international community to address
these challenges.
In that regard, South Africa welcomes the fact
that the report before the Council was compiled in
consultation with the Peacebuilding Commission.
While South Africa supports initiatives and
programmes that augment the work of the Commission,
it is important that the Commission continue to be
strengthened and that it remain the focal point of
peacebuilding activities, in line with its mandate. Thus,
the report of the Secretary-General should be seen as
an attempt to strengthen and enhance existing
mechanisms within the United Nations and to
streamline those outside the Organization in an effort
to better respond to the immediate aftermath of
conflict.
In his report, the Secretary-General acknowledges
that the immediate aftermath of conflict, while
challenging, also offers a window of opportunity for
the international community to provide basic security,
deliver peace dividends, shore up confidence in the
peace process and strengthen core national capacities.
The Secretary-General also proposes an agenda on how
the United Nations can be strengthened in order to
respond to the immediate aftermath of conflict and
identifies the following areas as priorities: basic safety

09-41769

and security, basic welfare, economic reintegration and
support to political processes.
South Africa fully concurs with the SecretaryGeneral that national ownership of the peacebuilding
process is critical for confidence-building and
strengthening fragile Governments. Our experience in
African peace processes, such as those in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi and Côte
d’Ivoire, has also shown us that a peace agreement
alone is not sufficient to bring stability in the country.
Effective communication and inclusive dialogue
between national actors and the civilian population are
critical in building confidence in the process, which
allows for realistic expectations by the population.
Accordingly, it is important that national actors
be capacitated in order to meet these expectations.
Again, South Africa’s engagement in the African peace
processes has also shown that lack of due attention to
national capacity development has the potential to
constrain national actors from taking ownership of
their recovery process.
In that regard, South Africa would like to stress
the important role that women continue to play in
peacebuilding efforts in post-conflict societies.
South Africa believes that regional and
subregional organizations have always been an
important element of the multilateral system. Many
with their own capacities are making a direct
contribution to peace and security in accordance with
Chapters VI and VIII of the United Nations Charter.
For instance, the African Union, with its Peace and
Security Architecture, continues to demonstrate the
commitment and desire to successfully contribute to
the achievement of stability, peace and political
solutions in the continent. These organizations also
possess a considerable amount of human capacity,
which need to be harnessed and utilized effectively in
order to augment the capabilities of the United Nations.
South Africa’s own experience has shown that the use
of civilian expertise can be a valuable tool in the
immediate aftermath of conflict.
The Secretary-General identifies an agenda for
action by the international community on key priority
areas, among which is the role of the United Nations.
The United Nations possesses enormous comparative
advantages, which should be marshalled to provide
effective leadership, coordination and accountability,

27

S/PV.6165

particularly as relates to its country teams on the
ground.

implementation of a programme for post-conflict
recovery in the Central African Republic.

South Africa has always supported the idea of
integrated peace missions in view of the
interdependence of United Nations efforts in countries
emerging from conflict. We believe that this integrated
approach will go a long way in maximizing the impact
of United Nations responses.

More than 10 years after the crises in my country,
the political and security situation remains an issue of
real concern, despite the stability and peace it now
enjoys. Today, the authorities face numerous
challenges arising from the disruption of the economy,
displaced populations and the destruction of
infrastructure, which have resulted in impoverishment
and suffering.

Related to this is the issue of the Post-Conflict
Needs Assessment. South Africa is of the view that the
Post-Conflict Needs Assessment should be synergized
with the Peace-Building Commission. The experience
of the past four years has shown that the advisory role
of the Commission has been instrumental in assisting
the countries on its agenda to develop their national
strategy frameworks. South Africa believes that the
Post-Conflict Needs Assessment process needs to
compliment the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
With regard to the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Commission had demonstrated the ability to deliver
effectively on its mandate, notwithstanding the
challenges of the past four years. South Africa looks
forward to the forthcoming five-year review of the
Commission, to take place in 2010, which will be
critical in giving an assessment of the Commission’s
work and of progress achieved so far.
South Africa is of the view that, in order for postconflict peacebuilding to succeed, it is imperative that
immediate, predictable and flexible financial resources
be made available. Therefore, forming solid
partnerships with institutions such as the World Bank
in a sustained manner is vital.
Lastly, my delegation supports the draft
presidential statement to be adopted by the Security
Council later today.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Jean Francis Bozizé, Minister Delegate
at the Presidency of the Central African Republic in
charge of National Defence, Veterans’ Affairs, Victims
of War, Disarmament and Restructuring of the Army.
Mr. Bozizé (Central African Republic) (spoke in
French): On taking the floor at this meeting of the
Security Council, I would like to start by conveying to
the President, to his delegation and to all members of
the Council the warmest greetings of the authorities of
my country and assurances of their commitment to the

28

The restoration of relative calm shortly after the
inclusive political dialogue was immediately followed
by a wave of violence with the occupation of the
eastern prefecture of Vakaga by rebels of the Union de
Forces Démocratiques pour le Rassemblement. The
reconquest of this region by Government forces was
not enough to put a stop to the irredentist dreams of
those who were nostalgic for the time of armed
uprisings. We thus have seen the re-emergence of
armed groups whose real motivation was none other
than to satisfy their own thirst for power.
The wounds inflicted by the bloody conflicts on
the country remain, for the means of production have
collapsed, the social fabric is torn and infrastructures
have been destroyed. The fragility of the economy, the
precarious state of institutions and political instability
make it difficult to implement classic development
programmes with any rapidity. At the same time,
humanitarian aid is falling off for lack of resources due
to the international financial crisis, and the tools at its
disposal are not adequate to respond to the country’s
needs for economic and social recovery.
Thousands of people have been displaced towards
more peaceful areas, including outside the country
itself. Around 300,000 displaced persons have been
counted at several places on the Chadian border, living
in a highly precarious situation and lacking drinking
water and the barest of necessities.
The Government, after an effort to engage in
dialogue with armed groups so as to lessen the
population’s suffering, has undertaken security sector
reform aimed at enhancing the capacity of the defence
and security forces within the context of democracy
and good governance. The conclusions of this political
dialogue provide for an immediate ceasefire, a
demobilization of former combatants and their
reintegration into civilian life or into the regular army

09-41769

S/PV.6165

in order to provide a sustainable solution to the
problem of lack of security.
The transition from armed conflict to peace is a
complex process that involves making the country
secure, protecting the people, reintegrating displaced
persons and refugees, rebuilding infrastructure,
relaunching the economy, promoting good governance
and political dialogue, and restoring the social capital
of the country.
Conflicts pose a greater challenge to
rehabilitation programmes and make it very difficult to
find coherent links between emergency aid,
rehabilitation and development, as crises most often
follow a pattern of deterioration, escalation, disorder,
calm and hope to a reversal of the situation. In spite of
the actions of armed persons in the regions I have just
mentioned, we look forward to the return of calm.
We need to consolidate what has been achieved
through that calm. After the peace agreements with the
Government, and although some armed groups may
still be reluctant to join the peace process, in a State as
fragile as the Central African Republic, the postconflict rehabilitation programme needs to be launched
as soon as possible. It is particularly important to
respond both to the urgent humanitarian needs
resulting from the conflict and to support a social,
political and economic development process that aims
at achieving peace and stability. We also need to
integrate post-conflict rehabilitation into an overall
global strategy.
It is essential that the improved prospects for
peace and economic recovery be exploited to
encourage all actors to speed up the demobilization of
their combatants. The World Bank and the United
Nations Development Programme have joined that
process, and the initial resources have allowed us to
demobilize and reintegrate 7,665 ex-combatants who
returned to their communities in 2007.
I would also like to share with the Council a
major concern of the Central African Republic
authorities. Over the past 10 years, the phenomenon of
child soldiers took hold in the Central African
Republic, where several hundred children under the
age of 18 fought with the armed groups. Children are
vulnerable, and perpetual conflict interrupts their
education and destroys their future. Rehabilitation in
this context consists of restoring their childhood to
these young soldiers, porters, messengers, cooks or, in

09-41769

the case of girls, sex slaves. I therefore welcome the
fact that post-conflict rehabilitation programmes take
the situation of child soldiers and girls into account.
We are confident that several factors may still
undermine the post-conflict rehabilitation operations,
whose success depends on the relative stability on the
ground, a minimum level of security, the soundness of
the peace agreements, and the political will of the
parties to resolve the conflict. Our willingness to
engage in dialogue is clear, however, and we offer as
proof of that the many peace agreements signed with
various armed groups, the amnesty offered to the
leaders, and the holding of the inclusive political
dialogue.
The Government insists on an in-depth analysis
of the structural causes of the conflict in the Central
African Republic, and on the establishment of a
general framework for advancing priority sectors and
measures. Balanced stabilization measures are required
in the political, economic, legal, social, environmental
and military spheres in order to harmonize the
interdependent objectives of peace and development.
There is obviously the question of the availability
of financial resources, which depend in particular on
the genuine commitment of the international
community to supporting us in the transition from
conflict to peace.
I personally am confident that, after this meeting,
the foundations will be laid for a post-conflict
rehabilitation programme in the Central African
Republic. I therefore support the text of the draft
presidential statement that has been presented by the
delegation of Uganda. I base my hope and optimism on
the commitment of the Security Council to contributing
to the definitive return and consolidation of peace in
my country.
The President: I now call on His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Somalia.
Mr. Omaar (Somalia): First of all, I thank you,
Sir, for this opportunity to participate in and contribute
to the consideration of the way forward for
peacemaking and peacebuilding. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2009/304) reflects both our
experience and our needs. We welcome and support its
proposals and recommendations.

29

S/PV.6165

Somalia and South Asia are proof that we have no
choice but to make peace and to build on it. To take but
one example, piracy off the waters of Somalia, based
on the absence of a national capacity to enforce the
rule of law for 18 years, has impacted and affected the
lives of almost every region of the world. Therefore, I
believe that disengagement from peacemaking and
peacebuilding is not an option at all.
As has been said, peacemaking needs vision and
a common strategy. From our perspective and due to
our history, the peace that we seek is subregional. For
50 years, the Horn of Africa has been at war in one
form or another, and we believe that the wider
peacemaking and peacebuilding effort in the Horn of
Africa is the only guarantee for the peace that we are
working towards in Somalia.
Secondly,
our
experience
shows
that
peacemaking and peacebuilding are not only parallel
and simultaneous, but also incremental. In Somalia,
despite the problems, two thirds of the country are
peaceful and in the peacebuilding phase. The North and
the North-East provide examples of locally grounded
initiatives that have developed and grown to that stage.
We are now fully and frankly engaged in the
completion of the Djibouti peace process in the
remaining third — the southern part — of the country.
That can be achieved only by reinforcing both the
ongoing political peacemaking process and the security
stabilization programme.
Somalis have shown national ownership in the
stable parts the North and the North-East and in the
Djibouti peace process. We have a three-pronged base
for national ownership: the North, the North-East and
now the Djibouti peace in the South. That has been
achieved at a high cost in human life.
We now believe that the proposals and
recommendations of the Secretary-General first, for
one, a coordinated and timely response by the United
Nations agencies and the international community and,

secondly, for the capacity-building of the institutions of
the State on the ground are the two most critical factors
that need to put in place. In terms of Somalia, those are
the two priority areas where we need the international
community to complete the cycle and the circle of
peacemaking and peacebuilding. That is necessary both
for the peacebuilding in the North and the North-East
and for the peacemaking in the South, where we are
engaged.
On behalf of Somalia and its people, we are ready
and we confirm our readiness to work with the
Secretary-General, the Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the World Bank and all United Nations
agencies to carry through those two elements —
capacity-building, on the one hand, and the coordinated
and timely response led by the United Nations
agencies, on the other.
The indication and example of the international
community’s involvement in Somalia, alongside our
own peacebuilding and peacemaking efforts, are
represented by the initiatives of the Security Council,
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union,
the African Union Mission in Somalia, and the forces
of Uganda and Burundi. Both Burundi and Uganda
have gone through the same experiences as us, and I
believe that they are the proof that the consistency of
the international community can help people on the
ground deliver the peacemaking and the peacebuilding
that we are discussing here today.
Despite the fact that 18 years have passed in
Somalia, the achievements in the North and the NorthEast speak for themselves and for Somalia. The process
is now under way in the southern part of the country,
and we believe that we can complete that process and
close the current chapter of the history of Somalia.
The President: There are a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. I intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3.15 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.25 p.m.

30

09-41769
