UNITED NATIONS

CIAL

RECO

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (SIAgenda12427). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . . . . I

1

Adoption of the agenda, . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , .

1

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations of
Nicaragua addressed tp the President of the Security Council (S/15651), .

1

SiPV .2427

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfficinI Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Secwity Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

2427th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 29 March 1983, at 3.30 p.m.
~resiclrnl: Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
Present: The representatives
of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua,
Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland,
United States of America,
Zaire, Zimbabwe.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2427)

1.

Adoption

of the agenda.

2.

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy
Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15651).
The meeting was called to order at 4 pm.

Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister
for External Relations of Nicaragua addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15651)
I.
The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings on this item
E2420th to 2426th meetings],
I invite the representative
of Honduras to take a place at the Security Council
table. I invite the representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Barbados, Belgium,
Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Colombia,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, the German Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, Ghana, Grenada,
Hungary, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy,
.’ the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Mongolia,
Panama, Peru, the Philippines, Spain, the
Syrian Arab Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam and Yugoslavia to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber,
of the President, Mr.- Orte<
- At the invitation
Colindres (Honduras) took a place at the Council
tab/~; Mr. A&da
(Algeria), Mr. Muiiiz (Argentina), Mr. Moseley (Barbados), Miss Dew (Belgium),
Mr. Salazar Paredes (Bolivia), Mr. Bueno (Brazil),

Mr* Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. Sanz de Santamaria
(Colombia), Mr. Zurnbado Jime’nez (Costa Rica),
Mr* ROa Cw! (Cuba), Mr. Moushoutas (Cyprus),
Mr. Suja (Czeschoslovakia), Mr. A~-A@ (Democratic
Yemen), Mr. Snipping Victoria (Dominican
Repubiic), Mr. Albornoz (Ecuador), Mr. Chdvez-Mena (El
Salvador), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic),
Mr. van Well (Federal Republic of Germany),
Mr. Gbeho (Ghana), Mr. Taylor (Grenada),
Mr. R&z
(Hungary), Mr. Purushottam (India), Mr. RajaieKhorassani (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. La
Rocca (Italy), Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Maudave (Mauritius), Mr. MuAoz Redo (Me&
co), Mr. Narkhuu (Mongolia), Mr. Ozores Typaldos
(Panama), Mr. Pastor de la Torre (Peru), Mr. Arcilla
(Philippines), Mr. de Pinie’s (Spain), Mr. El-Fattal
(Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Rupia (United Republic
of Tanzania), Mrs. Coronel de Rodriguez (Venezuela), Mr. Hoang Bich Son (Viet Nam)
and
Mr. SiloviC (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Guatemala and Uruguay in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. QuifionesAm&quita (Guatemala) and Mr. Blanc0 f Uruguay)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of Hungary. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
4. Mr, R&X (Hungary): At the outset, @low me,
Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March and wish you success in the performance of
your important task. I hope that, under your experienced guidance, the Council will contribute to
solving the issue on the agenda. I wish also to express
appreciation for the exemplary and successful manner
in which Mr. Troyanovsky discharged his functions as
President of the Council last month.

peoples to choose their social and political system
without outside interference. It is very indicative that
many delegations have asked to speak in this debate,
and almost all of them have condemned the aggression
and expressed support for and solidarity with the
people of Nicaragua. The documents of the Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries have also condemned interference in the internal affairs of Nicaragua and have
called on the United States to demonstrate a more
reasonable attitude towards the social, economic and
political problems of Central America in order to find a
peaceful solution to them.

5. On 23 March [2420t12 jneeting] the Council heard
the statement of the representative of Nicaragua on
the armed aggression against his country from the
territory of Honduras. We have also received information from the international
press on this act of
aggression. As a result of this military attack, the
situation in Central America, which has been tense for
a long time, has further deteriorated. For this reason,
we consider these Council meetings timely and necessary in order to discuss this important question.
6.’ Exactly one year ago the Government
of Nicaragua asked for the convening of the Council because
of the growing threat against its security from outside
forces. The majority
of the Member
States that
participated in the discussion at that time called for a
peaceful solution of the dispute and condemned the
interference in the internal affairs of sovereign Central
American States. A draft resolution was submitted by
Guyana and Panama [S/14941], calling for dialogue
among the parties with a view to settling the conflict
peacefully. The draft resohttion appealed to all Member States to refrain from direct, indirect, covert or
overt use of force. As we all know, it was the United
States which vetoed that draft resolution.

10. My delegation also supports the views of Latin
American countries concerning the root causes of the
recent political, social and economic crisis in Central
America. It is the social injustices, inequaIity and
poverty that cry out for revolutionary changes. The
crisis in Central America can be solved only by
satisfying the demands of the people by political and
economic means and by putting an end to all outside
manoeuvres aimed at damping this process, as clearly
demonstrated
in the recent actions the Council is
considering now.
II.
The peace proposals made during the debate
yesterday by the Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua [242&h meeting, pams. 46 ltnd 471,
as well as those made previously by the four Latin
American Foreign Ministers in Contadora Island, offer
an acceptable basis for all parties to achieve peace and
tranquillity in the region. My delegation supports those
proposals. It is our fervent hope that the parties
concerned will accept them in the interests of peace
and security in Central America and the world over.

7. Since that meeting events in Central America have
taken a turn for the worse. Counter-revolutionary
gangs, trained in special camps in Honduras and other
places-as
widely shown on American
television
stations-have
crossed the borders of Nicaragua and
carried out armed attacks against Nicaraguan installations. This armed aggression is an organic continuation of earlier preparations and subversive actions
and, at the same time, indicates that the complaint by
Nicaragua a year ago was fully justified. If anyone still
has any doubts as to why, where and by whom this
aggression has been prepared, organized and financed,
he need only refer to the article by Mr. Landau in
yesterday’s edition of The New York Times.

12. It is also the hope of my delegation that the
Council’s discussion will contribute to the peaceful
solution of this dangerous situation by directing the
attention of the international community to the aggression and to the forces behind it. This act of aggression cannot be justified; it can oniy be resolutely
condemned as a violation of the most elementary
norms of international law and of the spirit and letter
of the Charter of the United Nations.

8. The issue before us today is an ever-increasing
threat from outside against the people and the Government of Nicaragua which is aimed at the social,
economic and political progress achieved after the
victory of the revolutionary
forces on 19 July 1979.
The people of Nicaragua in a long struggle defeated
one of the most oppressive rCgimes in the world, the
hateful dictatorship of Somoza. But there are certain
forces which question the right of the people of
Nicaragua to choose its own social and political
system. Furthermore,
these forces not only question
the sovereign right of the people of Nicaragua but keep
trying to interfere in its domestic affairs by intimidalion, aggressive demonstrations
of force and concrete
acts of aggression. This is the issue before us today
and with which the Council must deal seriously in
order to prevent it from deepening and escalating.

13. On 23 March the Hungarian Solidarity Committee issued a statement condemning the armed attack
by counter-revolutionary
forces against the people and
Government of Nicaragua in the most resolute manner
and expressed the solidarity of our people with the
people of Nicaragua. That statement also emphasized
that the Hungarian people would continue to support
the people of Nicaragua in its effort to build a just and
democratic society.
14. Here, before the Council. I should like to
reiterate that my Government resolutely condemns the
armed aggression against Nicaragua and the foreign
forces behind it and demands an end to interference in
the internal affairs of that country.

9. At this juncture I should like to associate myself
with those delegations-the
overwhelming
majoritywhich emphasized that it is the legitimate right of all
2

15 0 The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

ism is by the remotest chance interested in what it
terms democracy in Nicaragua, then how come it was
the primary supporter of the most corrupt tyrants in
Nicaragua for decades-until
the people of Nicaragua
sacrificed their lives in order to overthrow their
corrupt regime and force the tryant to flee into the
arms of his American masters? How can the Yankee
imperialists even think that a people who has acquired
awareness and has risen against tyranny can be
humiliated by such simplistic tactics? A people that
was strong and determined
enough to defeat an
established order which was unconditionally
supported by the United States can easily defeat the
disillusioned remnant mercenaries of that regime.

16, Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Islamic Republic
of Iran): Sir, I should like to congratulate you on
presiding over the Council this month and indeed, over
this very important meeting. I should also like to thank
and congratulate your predecessor, who skilfully and
successfully conducted the presidential affairs of the
Council last month.
II.
This is the third series of Security Council
meetings in the three months since the last session of
the General Assembly-each
month, one series of
meetings-to
debate some form of American aggression and intervention. In this meeting too, I shall start
my intervention
with a verse from the Holy Koran:
‘“And soon will the unjust aggressors know what
vicissitudes their affairs shall take.“’
,.
18. The Council is meeting once again to consider yet
another manifestation
of the expansionist and hegemonic policy of the United States, which is, as usual,
involved in illegal intervention in the internal affairs
of other countries. The small yet great and revolutionary people and Government of Nicaragua in the past
four years-which
means ever since their revolution
embraced victory-have
been the victims of countless
acts of aggression by the United States, inflicted upon
them either directly or through the lackeys of imperialism in the area.

22. Expansionist
and hegemonist interventions
by
the United States-which
have become the practice in
the affairs of Latin American countries-are
al1 well
known. In El Salvador, the United States has continuously supported the corrupt and unpopular regime
which is involved-of
course, with American weapons
and along with American mercenaries, under the guise
of military advisers-in
massacring innocent people
whose only crime is their struggle to gain their
legitimate rights.
f
23. Moreover, Latin America is not the only victim
of American intervention.
It seems that the so-called
backyard of the United States has expanded to include
Palestine, Lebanon, Iran, the Far East and, in short,
the entire globe, not to mention outer space.
24. The expansionist policy of the United States and
its violation of the principles of the Charter are all
justifiable
to the American Administration
because
they are designed to protect American
“national
interests” and to safeguard American “national security”. But has it occurred to the people in the White
House that other countries might have national interests and national security concerns?

19. This is not unexpected. However, has anyone
ever heard of any friendly relations between the
United States and any revolutionary people or Government? The devouring United States imperialism
is
well known for its constitutional
animosity towards
the freedom and independence of small nations such as
Nicaragua.

25. There seem to be indications of some insidious
attempts to politicize a crisis which is definitely not
simply an academic political issue to be resolved
through oration and rhetorical babbling. More often
than not, nations have been betrayed by the fallacy or
mistake of converting a political
problem into a
military crisis or by the fallacy of deliberately mistaking a military
crisis for a matter for political
intellectualization.
We could say that militarization
of
political problems is the art of America exclusively
-if,
of course, we did not have the situation in
Afghanistan, And politicization
of military crises and
massacres is the sole privilege of the United Nations
par excellence.

20. The representative
of Nicaragua presented a
detailed report of the recent developments
on the
Nicaraguan-Honduran
border to the Council
on
23 March {242&h meeting]. The American imperialists
have been trying to destabilize and ultimately
to
overthrow the revolutionary Sandinist Government of
Nicaragua through economic pressures as well as
political and military coercion, by training and arming
the remnants of the Somozist Guards, who have
proclaimed themselves to be “Nicaraguan democratic
forces”. These trained terrorists and mercenaries have
been trying to infiltrate Nicaragua from Honduras in
operations which have resulted in the killing of many
innocent Nicaraguan peasants and students.

26. The Council must beware that the precious blood
of Nicaraguan heroes not be trampled upon by those
who are satanically preparing the ground for academic
studies and conference approaches. The United States
imperialists would be more than happy to attend, and
even to sponsor, such conferences in order entirely to

2 1, Considering the atrocities these self-proclaimed
“democratic
forces” are committing-with
the help of
their American masters-against
the Nicaraguan people in order to establish their own brand of democracy,
the question comes to mind that if American imperial3

revolutionary
peoples and Governments to condemn
United States militaristic
machinations,
both direct
and indirect, through local puppets, against Nicaragua,
and other oppressed masses of the region.
_’

dilute the issue and at the same time lay the foundation
for further conferences and further debates.
27. American aggression against Nicaragua’s reVOhtion must bc stopped and not be debated, or else the
international body will be responsible for all the crimes
that super-powers, and particularly the United States,
are perpetrating in the third world, including in Latin
America. The international
body is not meant t0
intellectualize military aggression and thereby pacify
the victims. It must stop the act of aggression by all
means. Members of the Council, who are the guardians of international peace and security, have all seen
the results of the seasonal meetings and annual
conferences on Palestine and the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people. Those are enough. There is no
need for profound studies aimed at understanding the
Nicaraguan problem. Let us please ask the Americans
to wash their bloody hands of Nicaragua.

32. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Czechoslovakia. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement,
33. Mr. SUJA (Czechoslovakia)i
May 1 begin by
congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We have
witnessed your knowledgeable and experienced con..
duct of your extraordinarily
important office. Let me
wish you much success in the remainder of your tern
of office. May 1 at the same time take this opportunity
to congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky,
representative of the Soviet Union, whose guidance of
the Council’s work in February was outstanding.

28. Is it not time to let the oppressed people
determine their destiny without any interference,
intervention and coercion by the United States and its
lackeys, or by other super-Powers? Has the time not
come for United States imperialism to stop, once and
for all, its militaristic policy in that part of the world?
How long should the precious blood of Latin America’s oppressed masses be shed by the Yankee
imperialists-who
are called military trainers, and not
even advisers-and a bunch of friendly generals and
fair-haired Christian democrats who happen to be
Washington’s exemplars of democracy and development? How long can Washington justify the export of
death and destruction to the area through desperate
recourse to the discredited domino theory?

34. Thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the
opportunity to address in this body a serious threat to
international
peace and security: the launching of
armed aggression against Nicaragua and the Sandinist
national revolution,
an intervention
that is being
escalated from the territory of Honduras while the
counter-revolutionary
bands of the overthrown dictator Somoza are used, an invasion made possible
thanks only to all-round assistance from the United
States.
35. In the face of the facts we regard the request by
the Government of Nicaragua for consideration of the
current culmination
of the attacks against Nicaragua
as fully justified. There can be no doubts as to the
nature of this aggression. A number of speakers here
have already provided analyses of its causes. It is
a case of outside intervention,
violating a number
of fundamental
generally recognized principles and
norms of international
law, including the Charter of
the United Nations and the charter of the Organization
of American States, as well as international legal rules
clearly and unequivocally formulated in the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.’ In
this respect nothing is changed by the attempts to
present this act of aggression as a civil war and as an
internal Nicaraguan affair.

29. The Islamic Republic of Iran condemns the latest
episode-in fact, all the episodes-co-ordinated
by the
United States and its military aggression against the
heroic Nicaraguan people and their victorious revolution. The mere fact that the invasion of Nicaragua
takes place in the midst of the still ongoing propaganda
campaign about the so-called El Salvador crisis and
two successive joint military
manoeuvres
in the
Caribbean clearly shows what is behind it all.
30. As part of its all-out drive to prop up made-inthe-United-States, shaky regimes, United States imperialism deems it absolutely necessary to topple or
tame revolutionary peoples and Governments. Yankee
imperialists,
who are deeply concerned about the
region’s natural resources, markets and investment
opportunities, etc., stop short of no crime, however
heinous, to preserve and foster their ill-gotten interests. Invasion of revolutionary Nicaragua heralds the
dawn of an era of United States, as well as United
States-sponsored, militarism in the region,

36. At the same time, the attack against Nicaragua
and the Sandinist revolution is not an isolated action in
the scenario of the struggle of imperialist
forces
against social progress in the world. It is one of many
parallel actions the common denominator of which is
attacks against the sovereignty of States and against
their independence and territorial integrity, actions
designed to increase tensions throughout the world
and to aggravate the international
situation.
It is
one of a broad range of actions which in the final
analysis increase the danger of a world-wide nuclear
catastrophe.

31. While reiterating its support for the Nicaraguan
People and Government in defending their just and
legitimate rights, the Islamic Republic of Iran calls on
the international community and all progressive and
4

--

escalation of the direct armed intervention against the
Nicaraguan revolution and the Nicaraguan people:

37. The overwhelming majority of speakers have
expressed themselves in favour of halting the aggression against Nicaragua and resolving by peaceful
means a situation that threatens international peace
and security. They have associated themselves with
the resolute positions advanced so unequivocally
by the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the
Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries
held at Managua in January and by the Seventh
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries held at New Delhi earlier this
month. We too deem it necessary to put an end to the
launching of armed bands against Nicaragua and to
the interference in its internal affairs by demanding
changes in its internal political system, demands that
we could hear even in this United Nations body. Only
halting the aggression and the intervention in the
internal affairs of Nicaragua and starting negotiations
represent a way that is in keeping with the Charter of
the United Nations, international law and the wishes
of the public of the entire world,

“The people and Government of the CzechoSlovak Socialist Republic express indignation over
the escalation of the aggression by Somozist bands
from basesin Honduras with the support ofthe%most
reactionary forces of imperialism. This aggression
represents a gross violation of the integrity and
sovereignty of Nicaragua and is in sharp contravention of the Charter of the United Nations and the
norms of international law. It increases the tension
in the subregion and gravely threatens world peace,
It is a manifestation of imperialist efforts to liquidate
the results of the Nicaraguan revolution and to halt
the struggle of the peoples of that region for freedom and self-determination. Responsibility for the
aggression must be shared by external forces that
provide open encouragement as we11as military and
material support to the Somozists. We join the
protest by the world’s public and demand an
immediate halt to the aggression and express our
solidarity with the fighting people of Nicaragua. We
welcome the initiatives of Mexico, Venezuela,
Panama, Colombia and other States aimed at a
peaceful settlement of the situation in Central
America, and we support all proposals and measures in favour of creating conditions of mutual
confidence and co-operation in the subregion.”

38. That is why we appreciate as appropriate for
further consideration many of the concrete proposals,
ideas and impulses aimed at a speedy and just political settlement that we have heard here. In particular
I have in mind the proposal made yesterday by the
Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua
12424th meeting,’ paras.

46 and 471.

41. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of Ghana. 1invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

39. Czechoslovakia welcomed the victory of the
Sandinist revolution in a country tormented by the rule
of the brutal and corrupt Somoza regime supported
from abroad. We highly appreciate the successes of
the Nicaraguan people achieved under the leadership
of the Sandinist National Liberation Front and the
Government of National Reconstruction in consolidating the results of the Sandinist national revolution,
in rebuilding the national economy, implementing
social reforms and building a new, just society. We
admire the people of Nicaragua, which heroically
resists the pressure from aggressive imperialist forces
and defends its inalienable right freely to decide the
fate of its country. We highly appreciate the peaceloving, action-oriented and active foreign policy of the
Government of Nicaragua, which received recognition
in this Organization through, among other things, its
election to the Security Council. As was tellingly
stated in a communique sent during an official friendly
visit to Czechoslovakia by the Minister for External
Relations of Nicaragua, Mr. Miguel d’Escoto Brockmann, the two countries are developing broad relations based on equality and mutual respect to the
mutual benefit of both sides.

42. Mr. GBEHO (Ghana): It is customary first to pay
respects to the President of the Security Council on
occasions such as the one I am privileged to be
involved in now, and I should not miss the opportunity, But more than that, it is a pleasant duty
for me personally to congratulate you, Sir, a distinguished colleague, for the rare honour bestowed upon
you and to convey the esteem of my Government,
which has always admired the diplomatic skill of the
United Kingdom. May 1 also on this occasion pay a
richly deserved tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Oleg
Aleksandrovich Troyanovsky of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, for the exemplary leadership that
he offered the Council during the month of February.
43. The cynic would wonder what stake Ghana has in
this debate, which is focused basically on Central
America, since we are a small and militarily weak
country tucked far away in a corner in West Africa.
But it ought to be made very clear that I have come to
the Council today not only to fulfil an obligation that
my country has always shouldered responsibly under
the Charter, but also to voice our opinion on the
unacceptable threat to the independence, territorial
integrity and sovereignty of a small and non-aligned
country like ours. The complaint of Nicaragua of
increased acts of aggression against it should disturb
all non-aligned and weak countries because it con-

40. My country received the reports of the escalating
aggression against Nicaragua with deep concern as to
the impact those actions would have on international
peace and security. With the Council’s permission,
I shall now quote from the position adopted by the
Czechoslovak Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs on
26 March of this year with regard to the current
5

stitutes further evidence of the bullying tactics of a
bigger country towards a smaller neighbour. 11 is
Nicaragua today, but our own recent national experiences indicate quite clearly to us that it may be
ourselves tomorrow. Therefore we participate in the
debate in the hope that our few words will be added to
the words of those who abhor violence and the
trampling underfoot of the principles of the Charter
and the resolutions of the Organization.
44. We are concerned because when the fundamental
principles of international behaviour among States are
threatened, it is the weak countries such as mine that
have the gravest cause for concern. It is precisely the
countries members of the Non-Aligned Movement, the
nations which do not possess the overwhelming
military capabilities of the super-Powers or the great
Powers, that depend on universal adherence to the
tenets of the Charter and the Declaration on Principles
of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Co-operation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations? and that are most
alarmed by non-adherence to those principles.
45. In the last few days we have heard many
speakers recount the worrisome details of the present
military situation in Nicaragua and especially the
attempts over the past 12 months or so to destabilize
the revolution and the Government of National Reconstruction of Nicaragua. Their accounts have been
incontrovertibly
supported by factual accounts of the
attempts being made and recently heightened by the
Somoza national guard to attack civilian targets and
generally to promote violence inside Nicaragua from
its neighbour, Honduras. I shall not take any more of
the Council’s time to recount what is by now a familiar
story. Let me say, however, that my references to the
activities against the Sandinist
Government
from
across the border in Honduras are serious ones,
because I am one of the few Africans privileged to
have witnessed with my own eyes the tense and
insecure situation prevailing on the border between
Nicaragua and Honduras.
46. 1 have listened with great attention
to the
statements of the representative of the United States
and those representatives of Central American States
who have generally supported her, but, I must
confess, there are certain questions left unanswered in
my own mind and, 1 suspect, in the minds of many of
my colleagues. For example, there is no doubt that the
perpetrators of violence, the Somozists, have come
into Nicaragua from somewhere where they have
received arms and training for their purpose. Secondly, this band of anti-Sandinist
terrorists has no
known budget of its own for the military hardware that
it now possesses, and so it.is being financed by some
authority. Thirdly, there has not been a convincing
denial in the past of the allegations in the media of
outside interference in the affairs of Sandinist Nicaragua.

47. The Council needs no lessons in history from my
delegation: suffice it to recall that the Non-Aligned
Movement was set up with the aim of helping countries which had just attained hard-won independence to avoid becoming drawn into the ideological
and military
conflicts of the super-Powers. Each
non-aligned country therefore endeavours to concentrate on the priorities
of national socio-economic
advancement for its people and desires nothing more
than peace and stability, co-operation, sympathy and
understanding from the international community.
48. What we definitely
do not need is external
interference,
attempts to dictate or prescribe our
political destinies and destabilization.
It is regrettable,
therefore, to see this phenomenon of destabilization
rearing its ugly head in the locality of some nonaligned countries today. Much as we acknowledge that
the most powerful nations have a wide range of
interests in many parts of the world, we cannot accept
that these strategic and other interests should impinge
upon and detract from the inalienable right of sovereign countries and peoples to determine freely and
without interference the political arrangements they
wish to live under. We cannot accept attempts to destabilize any non-aligned country for foreign interests
on the pretext that the international political arrangements of that country do not live up to some
supposed moral standards, especially when no similar
solicitude is displayed for the rights of countless other
peoples whose oppression is glaringly apparent, such
as the black majority in South Africa. We cannot
accept that any State or group of States should have
some inherent mandate or right to prescribe what form
of government sovereign peoples should live under.
49. Ghana would like to reaffirm its adherence
to the final communique
adopted at the conciusion of the Extraordinary
Ministerial Meeting of the
Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries
held at Managua in January [see S/15628, annex], in
which the Co-ordinating
Bureau expressed solidarity
with Nicaragua in its efforts to deter threats to its
sovereignty,
independence
and territorial
integrity.
Ghana also fully subscribes to the appeal issued by the
Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned
Countries at New Delhi this month,
calling for an end to hostile acts against Nicaragua and
urging all countries to refrain from acts which raise
tensions in the troubled Central American region [see
S/1567.5 nnd Corr.1 and 2, annex, sect. rJ.
SO. As I have already stated, the flagrant destabilization efforts made against Nicaragua are especially
worrying because they further detract from the effectiveness of the United Nations as an organization
for peace, since in the harassment of Nicaragua its
principles are openly and rudely disrespected. Indeed,
it does no credit to the Organization if a member of its
highest organ-an organ intended for the maintenance
of international
peace and security-can
so easily
become the victim of unbridled violence fomented and
promoted by other member States.

job of providing a higher living standard for its people,
and the international community should help it.

51. 1 know I echo the feelings of many and the
conviction of my own Government when 1say that the
statements made in contradiction of the Nicaraguan
complaint have been less than convincing. In many
respects,
some of them constitute classic examples of
the cause of the misjudgement often heard about the
task of diplomats.

55. Ghana salutes the revolutionary Government and
people of Nicaragua and wishes them successin their
struggle against the enemies of poverty, disease and
underdevelopment, as well as in their efforts to
achieve social and economic justice, without which all
talk of human rights is meaningless.

52. Ghana has followed carefully the extensive debate during the past week and commends the readiness
of both Nicaragua and Honduras to enter into a serious
dialogue to resolve problems between them. We are
pleased to note that the countries of the Central and
Latin American region have undertaken important
initiatives which hold the promise of facilitating
peaceful solutions to the problems of the area. These
efforts deserve the fullest support of the Security
Council and of the international community as a
whole.

56. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of Uruguay. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
57. Mr. BLANC0 (Uruguay) (inrerpretation from
Spanish): I wish first of all to thank the Security
Council for the opportunity it has afforded my
delegation to take part in the present deliberations.
Mr. President, 1 am pleased to join in the compliments
that have been offered to you on the manner in which
you have conducted the Council’s proceedings.

53. Above all, Ghana believes that there is a grave
danger of escalation of tensions in the Central American region, and therefore there is an urgent need for
prompt and effective action to reduce tensions, alleviate the danger of full-scale war and give the
praiseworthy efforts of various countries in the region
-such as Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia and Panama-a
real chance to succeed. We are aware that no
dramatic action of the Council is expected to result
from the present debate. However, we also caution
against any counter-productive levity, with which
some member States have approached the whole issue
in the Council. It is our hope that members of the
CounciI, and certainly you, Sir, as its President, will
employ every available diplomatic skill in this body,
and the leverage that the Council has, to ensure that
the situation in Central America does not deteriorate
any further or trigger a subregional unrest, but rather
that there be a return to peace and harmony.

58, Uruguay follows with grave concern the distressing events that have taken place in Central
America. Above and beyond political positions and
ideological schemes, there lies the magnitude of
human suffering that has beset so many for so long,
We cannot allow these daily reports of tragic news to
dull our senses by dint of repetition and weaken our
power to react.
59. Nor must we allow the situation to remain frozen
behind confrontations and tension.
60. My country takes part in this debate moved by
these feelings and by its traditional devotion to peace.
We believe, however, that this debate does not stand
in the way of action that could be taken within the
Organization of American States, in keeping with
Article 52, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United
Nations.

54. When a people has struggled and fought as long
and as hard against such odds as have the people and
the revolutionary Government of Nicaragua, it needs
and deserves the respect of the international community, and those who for their own reasons would not
support its heroic reconstruction efforts should at the
very least not hinder them. Any actions to the contrary
are not only repulsive, but also seriously undermine
international democracy. We cannot believe for one
moment that the Sandinist Government of Nicaragua
would in all sanity choose war with its neighbours, or
with the United States, for that matter, because it
scarcely has the resources to prosecute such a war, or
that it would prefer tension with its neighbours to
living with them in peace and harmony, because
without those conditions Nicaragua cannot consolidate its own political and economic programmes and,
most importantly perhaps, would fritter away all its
resources when they are clearly needed to reconstruct
a country mercilessly devastated by the exploitation
and tyranny of Somoza. The Government of Nicaragua merely wishes to be left alone to get on with the

61, Dialogue and negotiations within the framework
of international law can and must lead to peace. This
course of action, which is desirable in all cases,
is particularly appropriate in the present situation
involving countries which are closely bound by many
ties. As members of the family of Latin American
nations, we share a responsibility to co-operate in
making these bonds a reality, both in constructing a
common future and in destroying anything that separates us or creates antagonism.
62. Although the debate in the Security Council is
not exactly what, in my delegation’s opinion, is in
keeping with the functions of this body and has come
to resemble deliberations in the General Assembly, it
has had the virtue of bringing out once again the
urgency and the necessity of a solution. In addition,
aside from confrontations and sometimes very deep
differences, it has served to bring out certain important elements which could form part of a solution.
7

63. Firstly; it has been pointed out and recognized
that the situation in Central America represents a
complex
body of internal,
bilateral,
regional and
international
factors which must be tackled. Secondly, it has also been accepted and recognized
that the principle of non-intervention,
universally and
strictly applied,
is the basis for a stable peace,
Moreover, that principle is fundamental to the foreign
policy of my country, for which it has always had an
abiding respect. Thirdly, the Latin American countries, including those involved, have shown a willingness to co-operate in a constructive spirit in keeping
with the various machinery and formulas that have
been suggested here in the Council. Fourthly, such
machinery exists in law for potential use. And fifthly,
it has been accepted that these solutions must be
reached through peaceful means, by dialogue and
negotiations.

success of the debate. We should also like to take this
opportunity to thank the Council for having allowed us
to take part in its deliberations.

70. Guatemala takes part in these talks in the Council
in order to express its concern over this further
bloodshed between Central American brothers, which
has added a further element to the already difficult
situation. Our greatest aspiration is to seek Central
American unity, the unity of what we five Central
American countries call a great homeland-a
patria
grande. But that unity was been broken by unavowed
interests during particularly troubled times. If we
could restore that unity today, we would earn respect
and enhance our prestige. We long for unity for that
great Central American nation, which so badly needs
the love and self-sacrifice of all its sons,
71. Some countries would portray the upheaval in
Central America as the struggle of liberation
movements and as an internal struggle for a change in
economic structures. It is particularly noteworthy that
Nicaragua has attributed the present fighting to nonLatin-American
interests and that El Salvador has said
that Nicaragua is the tool of countries outside the
Central American region which are providing weapons, training and logistic support. Furthermore,
it is
also most noteworthy that during the same period
guerrilla groups have emerged in all Central America
and that none of the five countries have been spared,
This prompts us to conclude that these problems
of
armed struggle are the result of foreign interference.

64. My delegation is well aware of the fact that there
are many difficulties.
65. The delegation of Nicaragua referred to a bilateral dialogue with qualified witnesses and in parallel
with a regional dialogue, also with qualified witnesses.
The delegation of Honduras referred to a regional
dialogue which could include bilateral aspects and in
which qualified witnesses could also participate. Both
positions do not entirely coincide, but they accept a
dialogue; they agree that it should cover a wide range
of subjects; and they have agreed to the participation,
in one form or another, of other countries.

72. We representatives at the United Nations would
be nai’ve indeed if we were to believe that the countries
sponsoring these movements would admit that they
have created them, if we were to believe that they
would confess their hegemonistic designs or their
strategic interests. If we Central Americans who have
experienced this crisis and upheaval wish our names to
remain immortal in the annals of history, we must seek
areas of co-operation, paths towards understanding
and peace with development in which the principles of
non-intervention,
non-aggression and the right of the
people of every nation to the Government of its choice
are respected.

66. In my delegation’s
opinion, there remains the
problem of defining more precisely the machinery and
the procedures to be followed, as well as the order and
the arrangement of topics. That is up to the parties
directly concerned, although they can count on the
valuable support of the Latin American community,
whose readiness to co-operate has been’made manifest
throughout the debate.
67. Uruguay would like to urge very strongly that
this course of action, begun in the midst of so many
difficuhies, continue to be followed, as we overcome
the remaining obstacles and consolidate a stable peace
in Central America. Our participation
in the debate
was guided by this goal of peace and solidarity with all
the sister nations of Latin America.

73. Guatemala expresses its desire to take part in a
meeting of Central American Foreign Ministers,
so
that it may be Central Americans who seek a solution
to their problems and make an effort to obtain one,
Guatemala offers its territory as the venue for such a
meeting and once again expresses its faith in Central
America, its desire to respect and not to intervene in
the internal affairs of other countries or to promote
associations for that purpose. But we also demand the
same treatment in return, and we call upon Central
Americans to show the world that our faith in Central
America is so strong that it can overcome all obstacles
and can spread throughout the world.

68. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative
of Guatemala.
I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
69.

Mr.

QUINONES-AMEZQUITA
(Guatemala)
Spanish):
Sir, since this is the first
time that Guatemala
has participated in this discussion, we wish to congratulate
you warmly on your
assumption
of the presidency, of the Council for
March. We are sure that your well-known ability as a
diplomat will serve as a catalyst to promote the
(interpretationfiom

74. The PRESIDENT:
I should now like to make
some brief remarks as President. Thereafter I shall
8

deEiver a natiOnal statement on the item on the
Council’s agenda in my capacity as representative of
the United Kingdom.

79. MY delegation has listened carefully to the entire
debate and now wishes to consider whether anything
constructive can be extracted from it.

75.

80. Our agenda item refers to the letter of 22 March
1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations
of Nicaragua. That provides an appropriate startingPoint. In the letter, the Nicaraguan Deputy Mihster
raises a “grave increase in acts of aggression against
Nicaragua and the Sandinist People’s Revolution”.

Speaking

as President

of the Council, I must
of considerable
discomfort during the debate on this agenda item. It
would have been embarrassing for me to have ruled
speakers out of order, but equally I was embarrassed
not to rule them out of order. As President I have been
put in a difficult position by the way in which some
speakers have taken advantage of the laxness which
has crept into our procedures. Some have spoken on
matters well outside the agenda item under discussion.
Some have also used unhelpfully
strong language
which
went beyond the bounds of civility. All this is
bad for the Council’s standing whereas the SecretaryGeneral in his report on the work of the Organization’
has stressed the urgency of enhancing its standing,
This prospect is one which should give Council
members pause and should set limits to their own
conduct in the Council as well as the standards they
would expect of others.

confess that 1 have had moments

81. I assume that, by definition, the Council is not
being asked to consider the internal affairs of Nicaragua. The “Sandinist People’s Revolution”
is an
internal matter for the people of Nicaragua. The
essence of the complaint, therefore, is aggression
against Nicaragua. It is not stated in the letter where
the aggression comes from or who the aggressor is.
Nor is it explained in what sense there has been an
increase in acts of aggression or how such an increase
is grave. The charge, it other words, is widely phrased.
On this basis, the Council is asked “as a matter of
urgency” to analyse the situation because, so the
letter claims, the situation endangers international
peace.

76. As President of the Council, it is my duty to draw
attention
to this serious situation and to appeal to
delegations,
both members of the Council and delegations of non-members
speaking by invitation of the
Council under the provisional rules of procedure, to
exercise due restraint in their interventions. Our work
will achieve success only if we apply ourselves
constructively
to the problems which come before us.
I need not dwell on the awesome duties assumed by
States members of the Council, when the Charter
confers on the Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, nor
need 1 dwell on the counterpart of that, in Article 24,
that the remainder of the membership of the United
Nations agree that in carrying out its duties under that
responsibility
the Council acts on their behalf. Our
efforts to fulfil the Council’s mandate should not be
prejudiced by an excess of vituperation or irrelevance.

82. Drawing now on the statements made during the
debate, let us respond to this invitation. Let us analyse
the situation as it has been described to US by the
States most directly concerned.
83. First, despite the terms of the letter of 22 March,
Nicaragua has not clalmed to be under attack from
another State. To be sure, the statement on 23 March
by the Deputy Minister [2420t/z meeting1 spoke about
“counter-revolutionary
activity”, but he made it clear
that the real reason why Nicaragua has come to the
Council is apprehension of an attack from Honduras.
84, On the other hand, the representative Of Honduras has given a clear assurance, on specific instructions, that “no movement of my COUntrY’S . . . troops Will
be across the border”. 1 have conrlrmea me accuracy
of that text from the provisional verbatim record for
the afternoon of 24 March [see 242212ndmeeting,

77. That concludes my remarks as President of the
Council, I should now like to make a brief statement in
my national capacity,

para. 1661.

85. On the face of it, we have here an assurance
which deals directly with the specific complaint which
Nicaragua has asked the Council to consider as a
matter of urgency. My delegation sees no reason why
that assurance should not be accepted by the Councd.

78.

Some of the speeches in this debate have
contained what seemed to the United Kingdom delegation to be extreme and even wild accusations. They
did not sound as if they were intended to promote
international
understanding or formed part of a serious
attempt
to solve problems. My delegation is not
impressed by emotional and aggressive rhetoric. We
dislike this way of proceeding. It is not for me to say
whether
other organs of the United Nations might
serve the function of an escape valve for Pent-up
emotions, but the Security Council is a deliberative, a
consultative,
and ultimately
even a decision-making
body. It is important always to bear in mind the
particular
nature of the responsibilities laid upon the
Council by the Charter.

86. The debate has, however, made clear that the
apprehension of an imminent attack bY Honduras IS far

from being the only apprehension felt by the States of
the region,
87. While Nicaragua has come to the Council to
about alleged United States attempts to
destabiljze that country, Honduras has referred to the
“extra-continental”
presence in Nicaragua and has
complain

9

expressed fears that the buildup of forces in Nicaragua
is directed against Honduras. The United States,
Salvadorian and Honduran representatives have mentioned alleged attempts by Nicaragua to destabilize El
Salvador. This is not an exhaustive list, but it is
enough to show that the underlying
problem is
complex. It seems clear enough that the real problems
of the region have many facets. These are the
problems
that we, as a Council,
must consider
pursuant to our Charter responsibilities,
They appear
to relate to Central America in general, even though
certain countries of that region seem at the moment to
be suffering more severely than others.

“Honduras reaffirms its unshakeable decision to
begin as soon as possible a multilateral
dialogue,
first and foremost with the Central American countries and open to other democratically
governed
Latin American countries in the Caribbean. We
believe that this is the right way to reach responsible and serious agreements that will strengthen
peace and security in the region.” [See 2424th
meeting,

89. The representative of Colombia read out part of
the Contadora declaration, and I now quote from that:

9.5. However, as I have already noted it has been
alleged that the problem has wider dimensions. These
additional potential dimensions cannot be ignored in a
case where regional initiatives have hitherto proved
insufficient. Something more may have to be added.
My delegation ventures to suggest that something
more should, indeed, be added. That something, we
consider, could well be the good offices of the
Secretary-General.
Under Article 36 of the Charter,
the Security Council may, at any stage of a situation
the continuation
of which is likely to endanger the
maintenance
of international
peace and security,
recommend appropriate procedures or methods of
adjustment.

“[The Ministers] made an urgent appeal to all the
countries of the Central American area to engage in
dialogue and negotiation so as to reduce tensions
and lay the foundations for a permanent atmosphere
of peaceful co-existence and mutual respect among
States,” [See 2422nd meeting, par-a. 41.1
90. The representative of Panama also stressed the
importance of restoring peace in Central America and
mentioned the appeal to all the countries of the Central
American area [2&f .\ 1 sneering].
91, The representatib I: of Mexico spoke of the crisis
in Central America.
He urged that the Security
Council “cannot, without jeopardizing its prestige and
authority, disregard the dangers which quite obviously
are threatening
international
peace and security in
Central America”
[ibid., para. 231.
of Nicaragua

made

96. My delegation believes that there is widespread
agreement that the appropriate method for resolving
the problems of the region would be a dialogue among
the States of the region, perhaps in the form of
a conference to consider the problems of Central
America, which would include bilateral as well as
multilateral problems and in which other Latin American States might be asked to participate, as necessary
and appropriate.

an

“We appeal to the members of the Council and to
the international
community to exert their efforts to
develop in a co-ordinated
manner a policy conducive to peaceful. negotiated solutions in the
Central American region.

97. Given this measure of agreement, it seems that a
fruitful role for the Security Council to play would be
to assist in bringing such a dialogue into being, and
that the good offices of the Secretary-General could be
an effective means towards that end. If a conference
were to emerge as the most promising route, a number
of questions would need to be resolved, including its
terms of reference, its date and place, its composition,
the status of the participants, and so forth, Points of
this sort cannot be laid down by the Council * in
advance; it would be far better for the SecretaryGeneral to have the freedom, in the exercise of his
good offices, to discuss all of these questions with the
States concerned. We are confident that if this
approach were acceptable to all, then the SecretaryGeneral himself would be willing to play his part.

*‘For its part, Nicaragua reiterates its willingness
to enter into a dialogue on Central American
problems, its readiness to tackle immediately
the
problems and differences that have arisen as a result
of military
actions in the northern border area
with Honduras and its open, constructive attitude
with regard to any type of peaceful solution to
the crisis in the Central American region.” [Sre
2420th

meatirzg,

paras.

12.1

94. In short, it seems to my delegation that among
the States most directly affected there is in principle
widespread agreement to an attempt to reach understanding in the Central American region, among the
Central American States themselves and with the
benevolent assistance of some other Latin American
States. If the problem concerned only Central America, that might have been enough.

88. At any rate, my delegation is impressed by the
way the countries of the region have described the
situation. In their statements they refer constantly to
“Central America”.

92. The Deputy Minister
eloquent appeal. He said:

para.

42 and 43.1

93. The Foreign Minister
of Honduras has also
p]caded for negotiation and co-operation on a regional
basis; these pleas carried conviction to my delegation.
For example, he said:

98. Having said that, and having. analysed the situation for the Council, I should like to make it plain that
10

the United Kingdom
conference,

would not seek a role in any such

.
99. I now resume my function as President of the
Council. I call on the representative of Nicaragua.
100. Mr. TINOCO (Nicaragua) (interpretation
Jrom
Spanish): First of all, Nicaragua wishes to thank the
members of the Security Council and the Members of
the United Nations who have participated
in this
debate for the concern that they have expressed over
the situation in the region and over the acts of
aggression of which our country has been victim.
101 I The Council has now held eight meetings to
become aware of and grasp the seriousness of the
events reported on by Nicaragua--the
development,
that is, of a new stage of aggression by the American
Administration
against Nicaragua by means of the
massive infiltration of Somozist bands from Honduran
territory.
We have also drawn the attention of the
Council to the fact that these counter-revolutionary
forces do not in themselves constitute a military threat
lo the stability of the Nicaraguan revolution,
but that
the real and potential danger was and is the fact that
those counter-revolutionary
activities may be only a
diversionary
or secondary aspect of a more general
plan engineered by the American Administration
to
seek the involvement
of other forces in the area in a
COUP aimed at the more economically,
politically and
militarily
sensitive areas of the country, the ultimate
purpose of which would be the overthrow of the
Nicaraguan
Government.
102. Today, we would repeat that this danger continues in latent form.
103. In the face of this escalation of aggression, the
Government
of Nicaragua wishes to repeat today what
we said last Wednesday-that
as regards the internal
life of Nicaragua, in spite of aggression, we plan to
continue and redouble the efforts of the Nicaraguan
people in productive labour in order to surpass what
are already production records in Nicaragua. We plan
to continue political pluralism and public freedoms at
their normal levels in Nicaragua in spite of the efforts
of the Somozist bands and the war being pursued by
the American Administration.
We plan to continue to
fight for the economic development of our country and
for a more just distribution of our national income.
104. In view of the serious situation besetting the
region and the possibility of its aggravation, we once
again stress our devotion to peace and our readiness
far dialogue. We would repeat the proposals already
put forward in the Cauncil to the Government
of
Honduras for a high-level dialogue between our two
countries in the presence of high-level witnesses.
A proposal has been made to the Government
of the
United States immediately to begin talks at the highest
possible level in a place and at a time considered
appropriate.
And we would once again remind the

Council of Nicaragua’s willingness to explore any
other initiative or formulation that is just and seeks
negotiations and peace for the region.
105. From the information that has been given during
these meetings of the Council, from the various
attacks by Honduran military units in Nicaraguan
territory that have taken place over the past week
and from the information
reported in the international mass media, it can be concluded that the
danger of internationalizalion
of the conflict along
the Honduran-Nicaraguan
border continues. For that
reason it is necessary that the Council remain alert to
the development of events,
106. As all who have participated in these meetings
know, the decision of the American Administration
to
continue with its plans and aggressive actions remains
unchanged, Those plans are aimed at the overthrow
of the Revolutionary
Government of Nicaragua. It
is clear to all present that the American Administration at all levels-from
President Reagan through
Secretary of State Shultz to Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
the
representative of the United States on the Security
Council-has
declined to reject the specific accusations levelled by the delegation of Nicaragua: namely,
first, that it is advising and directing the strategy and
details of the activities of the Somozist revolutionary
bands that have infiltrated into Nicaraguan territory;
secondly, that they have officially approved funds in
the amount of at least $19.9 million for the American
Administration
to finance and develop the activities of those counter-revolutionary
bands, whose
purpose it is to overthrow the Revolutionary
Government of Nicaragua; and thirdly, that there exist
in the United States training camps for counterrevolutionary
Somozists who wish to overthrow the
Revolutionary
Government of Nicaragua.
107. Today’s issue of The New York Times contains an article entitled “U.S. not denying Sandinist
charges “* and subtitled “Refuses to dispel impression
that it is helping forces fighting in Nicaragua”.*
It
quotes a State Department spokesman, Alan Romberg, as saying that there is “a bit of psychological
warfare’ ’ in the silence of the United States when
these accusations are levelled at it.
108. But this is not psychological warfare; it is a real
war promoted by the United States against Nicaragua.
The automatic weapons, the C-4 explosives and the
grenade launchers made in the United States, on
which Stephen Kinzer reported in yesterday’s issue
of The New York Times, are all real-and
Mr. Kinzer
was reporting on a visit he had made to a counlerrevolutionary
camp in Honduran territory. The widowed Nicaraguan%
the children wounded and the
peasants decapitated as a result of aggression promoted by the United States are not the victims of
psychological warfare.
* Quoted in English by the speaker.

which we have kept, and we repeat our readiness to
continue it, because as the President has said, it is the
key charge in the conflict and is being levelled within
the framework of a political strategy to consolidate the
radicalization of the repressive Nicaraguan system.

109. What could be considered psychological and
extremely dangerous is that, by its assurance, silence
and the scorn with which it has responded to the
international community’s
accusations that it is destabilizing Nicaragua, the United States has got the
international community to feel that perhaps such an
attitude towards obvious facts is natural and normal.
This is dangerous because the further escalation of
such activities could also be claimed to be normal in
keeping with the silence and policy of speedy and
aggressive action of the present Administration.

116. I shall try to count to ten in order not to
continue these disputes and squabbles.
117. There are fundamental causes that have been
reported in the newspapers for months now. It is
probable that the Nicaraguan Government is consolidating itself, or it is probable that its own people
are repudiating it, but the Govermnent of Honduras,
as a responsible force, will never cross the border in an
invasion.

110. It is extremely dangerous to allow scorn for
international public opinion to become a norm of the
daily conduct of a country, especially a Power such as
the United States, The Security Council must ensure
that this political conduct in international relations is
not accepted, for it is very similar to the scorn shown
by a criminal for the society that accuses him of a
crime. We call on the Council to be alert to these
events.
111, The PRESIDENT:
of Honduras.

118. I have special instructions from my Government
not to use the reporters of The New York Times as
witnesses, who for one reason or another must have
wished to frustrate Mr. Reagan’s re-election-that
is
the exclusive affair of the Americans. We repeat, the
conflict, the argument, the shots that are being fired
are being made by Nicaraguans within Nicaragua to
overthrow the Nicaraguan regime.

I call on the representative

112. Mr, ORTEZ COLINDRES
(Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): I had thought that at the
conclusion of the Council’s deliberations the volume
of accusations would go down and there would be a
willingness to bring about peace, and the Organization
would have been able to tell the world the result of its
deliberations. Now, however, in spite of the regrets
and our wishes, the words we have just heard have
sent us back to where we started.

119. Another important point I should like to make
as part of my concluding statement is that Nicaragua
has a sui generis interpretation of the Charter of the
United Nations and of the solemn principle of nonintervention. You have repeatedly heard Governments
such as that of El Salvador and my own say that
Nicaragua’s official media are trying not only to
consolidate the Nicaraguan regime-which
they are
entitled to do, and to live in peace-but
are also
continuing to blame my country. Honduras is an
equilateral triangle in the area. We have common
borders with three countries involved in revolution:
one for 2.5 or 29 years, another for three or four years,
and then Nicaragua, where the struggle has been going
on since the fall of General Somoza. We are the
fulcrum of a regional system whose back is being
broken by external assistance from countries that have
traditionally been our friends but that today cannot
understand that this is not an isolated problem and that
the assistance they are giving to Nicaragua at the
present time should be given in the form of grain,
foodstuffs and medicine-assistance
in which we
would be willing to participate-not
in the form of
rockets, rockets which are air-to-surface missiles,
which are offensive weapons that disrupt regional
stability.

113. We are not going to engage in mutual accusaHowever, only to
make the job of the Council easier, I should like to
refer to a few specific points that you, Mr. President,
so aptly made. You spoke as representative of your
country, with the respect and deep awareness of the
experienced diplomat, in order to preserve the greatest
equilibrium when serving as Council President. Your
statement, Sir, gave us a most valuable summation of
the views of some Latin American countries that wish
to help us define the parameters of the danger and of a
dialogue. You also synthesized the position of those
countries of good faith from every continent that do
want to halt the daily increase in conflagrations
throughout the world.
tions or in a fruitless counter-attack.

114. I would urge the Council take the President’s
observations to heart, for he has summed up perfectly
my country’s approach to the subject. Indeed, I might
have made the same comments, except for my wish
not to compromise
the sound judgement
that he
demonstrated in his statement.

120. Consequently, we feel that Nicaragua is fully
entitled to invoke the principle of non-intervention,
and we wish to respect that. But we do not want
troops, trucks, aircraft and ships violating our land,
sea and air space in order to overthrow regimes that
are entitled to resolve their problems in an independent manner.

115. However, we greatly regret that the Deputy
Minister of Nicaragua has once ‘again charged that
military forces from Honduras have attacked the
Government of Nicaragua. We have made a promise

121. Finally, to make our posit.ion clear, Honduras
once again wishes to state that it accepts dialogue with
12

Nicaragua,
without any restrictions whatsoever, so
that we can discuss bilateral and regional problems.
There must be a serious agenda. There must be proper
preparations for the meeting, and we would like that
meeting to include not only the two countries, for after
engaging in mutual recriminations for eight meetings,
when we get back home the two of us are liable to be
throwing crockery at each other, which would be
disastrous for the stability of the region. That is why
there must be present those five brothers who have
stated today that the problems are all interrelated.

124. We have seen no formal, written accusation
from the Government of Nicaragua that substantiates
its journalistic statements. We have heard a suggestion that we very much welcome as deserving of
respect. I refer to what you, Mr. President, said about
the possible participation of the Secretary-General in a
future dialogue based on the particular Article of the
Charter that would allow him, provided that he is so
authorized by the Council, to take such an initiative.
Indeed, when we had a preliminary
dialogue in the
Secretariat offices, we were very pleased and felt that
such an initiative could make a fundamental contribution to peace.

122. 1 did not want to quote The New York Times,
but whether one likes it or not it is a newspaper that
must be read. Today, there were two articles, among
others: one about a Middle East country whose
ministers have gone to Nicaragua offering MiG aircraft-which
could further radicalize the conflict-and
the other containing reports from Costa Rica and
Managua in which official spokesmen of the Government of Nicaragua today announce that there has been
fighting along the southern border with Costa Rica, for
there, too, there has been fierce fighting and, we could
say, loss of life. I hope that that report, about which
not much was made and which must be added to the
many others press reports that have been mentioned,
is unfounded, for it would be regrettable indeed were
the conflict to spread to the fraternal Republic of Costa
Rica.

125. I have precise instructions from my Government to say that with regard to international
supervision, proper agreements and the limitation of weapons, we see the United Nations imprimatur
as a
universal guarantee.
126. The PRESIDENT:
There are no other speakers;
the Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

123, I repeat that we do not want to specify with
which distinguished witnesses the five Central American countries should meet, in order to avoid placing
any restrictions on the dialogue. We will accept any
democratic
country that the five Central American
countries choose by consensus to be seated at the
negotiating table. That would be all.

NOTES
I See XXW227.
z General Assembly
’ Ofjicial
Records
Session, Slrppplemettr

13

resolution
2625 (XXV),
annex.
of the Gmerul
Assembly.
Thrify-seventh
No. I (A/37/1).

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UMTED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

SE PROCUREF?

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
pnies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aup&
de! ventes.
New York 0~ Gen$vC

COMO

CONSEGIJIR

in United

Nations.

New

York

DES NATIONS

sent en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLKACIONES

Las publicaciooes
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulfe
Nueva’
York o Ginqbra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales’S&ction.
Hew York or Geneva.

Dk

LAS NAClqNES

Unidas
esten en ven!a en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00300

UNIES

et Ies agences
B : Nations

dCpositaires
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS
y casas dis!ribuidoras
en
Unjdas.
Secci6n
de Ventas,

60205~July

IYYO-2,050
