A/64/PV.106

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

106th plenary meeting
Friday, 9 July 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Mohamed
(Maldives), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Agenda item 53 (continued)
Sustainable development
(b) Follow-up to and implementation of the
Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States
Report of the Preparatory Committee for the
high-level review to assess progress made in
addressing the vulnerabilities of small island
developing States through the implementation
of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States (A/CONF.218/PC/1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft decision recommended by the Preparatory
Committee for the high-level review to assess progress
made in addressing the vulnerabilities of small island
developing States through the implementation of the
Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of
the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States in
paragraph 18 of its report (A/CONF.218/PC/1).

The Assembly will now take action on the draft
decision contained in paragraph 18 of the Preparatory
Committee, which is entitled “Organization of the
high-level review to assess progress made in
addressing the vulnerabilities of small island
developing States through the implementation of the
Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of
the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States”.
The
Preparatory
Committee
decided
to
recommend to the General Assembly the adoption of
the draft decision. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt the draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 53.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/64/L.58)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held the debate on agenda item
114 jointly with agenda items 48, 120 and 121 at its
47th plenary meeting on 16 November 2009. Members
will also recall that under this item, jointly with agenda
items 48 and 53 (b) and (f), the Assembly adopted
decision 64/555 at its 82nd plenary meeting on
15 April 2010 and resolutions 64/184, 64/265 and
64/289 at its 66th, 86th and 104th plenary meetings on

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-44285 (E)

*1044285*

A/64/PV.106

21 December 2009 and 13 May and 2 July 2010,
respectively.
I now give the floor to the representative of Qatar
to introduce draft resolution A/64/L.58.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of its sponsors, I have the honour to introduce
the draft resolution contained in document A/64/L.58,
entitled “The right to education in emergency
situations”. Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil,
Canada, Colombia, Croatia, the Dominican Republic,
Estonia, Finland, Germany, Israel, Italy, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, New
Zealand, Poland, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and Uruguay have become
co-sponsors of the draft resolution.
The right to education is one of the basic human
rights agreed internationally and enshrined in
international law. However, the enjoyment of this right
is facing growing threats around the world, particularly
in emergency situations resulting from armed conflicts
and natural disasters. This situation calls for special
attention to the realization of that right in those cases.
It is time for the General Assembly to address this
important issue by adopting a resolution on the matter,
especially given the fact that enabling children
everywhere to complete a full course of primary
schooling is one of the pillars of the implementation of
the United Nations Millennium Declaration (resolution
55/2).
The draft resolution before the Assembly today,
the first of its kind, reflects the heightened
international attention focused on the need to ensure
the protection of this fundamental right, especially in
cases where it is under serious threat. The draft
resolution is comprehensive and holistic and addresses
the various dimensions of the issue, including its legal,
political and humanitarian aspects. It also addresses
funding. The draft resolution also addresses all stages
of humanitarian response, that is, emergency
preparedness, emergency situations and the postconflict or post-disaster stage.
The main co-sponsors of the draft resolution —
Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Costa Rica,
Nicaragua, Norway and Qatar — moved to convene an
interactive thematic dialogue of the General Assembly
on this matter. The meeting was held at the sixty-third
session of the General Assembly on 18 March 2009

2

and contributed to highlighting the threats to the right
to education, especially in times of crises and
emergencies. The meeting emphasized the need for the
General Assembly to adopt a resolution on the right to
education in emergency situations.
The consensus on the draft resolution before us is
the culmination of cross-regional efforts. Its elements
were established in extensive consultations with all
stakeholders, including such United Nations agencies
as UNESCO and UNICEF, and relevant civil society
organizations, such as Save the Children.
In its preamble, the draft resolution reaffirms that
everyone shall enjoy the human right to education and
recalls the relevant international documents, while
underscoring the fact that the Convention on the Rights
of the Child must constitute the standard in the
promotion and protection of the rights of the child and
the realization of the right to education.
The
text
condemns
the
targeting
of
schoolchildren, students and teachers, as well as
attacks
on
educational
institutions,
while
acknowledging that protecting schools and providing
education in emergencies should remain a key priority
for the international community.
The draft resolution expresses deep concern over
the inadequate level of funding for international
education goals and calls on donors to continue to
support humanitarian funding channels and to
contribute to education programmes.
In the operative part of the draft resolution, the
Assembly welcomes the work of the Special
Rapporteur on the right to education and the
Committee on the Rights of the Child, notes with
appreciation the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and recognizes the establishment of the
education cluster of the United Nations Inter-Agency
Standing Committee and other initiatives to address
educational needs in emergency situations, including
through partnerships for the implementation of the
“Minimum standards for education: preparedness,
response and recovery” handbook of the Inter-Agency
Network for Education in Emergencies.
It urges Member States to implement strategies
and policies to ensure and support the realization of the
right to education as an integral element of
humanitarian assistance and humanitarian response. It

10-44285

A/64/PV.106

recommends that Member States ensure access to
education in emergencies and urges respect for
civilians, including students and educational personnel
and for civilian objects such as educational institutions.
It urges Member States to criminalize attacks on
educational buildings in order to prevent and combat
impunity, while stressing that such attacks may
constitute grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions
and war crimes under the Rome Statute.
In the part on reconstruction and post-emergency
situations, the draft resolution urges States to provide
quality education in emergency situations. In the part
on follow-up, it requests the Special Rapporteur on the
right to education to include in his next interim report
to the General Assembly an update on his report on the
right to education in emergencies, in order to identify
gaps and remaining challenges in ensuring the right to
education in emergency situations.
Allow me, in conclusion, to express my thanks
and gratitude to all the delegations that participated in
the consultations on the draft resolution for their
constructive cooperation, which has resulted in the
consensus on the text. We hope that the draft resolution
will be adopted today by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/64/L.58, entitled
“The right to education in emergency situations.” May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/64/L.58?
Draft resolution A/64/L.58
(resolution 64/290).

was

adopted

The Acting President: I call on those
representatives who wish to make statements on the
resolution just adopted.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium): On behalf of the
European Union (EU), I would like to thank the
Governments of Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Costa
Rica, Nicaragua, Norway and Qatar for forging a crossregional partnership to come to a resolution related to
last year’s General Assembly thematic dialogue on
education in emergencies. The EU is very pleased with
the interest many delegations have shown, which has
resulted in constructive consultations leading up to
resolution 64/290, adopted today.
The candidate country, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential

10-44285

candidates Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and
Serbia and the European Free Trade Association
country Liechtenstein, members of the European
economic area; as well as the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia and Georgia align themselves with this
statement.
The message of the resolution is clear. Education
in emergencies deserves full attention at the same level
as other equally important, life-saving needs that
humanitarian assistance aims to address during an
emergency, such as food, shelter, protection, water,
sanitation and so on.
From the outset, the EU has engaged with
partners to work on the resolution, stressing the
universal character of the right to education in
accordance with fundamental instruments such as the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights. The European Union would like to
take this opportunity to state for the record that this
resolution in no way alters the current norms and
obligations of international law, in particular human
rights and international humanitarian law, but merely
attempts to clarify how those standards relate to the
issue of education.
We commend the establishment of the education
cluster of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee to
address, in a coordinated manner, educational needs in
emergency situations, including through partnerships
for the implementation of the “Minimum standards for
education: preparedness, response and recovery”
handbook of the Inter-Agency Network for Education
in Emergencies. Furthermore, we sincerely believe in
financing according to assessed needs as a primary way
to respond to the humanitarian needs of affected
populations.
The European Union commends the work of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the United Nations agencies that provide
humanitarian assistance, as well as the work of the
special rapporteurs who monitor the specific issue of
the right to education. The European Union also
welcomes in particular the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict on violations and abuses
committed against children in armed conflict, and

3

A/64/PV.106

continues to encourage the fulfilment of her precious
task.
The European Union appreciates this resolution
as an excellent one-off opportunity to consolidate all
relevant issues concerning the right to education in
emergency situations, while entrusting further followup to the appropriate United Nations bodies.
Mr. González (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking the President for
convening this plenary meeting of the General
Assembly. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Qatar for introducing resolution
64/290, entitled “The right to education in emergency
situations”.
In most cases, humanitarian emergencies
interrupt, deteriorate or partially or totally destroy
access to the right to education. Furthermore, attention
to this issue by the humanitarian actors that provide
assistance is very limited or non-existent since most
humanitarian assistance is limited to the traditional
issues of food, medicine and shelter. This makes it
even more difficult to re-establish educational services,
sometimes for excessively protracted periods of time.
At the same time, the number of children in the
world who do not have access to education because of
complex humanitarian situations or natural disasters is
alarming. This is undoubtedly not only an individual
but also a collective burden in terms of the recovery
and reconstruction of the affected areas. Education
plays an important role in mitigating and reducing the
risk of and vulnerability to natural disasters and in
preventing abuses and violations. It is also an effective
social investment for promoting development and
preventing conflicts.

4

Costa Rica is proud to have been part of the
process culminating in the adoption of today’s
resolution, which highlights the importance of ensuring
the right to education in emergency situations as an
integral element of humanitarian assistance. The
resolution brings together, in a balanced way, an
approach based on human rights with an assessment of
needs on the ground so as to ensure a humanitarian
response that ensures the continuity and sustainability
of funding from the initial response to the emergency
to reconstruction.
The resolution is also a reminder that, while we
acknowledge education as an imperative of human
rights, even in emergency situations, neither the
primary obligation of States nor the secondary
responsibility of the international community with
regard to a minimum level of access to and quality of
education for all affected populations, without
discrimination of any kind, should be suspended.
We hope that this resolution and the upcoming
report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to
education may help to identify the main challenges and
to propose solutions to address this issue more
effectively.
As one of the main sponsors of the resolution,
Costa Rica joins in the thanks extended to all
delegations that have worked actively and
constructively throughout this process.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 114.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

10-44285
