S/PV.9144

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9144th meeting

Friday, 30 September 2022, 4.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almedia Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Gallagher
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-60744 (E)
*2260744*

S/PV.9144

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Navid Hanif, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Economic Development in the Department
of Economic and Social Affairs; Mr. Sergey
Kupriyanov, official spokesperson for Gazprom; and
Mr. Marc-Antoine Eyl-Mazzega, Director of the Centre
for Energy and Climate of the French Institute of
International Relations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Hanif.
Mr. Hanif: I have been requested to brief the
Security Council on the issue of recent leaks in the
Nord Stream pipelines. I should emphasize that all of
the information and data cited in this briefing are from
publicly available sources. The United Nations is not
in a position to verify or confirm any of the reported
details related to the incident.
Between 26 and 29 September, four leaks were
detected in the Nord Stream submarine pipelines in the
Baltic Sea. The first was reported in the Nord Stream
1 pipeline on the morning of 26 September in Europe
when seismologists detected a spike in activity. The
second and third were reported in the Nord Stream
1 pipeline on the evening of 26 September. A fourth
leak was reported in the Nord Stream 2 pipeline on
the morning of 29 September. Neither pipeline was in
operation, as supplies to Nord Stream 1 were halted
this month and Nord Stream 2 has never come into
operation. However, both pipelines contain natural
gas and were reported to have held several hundreds
of millions of cubic metres of natural gas at the time
of the incident. At this stage, a site inspection has not
yet been done and details on what exactly happened
remain unknown. While the causes of the incident are
being investigated, it is equally urgent to address the
consequences of those leaks. I would like to point out
three possible potential effects.
2/13

30/09/2022

First, the damage to the Nord Stream pipelines raises
concerns regarding the uncertainty in the global energy
markets. According to the report Global impact of war
in Ukraine: Energy crisis — Brief No.3, published by
the United Nations Global Crisis Response Group in
August, the high price volatility witnessed since the
pandemic, particularly in 2022, suggests that prices
remain at high levels and could rise again, causing
socioeconomic stress across the world. The incident
could exacerbate the high price volatility on the energy
markets in Europe and around the world.
Secondly, the potential environmental impact of
the leaks is a matter of deep concern. A discharge of
hundreds of millions of cubic metres of gas into the
atmosphere can result in hundreds of thousands of
tons of methane emissions. Over a 20-year time frame
methane has more than 80 times the planet-warming
potency of carbon dioxide, and roughly 30 times its
potency over a 100-year time frame. It is not yet possible
to assess how much methane has actually been released
into the atmosphere, given the many uncertainties.
Thirdly, the incident also makes the vulnerability
of critical energy infrastructure manifestly clear. It
underscores the importance of accelerating the energy
transition in order to create a clean, resilient and
sustainable energy system while ensuring universal
access to affordable, reliable and sustainable energy for
all. As the Secretary-General emphasized at the launch
of the Global Crisis Response Group’s third brief, every
country is part of this energy crisis.
Any attack on critical civilian infrastructure,
including energy infrastructure, is unacceptable. This
incident must not be allowed to further increase tensions
or deepen divisions in an already tense regional context.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Hanif
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kupriyanov.
Mr. Kupriyanov (spoke in Russian): On
26 September, in the space of one day, breaks occurred
in three branches of the Nord Stream pipeline system
in the Baltic Sea, specifically in both branches of
Nord Stream 1 and one of the two branches of Nord
Stream 2. The Nord Stream pipelines are offshore
gas pipelines, each approximately 1,200 kilometres
long, built to deliver a reliable supply of Russian gas
directly to Europe. The pipelines have a total projected
annual capacity of 110 billion cubic metres of gas per
22-60744

30/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

year, which is a quarter of the gas consumption in the
European Union and the power supply for 52 million
European households. Nord Stream 1 has provided
nearly half a trillion cubic metres of gas to European
consumers since 2011.
I will now provide more details about what
happened on 26 September. At about 6 a.m. Central
European Time, the gas pipeline onshore dispatcher
recorded a pressure drop in Line A of the Nord Stream
2 pipeline. Earlier, at about 2 a.m. Central European
Time, the pressure drop started to be recorded by the
Gascade system. The pressure dropped rapidly from
103 bar to 7 bar in the German section.

S/PV.9144

of the technical solutions used. In constructing the
pipelines, several centimetres of ultra-strong steel pipes
in a special reinforced-concrete casing were used. At
the time of the incident, gas was not being transported
through the pipelines for various reasons, but they were
in a fully operational state.
We have now started to search for possible solutions
to make the Nord Stream system operational once
again. At the moment, it is not possible to estimate the
time frame for the work to restore the system. We can
say with certainty that it will be a very complex task
technically. The first step is to physically inspect the
rupture sites.

The site of the rupture is in the Danish economic
zone, 25 kilometres south-east of the island of
Bornholm. The distance along the pipeline is 153
kilometres to the German coast and 1,081 kilometres to
the Russian coast.

In general, a situation with simultaneous ruptures
in three lines of offshore pipelines on the same day
is truly unprecedented. Europe has essentially been
indefinitely deprived of a key route for the delivery of a
crucial energy resource.

Later that day, two more ruptures occurred, this
time on the Nord Stream 1 pipeline. At 7.12 p.m.
Central European Time, Nord Stream 1’s control centre
dispatchers recorded a simultaneous pressure drop in
both lines of the gas pipeline. While the pressure before
the incident had been 165 bar, it subsequently dropped
to 8 bar.

Russia and Gazprom invested a great deal of effort
and money to construct and launch those pipelines
because that is the shortest and the safest — as we
thought — route for Russian gas to reach European
consumers. The pipelines are currently ruptured.

The site of one of the ruptures in Nord Stream 1 is
in the Danish exclusive economic zone, 54 kilometres
north-east of the island of Bornholm. From there, the
distance along the pipeline is 218 kilometres to the
German coast and 1,005 kilometres to the Russian
coast. The site of the other rupture is in the Swedish
exclusive economic zone, 59 kilometres north-east
of Bornholm, 224 kilometres from the German coast
and 999 kilometres from the Russian coast along
the pipeline. The two ruptures are therefore several
kilometres apart.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Kupriyanov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Eyl-Mazzega.
Mr. Eyl-Mazzega (spoke in French): I am a
researcher at the French Institute for Foreign Relations.
For several years, I have been working on RussianUkrainian gas issues.
(spoke in English)

The data on the sudden drop in pressure and
gas leaks allow us to say with confidence that the
depressurization of the pipelines was caused by
physical damage.

I cannot but concur with Mr. Kupriyanov’s
assessment that the Nord Stream 1 and Nord Stream 2
corridors were designed and laid on the bottom of the sea
through extraordinary state-of-the-art technology with
a view to reducing the risk of any significant damage
eventuating from storms, non-exploded Second World
War bombs, vessel anchors, fishing trawls or sinking
ships. They are great pipelines. To my best knowledge,
an accident can therefore be ruled out. However. I
am not in a position to say what exactly happened.
Instead, in my remarks, I will try to contextualize those
unprecedented events, as Mr. Kupriyanov put it.

Nord Stream 1 and Nord Stream 2 are modern,
high-tech and ultra-reliable offshore gas pipelines.
Years of safe operation have proved the flawlessness

In a nutshell, the explosions are another episode
in the long-lasting geopolitical confrontation between
the United States and Russia, on the one hand, and

It is estimated that about 800 million cubic metres
of gas were in the three lines of the pipeline at the time
of the ruptures. By comparison, that represents Danish
consumption over three months.

22-607443/13

S/PV.9144

Threats to international peace and security

30/09/2022

Europe and Russia, on the other hand, where energy
and pipeline infrastructure have taken centre stage and
have been weaponized.

such dirty fuels as heavy oil or coal as LNG became
unaffordable, which has caused, of course, huge and
lasting environmental damage.

Allow me to go back a year. In June 2021, when
the first unprecedented intervention by Gazprom
on the European gas market took place. Gazprom
unusually started to reduce its gas exports to European
markets — however, respecting contractual obligations.
That pushed gas prices up and led to a slow increase in
imports of liquefied natural gas to compensate. Nord
Stream was indeed fully operational by then. That
happened last year at the climax of tensions between the
United States and Russia around Nord Stream 2, whose
construction was being finalized but was slowed down
due to United States sanctions. Finally, the pipeline
construction was completed following a meeting in
Geneva between President Biden and President Putin,
and, by the autumn of 2021, the opening of the pipeline
was pending the completion of a certification procedure
to make sure that it complied with European Union
(EU) law.

So where did we stand just before the pipeline
explosions? Gazprom ended contractual relations, much
to my regret, in an incredible, unprecedented move, with
most of its European customers in full tatters, so that
flows through the pipeline had already been stopped
for several weeks. Against this backdrop, the relevance
and value of the Nord Stream corridors to Russia have
obviously declined. Financially, this huge investment
is a de facto sunk-cost investment. Gazprom had, as
I said, stopped transporting gas for Nord Stream, and
whatever the relevance of its explanations, Gazprom
has and had the ability to reroute gas going through
Nord Stream via either Belarus or Ukraine, but this did
not happen.

The last point, which is an important one, is that the
reduction in Gazprom supplies last year happened as
the EU published its accelerated decarbonization plan
for 2020 and as the Russian military build-up started
around Ukraine. Russia’s aggression against Ukraine
in February this year therefore aggravated the tensions
over the gas supply. At the end of February, Germany
indefinitely stopped the certification procedure for
Nord Stream 2. Shortly after that, Gazprom reduced
gas supplies to Europe via Poland and Ukraine, and,
in the following months, using various pretexts and
reasons, it progressively started to entirely cut off most
of its customers, but this time in disregard for long-term
contracts. This summer, in an unprecedented move,
Gazprom further reduced export volumes via Nord
Stream, blaming Western sanctions on equipment.
As we speak, that extraordinary pipeline
infrastructure had actually been shut down for many
days and weeks. Europe and many important countries
around the world have been severely impacted by
Gazprom’s market behaviour. On the one hand, in
Europe we have soaring prices, which cause incredible
burden and pain on consumers, utilities and public
finances, while Gazprom has made huge profits. And
in the rest of the world, many large importers are
deprived of access to LNG cargoes because simply
they cannot afford to pay for them. The consequences
are clear: many countries and companies turn to
4/13

It is a widely shared view among experts that the
Nord Stream 2 pipeline would probably never be put
into operation following Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine. The EU has therefore been working over
the past months to phase out Russian gas as soon as
possible, meaning when contract obligations allow,
and in turn Russia has pledged to rapidly divert its gas
infrastructure to Asia, in particular to China and India.
What then is the new situation we are in now
following the pipeline explosions? I cannot but refer
to the incredible massive methane leak, which an
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report
called dangerous. As a footnote, I would add that it is
regrettable that Russia has not signed on to the Global
Methane Pledge, and satellite pictures of Russia suggest
Gazprom has been ramping up gas-flaring operations
in recent months. Spot gas prices are up again, and
Gazprom can still export a lot more gas via Belarus
and Ukraine, if it really wanted to. I see little impact on
United States energy exports to Europe in the short to
long term. United States supplies to Europe will remain
steady unless the weather interferes. And, overall, there
is a clear upward limit to additional energy supplies
from the United States to Europe in future, which is
why Europe is looking for other options to help replace
some of the Russian gas.
In conclusion, these explosions set an extraordinary
precedent where energy infrastructure is targeted by
obvious sabotage operations of a sophisticated nature.
We had seen this before in Ukraine. This should be, in
my view, not only a concern for Europeans, but actually
22-60744

30/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

for the rest of the world, because anything happening in
Europe has global implications.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Eyl-Mazzega for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the representatives of the United
Nations Secretariat and Gazprom for their briefings.
We also thank Mr. Eyl-Mazzega. I will not comment on
his interesting but at times not always objective briefing
on what is happening on the gas market. We have a
representative of Gazprom in the Chamber with us, and
I think he could brief us himself if he so chooses.
Russia requested today’s meeting in connection
with the acts of sabotage on three lines of the Nord
Stream offshore-gas pipeline system on 27 September
2022 in the exclusive economic zone of Denmark and
Sweden near the Danish island of Bornholm. The Office
of the Prosecutor General of the Russian Federation
has already initiated criminal proceedings under the
article on acts of international terrorism. A preliminary
investigation has been opened.
Right now, let us simply take a look at the facts,
side by side. Fact number one is that a few weeks before
the start of the special military operation, United States
President Joe Biden said,
“If Russia invades, that means tanks or troops
crossing the border of Ukraine again, then there
will be no longer a Nord Stream 2. We will bring
an end to it.”
In response to a journalist’s question about how
this could be possible if Nord Stream 2 is controlled
by Germany and not by the United States, President
Biden replied, “I promise you, we will be able do
that.” This message was then parroted by many United
States officials.
Fact number two is that, in June 2022, the Danish
island of Bornholm, where three months later the Nord
Stream incident was to take place, was the site of
large-scale NATO exercises in the Baltic Sea. As the
United States publication Seapower wrote, one of the
main objectives for the alliance during these exercises
was to test unmanned underwater vehicles for which
the waters off the island were best suited. Following
the conclusion of the exercises, the American landing

S/PV.9144

ship USS Kearsarge did not leave the Baltic Sea and
remained near the Danish island until 20 September.
But the most interesting part is that, ever since the
end of August, the ship’s helicopter unit began to
systematically patrol the area of Bornholm island, and
the flight path of the helicopters curiously coincides
with the route of the gas pipelines.
I want to stress that this is open data on the
geolocation of maritime and air transport, which is
collected on the basis of data from transponders. In other
words, the United States did not hide its presence in the
area and carried out its manoeuvres in a demonstrative
and deliberate manner.
Fact number three is that, immediately after the
incidents, the former Minister of Defence and Foreign
Affairs of Poland Radek Sikorski, posted a photo of the
leaked site on Twitter and openly thanked the United
States for this sabotage. He wrote, “Thank you, USA.”
I am now showing the Council a photo of that tweet.
Under it, the Member of the European Parliament
commented on his own tweet, saying,
“… there’s no shortage of pipeline capacity
for taking gas from Russia to Western Europe,
including Germany. Nord Stream’s only logic was
for Putin to be able to blackmail or wage war on
Eastern Europe with impunity ...”.
Yesterday, apparently realizing that he had said too
much, he deleted his tweet. We also cannot fail to note
that Mr. Sikorski’s wife, Anne Applebaum, is a person
who enjoys access to the circle of power in Washington,
D.C., and a wide variety of information.
Fact number four is that, at almost at the same
time as the sabotage of Nord Stream took place, the
Polish city of Goleniów marked the official opening of
the Baltic gas pipeline from Norway. Poland has long
positioned this pipeline as a salvation from the Nord
Stream, even though, incidentally, the capacity of the
Baltic pipe is far inferior to that of Nord Stream.
Fact number five is the NATO statement made in
connection with the incident warning of the danger
of strikes against NATO infrastructure. It is as
though NATO is afraid that someone will retaliate for
something and take revenge on it. As the saying goes,
an uneasy conscience betrays itself.
As in any investigation, first and foremost, it is
important to establish who benefits from the current

22-607445/13

S/PV.9144

Threats to international peace and security

situation or, as investigators say, who had the motive
and the opportunity to commit the crime. Let us
analyse this further. Does the destruction of the Nord
Stream benefit European States? That can hardly be
the case. They in this case become dependent on a
more expensive and extremely unreliable supplier; I
am referring to the host country of the United Nations
Headquarters. If we set aside the Polish, Czech and
Baltic country politicians who have gone completely
mad with Russophobia, then despite the off-the-charts
anti-Russian hysteria in the EU, experts cannot fail
to recognize the danger of such a scenario and its
consequences for the European economy. There has
been serious environmental damage done to the waters
of the Baltic Sea and its maritime communications
are threatened. Our Danish and Swedish colleagues
have confirmed all of that in their letters to the
Security Council.
The objective significance of Nord Stream 1 and 2
and their contribution to Europe’s energy security has
been repeatedly stressed by top officials of the European
Union and its member States. From the beginning, Nord
Stream had the status of a Project of Common Interest
for the European Commission and enjoyed full political
support. The gas pipeline system made a significant
contribution to the diversification of natural gas supply
routes, just like the Yamal-Europe and TurkStream
pipelines. Their commissioning enabled Europe to
gradually become less dependent on the monopoly of
its gas supply transit by the Kyiv Government, which
has been distinguished by its unscrupulous business
practices — or theft, to put it simply.
Germany’s leaders have said for years that Germany
and Europe’s need for gas will only increase. In 2021, the
Austrian authorities said that Nord Stream contributes
to Europe’s energy security and welcomed the steps to
improve the reliability of the continent’s energy supply.
The disruptive consequences of the energy crisis have
proved those who understood the importance of Nord
Stream in ensuring stable and predictable energy
supplies right. The disruptions in gas supplies caused
by European and American sanctions in 2022 are
already having a negative effect on European industry,
profitability and competitiveness and are driving
the emigration of skilled labour and the transfer of
production capacities out of Europe and into the United
States in particular. Energy poverty is not just back, it
has rocketed to the top of the agenda of the developed
as well as the developing world. A resumption of
6/13

30/09/2022

supplies, especially through long-term contracts, which
Russia will continue to offer, would make it possible to
stabilize the situation in manufacturing industries and
avoid an energy collapse.
The next question is whether the destruction
of Nord Stream benefits Russia. Considered from a
common-sense point of view rather than one of sick
fantasies about Russia’s willingness to do anything
merely to frighten Europe, of course not. It makes no
sense for us to destroy with our own hands a project in
which we have made such a huge investment and that
could bring us significant economic returns. After all,
the West itself has constantly asserted that we profit
from energy exports and rising energy prices.
Finally, the big question is whether what
happened to Nord Stream benefits the United States.
Unquestionably. American suppliers of liquefied
natural gas (LNG) must be celebrating the massive
increase in LNG supplies to Europe, while from a
political standpoint, the last thread securing the energy
independence of the European Union has snapped.
Thanks to the energy crisis, European production is
being rapidly transferred to the United States, which
is receiving top personnel, advanced technology and
production resources, everything that a united Europe
has been accumulating and developing for decades. The
citizens of Europe have been left to face their problems
alone. Across the ocean, no one cares that Europe is in
for a very long, dark and cold winter. In connection to
those simple and logical questions, I would like to ask
the representative of the United States if he can confirm
right now, here in this Chamber, that his country had
nothing to do with that sabotage.
Of course, it is not our job to find and name
those responsible today. The Security Council is not a
judicial body and should not take on such tasks. Russia
therefore endorses a comprehensive investigation to
shed light on the true circumstances of the incident. We
would be interested to hear the opinions and official
views of our Western colleagues today. We hope that
they will refrain from the meaningless Russophobic
verbal gymnastics that they have been using about
Ukraine’s strikes on the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant. Should we expect assertions that in the wake
of the masochistic shelling of a power plant where we
ourselves are positioned, we have begun to blow up our
own pipelines?
22-60744

30/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

It is quite obvious to us that sabotage of that
complexity and scale is beyond the abilities of ordinary
terrorists. We consider the damage to the pipelines to be
deliberate sabotage of a crucial facility of the Russian
Federation’s energy infrastructure and an attack that
could hardly have happened without the involvement of
a State or State-controlled entities. We will definitely
establish the identity of everyone involved in the
sabotage. Those who were behind it cannot claim to
be a non-party to the armed conflict or to have neutral
status, which in any case Western countries violated
long ago. I also want to stress that any international
investigation of the incident can claim to be objective
only if Russia is included in it. We are also believe it is
essential not only for the countries in whose territorial
waters the incident occurred to participate but also
representatives of Germany, which has been the main
recipient of Nord Stream gas.
If the theory that one or another State is involved
in these acts of terror is confirmed, that would make
it a deliberate escalation of the conflict. I hope that
everyone in this Chamber is aware of the dangerous
point to which the perpetrators of this act of sabotage
are leading us.
Ms. Juul (Norway): We thank the briefers for
their updates.
The damage to the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines
in international waters within the economic zones
of Sweden and Denmark is deeply worrying and has
created a very serious situation in terms of climate and
environmental consequences and risks to shipping. We
remain in close contact with our Nordic neighbours,
and we thank Denmark and Sweden for the joint letters
sent to the Security Council.
All the information currently available indicates
that the damage to Nord Stream 1 and 2 is the result
of a deliberate and irresponsible act of sabotage. We
need to get to the bottom of what has happened and
why, even if it takes some time. Norway fully supports
the investigations launched by the Danish, Swedish and
German authorities aimed at getting full clarity about
the incident. This has occurred against a backdrop of
war and an energy crisis in Europe and beyond. Those
responsible clearly wanted to create fear and insecurity
on the European continent. As a major supplier of gas,
Norway is aware of the special responsibility we have
to safeguard security on the Norwegian continental

S/PV.9144

shelf. We will maintain close dialogue with our allies
and partners on the issue.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Mr. Hanif and Mr. Eyl-Mazzega for
their briefings and the information they shared with us.
Mexico has followed with concern the recent
incidents in the Baltic Sea that caused leaks in the
Nord Stream 1 and 2 gas pipelines, and we regret
the impact they will have on the environment and
international shipping. Unfortunately, they are also
an additional destabilizing factor for energy markets,
which had already been badly affected by the war in
Ukraine. What complicates it further is that given the
information available, it seems more likely to have been
an act of sabotage than an accident. That is particularly
worrisome in the context in which it occurred, as it
will not be easy to repair, and the damage inflicted
could have serious social and economic consequences.
It is therefore necessary for a rigorous and impartial
investigation to be carried out promptly in order to
determine the circumstances that damaged this civilian
infrastructure and to identify those responsible.
In conclusion, I reiterate that this regrettable
incident forces us to truly rethink how we will focus
the efforts of the Council in order to reduce tensions
and begin, more decisively, to seek a solution through
dialogue and diplomacy so that the conflict does not
continue to escalate, as it has week after week under the
Council’s passive watch.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Hanif for his briefing and
our other briefers for theirs.
Ireland is deeply concerned by the sudden and
extensive gas leaks detected in the Nord Stream 1 and
2 pipelines earlier this week. The immediate priority
must be to ensure maritime safety and avert the risk
of a climate and ecological disaster. The potential for
a massive and highly damaging emission event is a
serious concern.
All the analysis to date indicates that the leaks are
the result of deliberate acts of sabotage. We understand
that at least two detonations occurred underwater,
damaging the pipelines and causing major leaks of
natural gas into the Baltic Sea. The magnitude of the
explosions was measured at 2.3 and 2.1 on the Richter
scale, corresponding to an explosive load in the region
of several hundred kilograms.

22-607447/13

S/PV.9144

Threats to international peace and security

The irresponsibility of such acts cannot be
overstated and must deeply concern us all. That such
acts could occur now, in the midst of a global energy
crisis and with winter fast approaching, makes it all the
more appalling.
Sweden, Denmark and Germany have our
full support in managing the consequences of this
indefensible act, and we stand ready to provide any
assistance necessary. We also strongly support the
ongoing investigations in the most affected Member
States in order to determine the full facts behind
the leaks.
Let us be clear — any deliberate disruption of
European energy infrastructure is utterly unacceptable.
Ireland, along with our European Union partners, will
ensure that it is met with a robust and united response.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Hanif for
his briefing. We listened carefully to the briefings
delivered by Mr. Kupriyanov and Mr. Eyl-Mazzega.
The information we were provided just now on
major leaks in the Nord Stream 1 and 2 gas pipelines
are alarming and raise concerns about the possibility
of a disaster in the Baltic Sea. The magnitude of the
risk and the scope of economic and environmental
stakes call for an urgent and well-defined response
in order to assess the level of the threat and to guard
against possible negative consequences of the release of
methane into the atmosphere.
We note with apprehension the measures taken,
particularly regarding the ban on overflights and the
navigational bottleneck in the area concerned. We
hope that those precautionary measures are taking into
account safety and the indispensable energy supply in
question, given that the winter season is approaching.
Above all, we hope that the damage to the gas pipelines is
not the result of hostilities between the warring parties.
We are opposed to war, but also note that war is
not a state of lawlessness. It has strict rules that protect
civilian populations and infrastructure. We reiterate
our call for an immediate cessation of hostilities
between the warring parties and stress the urgency of
action to repair the damaged gas pipelines leaks and
mitigate the damage. We also call for an independent
investigation to shed light on the leaks and to identify
those responsible.
8/13

30/09/2022

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank our briefers for setting out what we know so far
about this case, which is clearly still very limited.
But this afternoon in the Chamber, we once again
heard some absurd Russian claims and conspiracy
theories. Russia’s request for this meeting was a cynical
attempt to distract from Putin’s illegal annexation of
Ukrainian territory today.
The damage to the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines
in the Baltic Sea is of deep concern. Those leaks are
not only causing risks to shipping but also substantial
environmental damage in the Baltic Sea. They are
releasing enormous amounts of methane into the
Earth’s atmosphere.
We agree with the assessment that all currently
available information indicates that this damage is the
result of sabotage. We strongly support the investigations
by the authorities of Denmark, Sweden and Germany.
Intentional damage to civilian infrastructure is reckless
and irresponsible, wherever it takes place. We must
establish clear international norms that such damage is
utterly unacceptable.
For NATO’s part, as set out in yesterday’s statement
of the North Atlantic Council, allies remain committed
to prepare for, deter and defend against any hybrid
tactics by State and non-State actors, including coercive
approaches to energy. We are clear that any deliberate
attack against allies’ critical infrastructure would be
met with a united and determined response.
The United Kingdom will continue to work alongside
our partners to protect Europe’s energy security.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Hanif and our other
briefers today.
I will be a little longer than I intended given that,
once again, our Russian colleagues have decided to
instrumentalize a Security Council meeting to spread
conspiracy theories and disinformation and, to quote
my colleague, “morbid fantasies”.
But let me begin by saying clearly and unequivocally
that we are deeply concerned by the apparent sabotage
that took place on the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines.
As we heard just now from the representative of
the United Kingdom, deliberate actions to damage
critical infrastructure cannot be tolerated. Efforts to
investigate are under way, and the United States strongly
22-60744

30/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

supports European efforts to conduct that important
investigation. It could take time, but the search for the
truth will not be rushed. It is important that we first
establish the facts.
I know our Russian colleagues have had a bad day.
They had to sit and watch that strangely odd fascist
Nuremberg-style rally combined with Las Vegas
1970s show that happened in Moscow this morning
to celebrate the illegal annexation of Ukrainian
territory. And then in the afternoon they got hit by the
Council’s vote, sending a clear message about Russia’s
annexation of Ukrainian territory. But I do not think
that justifies the Russian delegation once again raising
conspiracy theories and spreading mass disinformation
in the Council.
My Russian colleague continues to use
inflammatory rhetoric accusing the United States of
being involved in this act of sabotage. Let me answer
his question. Let me be clear — the United States
categorically denies any involvement in this incident,
and we reject any assertions to the contrary.
Let me also talk about energy supplies, since that
was raised, and the relationship between the United
States and our European friends and partners in the
energy sector. It has been clear for years that Russia
is not a reliable energy supplier. The United States has
therefore been working with our European partners and
our allies in order to increase their energy resilience
and provide alternative supplies. We are working on a
short- and long-term basis to address energy security
and the stability of global energy markets, not only for
Europe but the world.

S/PV.9144

has committed war crimes in Ukraine, including the
deliberate destruction of infrastructure. The sabotage
of critical infrastructure should be of concern to us all.
In the context of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine,
we have seen numerous Russian attacks damaging
civilian infrastructure. We have witnessed Russia
recklessly seize control of Europe’s largest nuclear
power plant, risking a nuclear disaster in Europe.
We have seen countless attacks destroying civilian
electricity infrastructure.
Russia attacked energy and water infrastructure in
Kharkiv, Zmyiv and Pavlograd on 11 and 12 September,
causing mass blackouts and water cut-offs. On
14 September, there were reports that Russia had struck
a dam at the Karachunov reservoir, causing fears of
floods. In this very Chamber we have also heard United
Nations experts recount numerous verified instances
of harm to civilians and civilian infrastructure
resulting from Russia’s war against Ukraine. They
include credible reports of the bombing of educational
institutions, medical clinics and hospitals and the
killing of aid workers, medical staff and patients.
Evidence of the scale of atrocities continues to mount
as Russia ignores international calls for an immediate
end to the war.

I will end there, because while we get to the
bottom of what happened to Nord Stream, we will
not let Russia’s disinformation apparatus distract
us from addressing the main issue at hand, which is
the continuing aggression against Ukraine and the
destruction of civilian infrastructure on Ukrainian
sovereign territory. It is important that we use this
meeting not to foster conspiracy theories, but to focus
our attention on Russia’s blatant violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and on its crimes in Ukraine.

Despite the efforts we heard today to distract us
from the truth and disseminate more disinformation
and slightly wacky theories, the facts on the ground
in Ukraine speak for themselves. Russian attacks in
Ukraine have hit civilians and reduced cities to rubble,
resulting in thousands dead and injured. As we did with
this afternoon’s vote (see S/PV.9143), we must continue
to speak out against Russia’s atrocities, the war and
the wanton disregard for international law that we are
seeing on the ground. We must not allow Russia to
continue to use the platform of the Security Council to
spread lies and disinformation, which it has done since
the very beginning of the war in Ukraine. I am sure
that all of us recall how during the days before the war
began, the Russian delegation was tweeting out that
there was no intention to invade Ukraine.

In only half a year, Ukraine has become the scene
of some of the worst mass-scale violence that Europe
has witnessed in decades, including the destruction
of infrastructure. Of deep concern to us all is the
conclusion last week by the United Nations Independent
International Commission of Inquiry that Russia

We must continue to investigate and bear witness to
Russia’s atrocities, and we must demand accountability.
The United States will not be distracted from seeking
justice and accountability. We will not be distracted
from defending the Charter against such blatant
violations and transgressions.

22-607449/13

S/PV.9144

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank the three briefers for their presentations.
We are deeply concerned about the recent multiple
leaks and powerful underwater explosions in the Nord
Stream 1 and 2 gas pipelines, which are the main artery
for transporting energy to Europe, providing a vital gas
supply to 23 European countries. The physical disruption
of the pipelines caused by the leaks has exacerbated
energy supply shortages in Europe. Consumers around
the world, particularly in developing countries, are
likely to suffer from the resulting volatility in energy
markets and soaring energy prices. The leaks are still
going on, and their impact on the shipping routes and
the Baltic Sea ecosystem continues to play out. At a
time when Europe and the world are facing growing and
seemingly insurmountable challenges, this incident is
indeed a terrible disaster that we would have preferred
not to see.
We note that some of the information we are
currently receiving indicates that the leaks were no
accident, but very likely the result of a deliberate act
of sabotage. If that is true, it would constitute an attack
on transnational civilian facilities and submarine
pipelines, in violation of international law. We also
note that all the stakeholders agree that an objective,
impartial and professional investigation of the leaks is
imperative. As the briefers stressed, the leaks highlight
the vulnerability of transnational infrastructure. We
stand ready to work with all parties to maintain the
security of cross-border infrastructure.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to begin by thanking Assistant Secretary-General
Navid Hanif for his briefing. We have also listened
closely to the other briefers today and taken note of the
information they provided.
We too are deeply concerned about the severe
damage to the Nord Stream 1 and 2 gas pipelines.
While the exact cause remains unknown, it appears that
the damage is the result of a deliberate act of sabotage.
At a time of heightened geopolitical tensions and global
turmoil, potential missteps and further escalation must
be avoided. Now is the time to maintain calm and
establish the facts concerning the cause of the damage
through a transparent and comprehensive investigation.
As the world continues to suffer from the
consequences of the ongoing conflict in Ukraine,
maintaining maritime and energy security around the
world is fundamental to ensuring stability and prosperity
10/13

30/09/2022

for all of us. Further volatility in energy markets will be
an increasing strain on communities around the world,
particularly in developing countries. Furthermore, the
incident has resulted in a grave environmental disaster
with long-term repercussions not only for the Baltic Sea
region but the world. While the full environmental cost
is only now being assessed, it is likely to represent one
of the worst greenhouse-gas leaks ever recorded.
The world is facing severe environmental,
economic, and energy challenges while on an already
difficult path to recovery from the coronavirus disease
pandemic. The damage to such energy infrastructure
and the resulting environmental and economic harm
will further exacerbate those challenges. We underline
the critical importance of avoiding any steps that
aggravate the fragile regional and global situation.
Every effort must be made to ensure that the facts
are properly established and that no further incidents
take place.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): We are also deeply
concerned about the reports of the large-scale leaks that
were detected on 27 September in both the Nord Stream
1 and 2 pipelines in the exclusive economic zones of
Denmark and Sweden in the Baltic Sea. The plumes
of gas rising to the surface are causing environmental
damage, and the impact on maritime life in the Baltic
is likely to be very substantial. The information
available so far indicates that the leaks are the result of
a deliberate act of sabotage. Such acts are unacceptable
and pose a serious threat to international security. We
support the investigations under way to find the origin
of the damage and its likely perpetrators. It will be very
important to have full clarity in that regard. We share
the commitment of the international community to
deterring and defending against the misuse of energy
and other hybrid tactics by State or non-State actors.
Any deliberate attack on critical infrastructure should
be met with a united response.
While we wait for the results of the investigation,
we must not lose sight of the larger context. While
Russia’s military aggression continues and has further
escalated, reckless and irresponsible acts of sabotage on
critical energy infrastructure could be seen as aimed at
intimidating the countries directly affected in the Baltic
region and the European Union. Since 24 February
we have witnessed repeated attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure, including through the serious
endangerment of nuclear plants. Energy is being used
as a weapon to achieve geopolitical gains. It is therefore
22-60744

30/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

imperative that we unite our efforts to promote energy
security and prevent further threats and actions.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I join others in thanking
Mr. Navid Hanif, Assistant Secretary-General for
Economic Development, and the other two briefers for
their statements this evening.
Europe and the world cannot afford any escalation
or spread of the war in Ukraine. Many countries
that were already struggling to build back after the
coronavirus disease pandemic are bearing the brunt of
the war’s impact, including a surge in food, energy, and
farm input prices. That is why Kenya continues to call
for an immediate cessation of hostilities to allow space
for diplomacy in the search for a political solution that
is aligned with the Charter of the United Nations and
that safeguards Ukraine’s territorial integrity while
being sensitive to the security concerns of all parties.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank the Assistant
Secretary-General and the other two briefers for
their statements.
We are closely following developments with regard
to the evolving situation. We continue to urge those
involved to exercise restraint and refrain from engaging
in any activity that could disrupt peace and stability.
Any targeting of civilian infrastructure and facilities
must be avoided. The present incidents have the
potential to impact stability in Europe and beyond, as
well as to negatively affect the environment. Since the
beginning of the Ukraine conflict, the global South has
been disproportionately affected by its consequences,
including those related to the food, fuel and energy
crisis. If left unchecked, the current situation has the
potential to further exacerbate those circumstances,
and we would support calls for an independent and
objective investigation in that regard.
India strongly reiterates the need for an immediate
cessation of all hostilities and a return to dialogue
and diplomacy. We have consistently reiterated that
the global order is anchored in international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and respect for the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of States.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Hanif, Mr. Kupriyanov and Mr. EylMazzega for their briefings.
This week’s incident is undoubtedly a cause for
concern for all in the light of its potential for further
disrupting Europe’s energy security with ripple effects

S/PV.9144

on the world economy. We must also be aware of the
significant environmental impact that such a disaster
implies for local maritime life, along with the threat to
our global effort to combat climate change represented
by the amounts of greenhouse gases leaked.
It is critical to ensure that reactions are based on
sound information. We urge for additional information
to be regularly shared with Council members on the
status of the Nord Stream pipelines. We also believe
that an investigation of the events should precede any
conclusions. It is in the interests of all to clarify the
incident and seek a prompt solution in order to avoid
worsening the energy crisis in Europe. We encourage
those involved to cooperate in the investigation efforts
and to work together to ensure that the necessary repairs
take place as soon as possible.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I would like to thank
the briefers for sharing their assessments of the situation
with the Council.
Ghana notes with great concern the unprecedented
damage caused to the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines
that has resulted in natural gas leaks in the area. We
have also noted that the leakage has necessitated
the demarcation of a no-sail zone and caused some
disruptions to maritime straits in the affected area. Like
the wider international community, we are concerned
about the immediate and potentially long-term damage
to the marine environment and climate in the region.
We believe that urgent and independent investigations
are needed to determine the circumstances that led to
the leaks in the two pipelines and to guide appropriate
remedial action, including ensuring accountability for
any persons or States found to have been complicit in
the matter.
The safety and security of Europe’s energy
infrastructure, like all other critical infrastructure
situated on land, in maritime areas or in cyberspace,
requires the concerted efforts of all Member States and
the wider international community in order to prevent
foreseeable interruptions to services that are critical to
the survival of the people who rely on them. Indeed, in
resolution 2341 (2017), the Security Council recognizes
the increasing interdependence of countries on critical
infrastructure and encourages cooperation at all levels
to ensure their safety and protection from all forms of
harm. We cordially call on all stakeholders to work
closely to resolve any issues affecting the security of
the Nord Stream gas pipelines and other such critical

22-6074411/13

S/PV.9144

Threats to international peace and security

infrastructure. We urge restraint on the part of all parties
concerned and caution against unilateral actions.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
France is extremely concerned about the two
underwater explosions that hit the Nord Stream 1 and
2 gas pipelines on 27 September and resulted in four
methane leaks off the Danish island of Bornholm.
Such events are unprecedented. France expresses its
full solidarity with Denmark and Sweden, which are
directly affected by the security and environmental
consequences of the explosions. The situation is grave,
and the threat must be taken seriously. All the available
information indicates that the leaks are the result of a
deliberate act and likely one of sabotage. Two seismic
events were recorded before the leaks occurred, with
measurements indicating explosions equivalent to 500
kilogrammes of TNT. It was therefore not a coincidence,
and the explosions were human-caused. I would like to
thank the Danish and Swedish delegations for the letter
they sent to the Council presidency yesterday, which is
very helpful to the Council in its work.
France condemns such an irresponsible act, which
endangers maritime navigation and the environment.
The coercive use of energy is unacceptable. We call
for a full investigation of the origin of the explosions
and support the conduct of the investigations by the
countries concerned. Any deliberate attempt to attack
critical infrastructure is unacceptable and should be
considered a hostile act. The European Union will
therefore be firm and united in its response to attacks
on its energy infrastructure, as well as to any attempt to
undermine its security of supply.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am grateful to my United States colleague
for his direct response to a direct question, which was
whether he could confirm right now, in this Chamber,
whether or not his country was involved in this act of
sabotage. My American colleague’s response was to
declare, in this Chamber, that the United States denied
any involvement in the incident, and I thank him for
his answer.
12/13

30/09/2022

However, in the light of his remarks, and of the
statement by my British colleague, I have another
question. I would like to know what they mean by
Russian disinformation and conspiracy theories. We
have not named anyone as responsible. There has been
no investigation yet. All we have done is cite facts. The
representative of the United States is not going to deny
what his President said publicly, after all. We just cited
what he said, which is a fact, just like the other facts
I cited.
It is a fact that NATO’s BALTOPS exercise took
place in June near the island of Bornholm. It is a fact
that a former Foreign Minister of Poland, Mr. Radosław
Sikorski, published the tweet that I showed Council
members in which he thanked the United States for what
happened to the pipeline. The opening of the Baltic pipe
from Norway is a fact. It is a fact that NATO has made
declarations about sabotage and the unacceptability
of strikes on its countries’ infrastructure. Those are
all nothing but facts. Can it be denied that the current
energy crisis in Europe is objectively making American
energy suppliers more competitive? Is that a conspiracy
theory too? It is an economic reality, and the United
States benefits from it in objective economic terms.
Lastly, before our American colleague took the
floor today, we had frankly not linked the Nord Stream
incident to the situation in Ukraine. Now we see that
our Western colleagues perceive this act of sabotage,
whoever may have committed it, as revenge of some
kind for Russia’s actions in Ukraine. Well, I think that
statement narrows the list of suspects and could be very
helpful to us in the investigation.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the United States of America has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I will take
the floor briefly. I again categorically deny any United
States involvement in the incident. We have heard,
also quite categorically, both from me and from one of
our briefers today, that the energy situation in Europe,
however one wants to describe it, is more affected by
Russia’s unreliability as an energy supplier than by
anything to do with the United States.
I would also like to point out that as the Russian
delegation itself has said, the facts are clear. There is
no hiding anything that has been said. However, as I
laid out, over the past seven months it has been Russia
that has a record of destroying civilian infrastructure
22-60744

30/09/2022

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9144

and causing suffering and loss across Ukraine. If there
is any country that has a record of doing the kind of
thing that we are discussing here today, it is not the
United States.

The President (spoke in French): I do not intend
to give the floor to the briefers again. However, if the
majority owner of Gazprom wishes to take the floor
instead of the briefer, it may do so.

The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names on the list of speakers.

Mr. Kupriyanov (spoke in Russian): I would like
to briefly thank Mr. Eyl-Mazzega for his overview of
the gas market, although we categorically disagree with
him. Nord Stream 1 and 2 —

As this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council
for the month of September, I would like to take this
opportunity to express the sincere appreciation of the
French delegation to the members of the Council and the
Secretariat for all the support and assistance they have
given us. I am also grateful to the technical support
team, conference officers, interpreters, translators,
verbatim reporters and security staff.
As France ends its presidency, I know I speak
on behalf of the Council in wishing the delegation of
Gabon good luck in the month of October.
The meeting is adjourned.
I apologize. The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation): Before we
thank you, Mr. President, for the French presidency of
the Security Council during the month of September, we
would like to point out that during the meeting we were
informed that one of our briefers, the representative of
Gazprom, wanted to make a brief comment at the end of
the meeting, and I believe that request was transmitted
to the presidency. I ask that you grant him that request,
if it is acceptable to the presidency.

The President (spoke in French): I have not given
the floor to the briefers. Mr. Kupriyanov does not have
the floor. The representative of the Russian Federation
has the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation): I cannot
speak for Gazprom. I just passed on Gazprom’s request
to speak.
The President (spoke in French): I am fine with
Gazprom speaking through the delegation of the
Russian Federation. Once again, if Gazprom’s owner
wishes to make a further statement, it may. If not, I will
adjourn the meeting.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation): I value your
irony, Mr. President, but just to get things straight, the
representative of Gazprom — whose participation in this
meeting we facilitated — obviously requested the floor
through us because he has a means of communication
through us, and not because the Russian State is the
major shareholder in Gazprom.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of Gazprom was permitted to take the floor just as the
other participants were.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

22-6074413/13
