A /73/PV.54

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

54th plenary meeting

Friday, 14 December 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Ten-Pow
(Guyana), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 75
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/73/392 and
Corr. 1 and 2)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/73/78,
A/73/170 and A/73/343)
Draft resolutions (A/73/L.18/Rev.1, A/73/L.51,
A/73/L.53 and A/73/L.61)
Draft amendments (A/73/L.64 and A/73/L.65)
(b) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Report of the Secretary-General (A/73/84 and
Corr. 1)
(c) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolutions A/73/L.18/Rev.1, A/73/L.51,
A/73/L.53 and A/73/L.61 and draft amendments
A/73/L.64 and A/73/L.65.

Before giving the floor for explanations of
vote before the vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Mohammed (Sudan): First and foremost, I
would like to pay tribute to all humanitarian workers
and United Nations personnel around the world for their
valuable sacrifices. We extend our heartfelt condolences
to the families of those killed in the line of duty around
the world.
We have serious reservations about the inclusion
of references to the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in draft resolution A/73/L.51
and other draft resolutions. To include such references
and language would exert unacceptable pressure on
States Members of the United Nations. We draw the
Assembly’s attention to the twenty-ninth preambular
paragraph and paragraph 7 of draft resolution
A/73/L.51, and we request that both paragraphs be put
to the vote separately.
We reject the inclusion of the ICC in draft
resolution A/73/L.51 — and its inclusion in other draft
resolutions — for the following reasons.
First, the Court is not an organ of the United
Nations, notwithstanding several attempts by some
parties to paint it otherwise in meetings of the Main
Committees of the General Assembly. We continue to
advance this solid conviction, which is supported by
practice and law.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-44140 (E)

*1844140*

A/73/PV.54

Secondly, the Rome Statute and other international
treaties are incompatible with established norms
of international law, and their articles contain
contradictions within themselves. Article 26 of the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties states that
every treaty in force is binding only on the parties to
it, based on the principle of free consent. The Rome
Statute imposes obligations on non-party States. We
would like to refer here to the joint statement by the
delegations of India and the United States of America
immediately after the adoption of the Rome Statute on
17 July 1998, which expressed the view from the very
beginning that international law, and specifically the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, had fallen
victim to this Statute.
Thirdly, since 2003 the International Criminal Court
has been only an impediment to peace in Darfur. The
ICC is bound to create a serious conflict between peace
and justice. It remains the main challenge facing the
international community and the national Government
of the Sudan in the area. It jeopardizes both peace and
security. At best, the ICC represents a threat to peace
and stability in Darfur, Africa and in many other parts
of the world, not to mention the problems created by its
disruptive history since its inception. The ICC has been
fraught with corruption and one scandal after another.
Fourthly, the ICC lacks independence, as half
of its budget is drawn from voluntary contributions
from the States and non-governmental organizations
that exercise control over it. We have opposed the
International Criminal Court since the beginning
because of all those considerations. The ways in which
we express our opposition have of course changed
according to circumstances and our official position as
a sovereign Member State of this Organization.
Finally, we reiterate hereby our full support for the
draft resolution as a whole. Humanitarian assistance is a
vital and instrumental means to address crises, whether
human-made or resulting from natural causes. That is
why the lofty goals of humanitarian assistance should
not be confused with such politically driven language,
which will lead only to discord and division. We call
on all Member States to vote against the inclusion of
the twenty-ninth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraph 7 as they stand in draft resolution A/73/L.51.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
2/11

14/12/2018

Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; and the European Free Trade Association
country Norway, member of the European Economic
Area, align themselves with this statement.
The EU deeply regrets the decision of the United
States to present an amendment (A/73/L.65) to the draft
resolution on the strengthening of the coordination
of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations (A/73/L.61) and an amendment (A/73/L.64 )
to the draft resolution on international cooperation on
humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters,
from relief to development (A/73/L.18/Rev.1), both
of which draft resolutions have always been adopted
by consensus.
The decisions to revert to previously agreed language
in paragraphs 58 and 59 of draft resolution A/73/L.61 and
paragraph 59 of draft resolution A/73/L.18/Rev.1 were
widely agreed to when it became clear that concerted
and lengthy efforts to find alternative wording would
not lead to an acceptable agreement for all delegations.
Sweden and Morocco, facilitators for draft resolutions
A/73/L.61 and A/73/L.18/Rev.1, respectively, made
every effort to conduct negotiations in a fair and
transparent manner. We commend the facilitators, as
well as those who participated in negotiations, for their
genuine efforts to maintain consensus and achieve a
good draft resolution for all.
The United Nations membership, many of whom
hold divergent views on the issues at hand, have always
been able to agree on this language. That illustrates
how carefully crafted and balanced these long-standing
paragraphs are. In that context, let us not forget that the
international community made a shared commitment
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to
achieve gender equality and the empowerment of all
women and girls, which includes universal access to
health-care services. International cooperation on
crucial humanitarian matters such as these requires us
to act in a responsible way. Undermining consensus
on these draft resolutions can have only negative
consequences, impacting first and foremost the most
fundamental rights of women and girls in need of
humanitarian assistance.
For the reasons I mentioned, the 28 States members
of the European Union will vote against the amendments
18-44140

14/12/2018

proposed by the United States, and we call on all other
States to also vote no.
In addition, regarding the proposal just made
by the representative of the Sudan, I wish to make a
statement on behalf of the European Union and its
member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; and the European Free Trade Association
countries Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the
European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
We deeply regret that the Sudan has called for a
vote on the twenty-ninth preambular paragraph and
operative paragraph 7 of draft resolution A/73/L.51.
The references to the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in the preambular and operative parts of the
resolution on the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel and protection of United Nations personnel
have existed since the first resolution on that subject
was adopted in 1999 (resolution 54/192).
The EU and its member States reiterate their
unwavering support for the ICC as the world’s first
permanent international criminal court and an important
tool of the international community for fighting
impunity and contributing to peaceful societies. The
gross violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights that we witness worldwide are a sharp
reminder of the increasing relevance of the Court, the
role of which is to complement rather than replace
existing national jurisdictions.
The primary responsibility to investigate and
prosecute crimes remains with individual States. All
perpetrators of such crimes must be held accountable
for their actions. A key element in the Rome Statute is
its equal application. In that respect, the creation of the
ICC has given millions of victims of atrocity crimes
new hope that justice will be done. States from all over
the world have joined efforts to make that possible.
The EU and its member States consider that the
fight against impunity for the most serious crimes is
critical to ensure a fair and just society by holding
the perpetrators accountable and ensuring justice
for victims. We also consider that peace and justice
are complementary and not mutually exclusive. For
those reasons, the 28 member States of the European

A/73/PV.54

Union will vote in favour of retaining the twenty-ninth
preambular paragraph and operative paragraph 7 of
draft resolution A/73/L.51. We call on all other States,
in particular States parties to the Rome Statute of the
ICC, to do the same, voting yes to the retention of
those paragraphs.
Mr. Sohlström (Sweden): We fully align
ourselves with the statement just made on behalf of the
European Union.
As the facilitator and main co-sponsor of this
year’s omnibus draft resolution on the strengthening of
the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
of the United Nations (A/73/L.61), I would like to make
some comments in my national capacity.
I wish to note that an omnibus resolution on
humanitarian assistance has been adopted by consensus
for 27 years. It is a resolution on the humanitarian
system that has strong regional support and a strong
history of consensus. As the main co-sponsor of this
draft resolution and as facilitator, we call upon the
sponsors of the draft resolutions — not all Member
States — to defend the text and to vote against the
amendments proposed to it.
Ms. Pritchard (Canada): I will deliver this
statement in two parts. I have the honour to deliver
the first part of this statement on behalf of Argentina,
Australia, Colombia, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Mexico,
New Zealand, Switzerland, Uruguay and my own
country, Canada.
We deeply regret that the agreed language related
to sexual and reproductive health and rights is being
challenged in the proposed amendments (A/73/L.64
and A/73/L.65) to the draft resolutions on international
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of
natural disasters, from relief to development (A/73/L.18/
Rev.1) and on the strengthening of the coordination
of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations (A/73/L.61).
Reliable and safe access to sexual and reproductive
health services is essential to ensuring the health and
well-being of all people, especially women and girls.
In humanitarian crises, the need for such services is
particularly acute, owing to the heightened risk of
disease, potential complications for maternal, newborn
and child health as a result of displacement and service
disruption, and the frequent occurrence of sexual and
gender-based violence, particularly in conflict settings.

18-441403/11

A/73/PV.54

It is estimated that a staggering 60 per cent of maternal
mortality occurs in humanitarian and fragile settings
because women do not have access to the services they
need. That is more than 500 women and girls dying
every single day because they lack access to services.
Timely and effective sexual and reproductive
health interventions can help to prevent morbidity and
mortality, including for women and girls, who may be
especially vulnerable. The language in draft resolutions
A/73/L.18/Rev.1 and A/73/L.61 reflects years of
consensus and recognizes the important role that sexual
and reproductive health services can play in advancing
gender equality and in providing long-term support for
achieving women’s and girl’s economic empowerment,
poverty reduction and sustainable development.
In addition, ensuring access to quality sexual
and reproductive health services in humanitarian
settings requires precisely the kind of coordination
and cooperation that this draft resolution seeks to
promote. We are therefore deeply disappointed that this
language is being challenged at this time, and we call
upon all delegations to vote against draft amendments
A/73/L.64 and A/73/L.65.
I have the honour to deliver the second part of this
statement on behalf of Australia, Iceland, Liechtenstein,
New Zealand, Switzerland and my own country,
Canada.
We regret than a vote has been called on the twentyninth preambular paragraph and operative paragraph
7 of draft resolution A/73/L.51, which the Sudan has
just introduced.
The twenty-ninth preambular paragraph of the draft
resolution recalls that attacks intentionally directed
against civilian personnel involved in a humanitarian
assistance or peacekeeping mission, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, are war crimes
under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), and notes the role that the Court can play
in bringing to justice those responsible. That paragraph
has been agreed language for years now.
Operative paragraph 7 of the draft resolution calls
upon all States to consider becoming parties to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. That
has also been agreed language for many years. Nothing
in paragraph 7 requires States to become signatories to
the Rome Statute. Nothing in that paragraph seeks to
impose the jurisdiction of the Court on States that are
4/11

14/12/2018

not parties to the Rome Statute. What that paragraph
does is recall one of the tools available to all Member
States to protect humanitarian and United Nations
personnel and encourage them to avail themselves of it.
The ICC has a key role to play in ending impunity
where national courts are unwilling or unable to
exercise jurisdiction, including in situations where
humanitarian workers and peacekeeping personnel
are the targets of violent attacks. As stated in the
Rome Statute, the objective of such investigations and
prosecutions is to end impunity for the perpetrators of
such crimes, and thus to contribute to the prevention of
such crimes. Ending attacks on humanitarian workers
and peacekeepers goes to the heart and purpose of the
draft resolution.
We therefore find it deeply disturbing that this
established consensus is now being attacked for reasons
that have nothing to do with the topic dealt with in the
draft resolution and are to the detriment of our common
cause. We call upon all delegations to vote in support of
those paragraphs as drafted, and we will do the same.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take decisions on draft
resolution A/73/L.18/Rev.1, entitled “International
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of
natural disasters, from relief to development”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
draft resolution A/73/L.18/Rev.1: Albania, Andorra,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Mali, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands,
Nigeria, Norway, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, the Russian Federation, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine and the
United Kingdom.
18-44140

14/12/2018

The Acting President: In connection with the
draft resolution, the General Assembly has before it a
draft amendment circulated in document A/73/L.64.
In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure,
the Assembly will first take a decision on the
draft amendment. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Belarus, Côte d’Ivoire, Guatemala, Sudan, Togo,
United States of America
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kenya, Kiribati, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Malawi, Myanmar, Oman,
Panama, Qatar, Russian Federation, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, United Arab
Emirates, Yemen

A/73/PV.54

Draft amendment A/73/L.64 was rejected by 6 votes
to 110, with 22 abstentions.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United States on a point of order.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): The
amendments that we sought were very important to the
delegation of the United States. Despite the results of
the vote on draft amendment A/73/L.64, we would like
to call a paragraph vote on operative paragraph 59 of
draft resolution A/73/L.18/Rev.1.
The Acting President: A separate recorded vote
has been requested on operative paragraph 59 of draft
resolution A/73/L.18/Rev.1.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Albania,
Algeria,
Andorra,
Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu,

18-441405/11

A/73/PV.54

Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Guatemala, Philippines, Sudan, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire, Kazakhstan, Panama,
Russian Federation, Senegal
Operative paragraph 59 was retained by 137 votes
to 4, with 6 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Philippines
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour; the delegation of Lesotho informed the
Secretariat that it had not intended to participate.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.18/Rev.1 as a whole?
Draft resolution A/73/L.18/Rev.1, as a whole, was
adopted (resolution 73/136).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.51, entitled
“Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
protection of United Nations personnel”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
draft resolution A/73/L.51: Belize, Equatorial Guinea,
Guinea, Haiti, the Niger, Nigeria, Peru, the Philippines,
Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, the State of Palestine
and Uruguay.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam on a point of order.
Mr. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I am sorry to inform the
Assembly that Viet Nam withdraws its co-sponsorship
of draft resolution A/73/L.51.
The Acting President: Separate, recorded votes
have been requested on the twenty-ninth preambular
paragraph and operative paragraph 7 of draft resolution
A/73/L.51.
6/11

14/12/2018

I shall first put to the vote the twenty-ninth
preambular paragraph.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger,
Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Against:
Bahrain, Burundi, China, Cuba, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Yemen,
Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam,
Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Malaysia,
Mauritius, Morocco, Myanmar, Oman, Papua New
Guinea, Qatar, Sao Tome and Principe, Singapore,
Sri Lanka, Thailand, Togo, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates, United States of America, Viet Nam
The twenty-ninth preambular paragraph was
retained by 93 votes to 13, with 26 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Egypt informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote against;
the delegation of Jordan informed the Secretariat
that it had intended to abstain.]
18-44140

14/12/2018

The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote
operative paragraph 7.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Namibia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zambia

A/73/PV.54

the delegations of Iraq and Jordan informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.51
as a whole?
Draft resolution A/73/L.51, as a whole, was adopted
(resolution 73/137).
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.53,
entitled “White Helmets Commission: participation of
volunteers in the activities of the United Nations in the
field of humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and technical
cooperation for development”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/73/L.53: Belarus, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Iceland, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Liberia, Mexico,
Morocco, the Philippines, Poland, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Slovakia, Sweden, Togo,
Tunisia and Viet Nam.

Against:
Bahrain, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burundi,
Cameroon, China, Cuba, Eritrea, Pakistan, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Yemen, Zimbabwe

The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.53?

Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam,
Indonesia, Israel, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Oman,
Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Sao Tome and Principe,
Senegal, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Turkey,
United Arab Emirates, United States of America,
Viet Nam

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.61 entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”.

Operative paragraph 7 was retained by 95 votes to
14, with 25 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Egypt informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote against;

Draft resolution
(resolution 73/138).

A/73/L.53

was

adopted

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/73/L.61: Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia,
Equatorial Guinea, Guinea, Jamaica, Kazakhstan,

18-441407/11

A/73/PV.54

Kenya, Kiribati, Lebanon, Liberia, Madagascar,
Malawi, the Marshall Islands, Mozambique, Nigeria,
Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, the Republic of
Moldova, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome
and Principe, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Togo and Tuvalu.
The Acting President: In connection with draft
resolution A/73/L.61, the General Assembly has before
it a draft amendment circulated in document A/73/L.65.
In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure,
the Assembly will first take a decision on the
draft amendment. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Belarus, Cameroon, Guatemala, Iraq, Qatar, Sudan,
United States of America
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Niger, Norway, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, San Marino, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Angola,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi,
Djibouti, Egypt, Ghana, Indonesia, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Malaysia, Myanmar,
8/11

14/12/2018

Oman, Panama, Russian Federation, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Togo, United
Arab Emirates, Yemen
Draft amendment A/73/L.65 was rejected by 7 votes
to 102, with 27 abstentions.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United States on a point of order.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): As
these paragraphs are of the utmost importance to my
delegation, we respectfully request a single, separate
vote on operative paragraphs 58 and 59.
The Acting President: A separate, recorded vote
has been requested on operative paragraphs 58 and 59
of draft resolution A/73/L.61.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Albania,
Algeria,
Andorra,
Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
18-44140

14/12/2018

Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Guatemala, Sudan, United States of America
Abstaining:
Burundi, Ghana, Panama, Russian Federation,
Senegal, Togo
Operative paragraph 58 and operative paragraph
59 were retained by 131 votes to 3, with 6 abstentions.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.61
as a whole?
Draft resolution A/73/L.61, as a whole, was adopted
(resolution 73/139).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote or position on the resolutions just adopted, may
I remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to join the consensus on these
resolutions and reaffirms the vital function of the
United Nations in responding to humanitarian need
around the globe. The United States has long been a
world leader in providing humanitarian assistance to
people in need, including through the United Nations,
and we remain committed to supporting those in need.
In the light of the scale of need and the Organization’s
role in the delivery of humanitarian assistance
globally, resolution 73/139, on strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
of the United Nations, should contribute to improving
the international humanitarian system. In that regard,
we welcome the progress achieved by Member States
together throughout recent negotiations.
Although we welcome the adoption of resolution
73/137, on the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel and protection of United Nations personnel,
we would like to take this opportunity to make an
important point of clarification. The resolution includes
references to the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and the Rome Statute that the United States cannot
support. As it stands, the language in the resolution
does not sufficiently distinguish between parties and

A/73/PV.54

non-parties to the Rome Statute, and is otherwise
contrary to the United States position on the ICC, as
announced by the White House on 10 September.
In particular, the United States reiterates its
continuing and long-standing principled objection
to any assertion of ICC jurisdiction over nationals of
States that are not party to the Rome Statute, including
the United States and Israel, absent a referral from the
Security Council or the consent of the State in question.
We also wish to reiterate our serious and
fundamental concerns with the ICC Prosecutor’s
proposed investigation of United States personnel in
the context of the conflict in Afghanistan. The United
States remains a leader in the fight to end impunity
and continues to support justice and accountability
for international crimes, including war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide. We respect the decision
of those nations that have chosen to join the ICC. In
turn, we expect that our decision not to join and not to
place our citizens under the ICC’s jurisdiction will also
be respected.
In addition to the statement just provided, the United
States would like to issue the following explanation of
position on resolutions 73/139, on strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
of the United Nations, and 73/136, on international
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of
natural disasters, from relief to development, for which
we are also pleased to join the consensus.
While we welcome the adoption of those resolutions,
we would like to make a number of important points of
clarification on some of their elements. We underscore
that General Assembly resolutions and many of the
outcome documents they reference are non-binding
documents that do not create rights or obligations
under international law, nor do they bind States to any
financial commitments.
With regard to the references to the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development contained in those
resolutions, the United States wishes to refer to its
statement at the 44th plenary meeting of the General
Assembly, on 3 December, under agenda item 12
(see A/73/PV.44). The United States notes that its
Administration has announced its intention to withdraw
from the Paris Agreement on Climate Change as soon
as it is eligible to do so, consistent with the terms of the
Agreement, unless suitable terms for re-engagement
are identified. Therefore, the Paris Agreement and

18-441409/11

A/73/PV.54

climate change language in these resolutions is without
prejudice to United States positions. We affirm our
support for promoting economic growth and improving
energy security while protecting the environment.
We also reiterate our views on the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, as set forth in
the United States explanation of position delivered on
18 March 2015.
The United States cannot support language that
undermines incentives for innovation, such as calls for
technology transfer that are not voluntary or on mutually
agreed terms. It underlines that such language will have
no standing in future negotiations. With respect to the
New Urban Agenda, the United States reiterates our
views, as set forth in the United States explanation of
position delivered on 20 October 2016.
Furthermore, the United States believes that each
Member States has the sovereign right to determine
how it conducts trade with other countries, which
includes restricting trade in certain circumstances.
We are within our rights to utilize our trade and
commercial policy as tools to achieve noble objectives.
Within the omnibus resolution on the strengthening of
the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
of the United Nations, the United States is strongly
supportive of the message of paragraph 67 regarding
the need for accountability. We read the paragraph’s
language on the need to bring those responsible for
violations of international law to justice to refer only to
those actions that constitute criminal violations under
applicable international law.
We emphasize that, in the twenty-eighth preambular
paragraph and paragraph 65 of the same resolution, the
reference to
“the applicable rules of international humanitarian
law relating to the non-punishment of any person
for carrying out medical activities compatible with
medical ethics”
is not meant to prejudge when and how such rules are
applicable to any particular situation.
The United States also supports international
cooperation on immigration issues, but it is the
primary responsibility of sovereign States to ensure
that immigration is managed consistent with their law
and policy. The United States cannot support processes
or documents that may result in the infringement of
our sovereign rights. The New York Declaration for
10/11

14/12/2018

Refugees and Migrants, of 19 September 2016, which
was negotiated by a prior United States Administration,
commits the States Members of the United Nations to
“strengthening global governance” of international
migration. The Declaration contains policy goals that
are inconsistent with United States law and policy,
and the United States cannot support reaffirming
that Declaration. It therefore dissociates itself from
the twenty-third preambular paragraph of resolution
73/109.
Lastly, the United States believes that women
should have equal access to health care, including in
humanitarian emergencies. We remain committed to
the principles laid out in the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development, and their reports, as agreed upon by
the General Assembly. As has been made clear over
many years, there was international consensus that the
Declaration and Programme of Action do not create
new international rights, including any so-called
right to abortion. The United States fully supports the
principle of voluntary choice regarding maternal and
child health and family planning. We do not recognize
abortion as a method of family planning, nor do we
support abortion in our global health assistance.
Ms. Elgarf (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My country’s
delegation would like to explain its vote on resolution
73/137, which was just adopted. We wish to note the
extreme importance that my delegation attaches to the
issue of humanitarian assistance and its commitment to
being constructively engaged in all intergovernmental
negotiations on General Assembly resolutions aimed
at strengthening United Nations efforts to improve
the response to humanitarian needs. My delegation
therefore calls on all Member States to intensify their
efforts and explore all avenues to removing obstacles
that impede consensus on General Assembly resolutions
on humanitarian assistance, especially with regard to
this important resolution.
Ms. Fisher-Tsin (Israel): The Secretariat announced
additional co-sponsors of the resolution on the safety
and security of humanitarian personnel and protection
of the United Nations personnel (resolution 73/137).
Among them was the observer State of Palestine.
According to paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution
52/250, of 13 July 1998, entitled “Participation of
Palestine in the work of the United Nations”, which
18-44140

14/12/2018

outlines the limited rights and privileges granted to the
observer State of Palestine, it has the right to sponsor
draft resolutions and decisions on Palestine and Middle
East issues only. The subject matter of resolution 73/137
clearly does not fall within those parameters.
We would like to stress the importance we attach
to following the rules of procedure of the Organization.
The rules of sponsorship have been clearly laid out in
the rules and regulations governing the Organization.
Any decision to avoid them is in violation of United
Nations resolutions and serves only to undermine
this institution.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 75 and its
sub-items (a) to (c).
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(e) Appointment of members of the Committee on
Conferences
Note by the Secretary-General (A/73/107)
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 51st plenary meeting, on 12 December 2018, the

A/73/PV.54

Assembly took note of the appointments of Ecuador,
Germany, Ghana, Guyana, Senegal and Ukraine as
members of the Committee on Conferences for a period
of three years, beginning on 1 January 2019.
Members will also recall that one seat from among
the Asia-Pacific States for a period of three years
beginning on 1 January 2019 still remains vacant.
After consultations with the Chair of the Group
of Asia-Pacific States, the President of the General
Assembly has appointed the Islamic Republic of Iran as
a member of the Committee on Conferences for a term
of office beginning on 1 January 2019 and ending on
31 December 2021.
May I take it that the Assembly takes note of
this appointment?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda item 117?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

18-4414011/11
