asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6860

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6860th meeting
Tuesday, 13 November 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Laher
Mr. M’Beou
Mr. Tatham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 6 November 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2012/813)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-58681 (E)

*1258681*

S/PV.6860

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 6 November 2012 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2012/813)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Serbia to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas MayrHarting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/813, which contains a letter
dated 6 November 2012 from the Secretary-General,
transmitting the forty-second report of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko.
Mr. Inzko: At the outset, let me take this
opportunity to thank those members of the Security
Council whose terms are concluding at the end of this
year — Columbia, Germany, India, Portugal and South
Africa — for their support. It has been an especially
challenging year for the Security Council, and I would
like to thank members for their readiness to encourage
and support efforts to take Bosnia and Herzegovina
forward towards our common objective of lasting
peace and stability. Let me also use this opportunity
to wish the recently elected incoming members of the
Security Council every success during their time on the
Council. Those of us working on the ground in Bosnia
and Herzegovina know we can continue to rely on the
Council’s support in the future. We will draw strength
from that knowledge in what remains a challenging
environment.

2

Ours is a just and important objective, namely,
lasting peace and stability for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
irreversibly on track towards integration into the
European Union (EU) and NATO. It is an objective
to which the international community remains
firmly committed over 20 years after Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s international recognition, in April 1992.
That commitment to our common cause with Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s citizens was yet again made abundantly
clear during the course of a series of high-profile visits
to Bosnia and Herzegovina during the reporting period.
This month, United States Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton and the EU High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy Catherine Ashton visited
Sarajevo together, as did United Kingdom Foreign
Secretary William Hague a few days earlier.
It has been a full year since we completed the
transition and reconfiguration of the international
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with the decoupling
of the EU Special Representative from the Office of
the High Representative and its incorporation into the
stand-alone EU delegation. I am pleased to report that
the EU delegation and my Office have established a very
close working relationship on the ground. Ambassador
Peter Sørensen has made an excellent start, and his
presence has indeed been a breath of fresh air. We are
coordinating our efforts while seeking synergies and
win-win situations wherever possible.
However, no matter how good our cooperation
within the international community, that alone cannot
deliver progress. We are now very deep into a phase
where the degree and speed of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
progress will be determined by the ability or inability
of the authorities in the country to deliver concrete
results. Regrettably, on that subject I must turn to less
welcome developments, because political leaders are
failing to produce what they should 17 years after the
Peace Agreement was signed.
When I addressed the Council six months ago
(see S/PV.6771), I was cautiously optimistic about the
direction in which the country was heading. After
15 months of waiting for political leaders to reach
agreement, we had finally witnessed the appointment
of State-level executive authorities in February. On
31 May, the State budget was finally adopted. It was
logical to expect that, with a Government and a budget
in place, the new coalition would immediately make up
for lost time and get down to addressing the pressing
needs of citizens and delivering the requirements to

12-58681

S/PV.6860

open up the next phase of the EU and NATO accession
processes.
To the disappointment of many in the international
community, that is not what happened. Instead, a
protracted effort to reconfigure the governing coalition
began in early June — a process that will hopefully be
resolved by the end of the year, following some six more
months of time lost. That dispute diverted attention
from pressing challenges. While other countries in
the region move forward, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
been left behind. The situation was also reflected in
the recent European Commission’s progress report. In
addition to the administrative and legislative gridlock,
at times in the Federation we saw political parties
disregard constitutional and legal provisions in their
haste to effect changes to governing coalitions.
The question of which parties form the governing
coalition is not a matter for the international community
to decide. However, when the rule of law is disregarded
we should be concerned. While the dispute continues
at the Federation entity level, in the last two weeks we
have seen signs of a rapprochement on the formation
of a new State-level coalition between the two parties
from the Republika Srpska and the Federation that
secured the most votes in the 2010 general elections. The
readiness of the two parties to start talking seriously
about substantial issues is a welcome development.
Without dialogue and a readiness to work towards
healthy compromises there can be no progress.
At the same time, it is critically important that, as
the parties proceed with their agenda, they do not take
steps to roll back reforms undertaken with great care
over many years to further the Peace Agreement. The
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board has been
consistently firm on that point.
Another issue of even greater concern to me
has been the marked rise in challenges to the Peace
Agreement, in particular the challenges to Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s sovereignty and territorial integrity that
we saw during the reporting period. I have reported
to the Council many times in the past about the
anti-State, secessionist rhetoric emanating from the
current Republika Srpska leadership. Unfortunately,
that rhetoric has intensified and worsened considerably
during the past six months. My written report
(see S/2012/813) contains many examples of the types
of inflammatory statements that have been uttered by
very senior officials in the Republika Srpska. How does
one respond when a leading politician says that Bosnia
12-58681

and Herzegovina makes him feel sick and that he hopes
to God it will fall apart soon? How would any of us
react if someone were to say about our own beloved
country, that it makes them sick and should fall apart?
I think we would be concerned, shocked and certainly
deeply saddened.
It would be a mistake to dismiss those words
as empty or election-driven rhetoric. They have
been supplemented over the past several years by a
comprehensive effort to erode, and in some cases
eliminate, the functionality of the State and its
institutions. The latest of many State institutions that the
Republika Srpska has sought to abolish or emasculate
is the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
is a multinational structure that has earned praise for
its contributions to peacekeeping operations around the
world, including operations authorized by the Security
Council itself.
In the light of the mandate I have been given by
the international community, a mandate which has
been repeatedly reaffirmed by the Security Council,
I regretfully conclude that these challenges are
worrisome enough to warrant the particular attention
of this body. There is probably no issue more central to
the Peace Agreement than the preservation of the unity
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Continued challenges to the State — including
the Republika Srpska’s regular advocacy for its
dissolution — must be taken seriously, especially
considering the history of the conflicts of the 1990s.
The United Kingdom’s Foreign Secretary, William
Hague, made quite clear during his recent visit to
Bosnia and Herzegovina that:
“Bosnia can only be a member of the European
Union as a single, sovereign State. Those who think
that there is another way for Bosnia are simply
wrong, and those who undermine the Bosnian State
will not be our partners”.
That is a view we fully share.
In the context of the developments that I have
just described, I was perhaps not surprised, but I was
disappointed, to see the authorities deliver very little
progress on the five objectives and two conditions for
the closing of the Office of the High Representative.
Nevertheless, there have been positive developments
on the objective related to the Brcko district through
actions undertaken by the international community. On

3

S/PV.6860

23 May, the Steering Board endorsed my decision to
close the Office of the High Representative in Brcko.
Accordingly, I closed that Office on 31 August. The
Steering Board also supported the decision of the Brcko
Supervisor, Rod Moore, to suspend his functions as of
the same date.
As a result of those actions by my Office and the
Brcko Supervisor, we have entered a new phase in
Brcko district where the local authorities have taken
full responsibility for day-to-day affairs in the district.
Given our responsibilities under the Final Award, both
the Supervisor and I will be keeping a close eye on
developments in that district.
In addition, a landmark ruling by the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the issue of State
property has significant implications for the resolution
of this issue, which is the second of the five objectives
for the closing of the Office of the High Representative.
In layman’s terms, the Court’s decision affirms the
primacy of the State’s ownership of public property.
After a campaign that rarely touched on local
issues, the 7 October local elections passed largely
without incident. Once again, Srebrenica was an area
of focus for the international community, and rightly
so given the genocide that was committed there. One
of the high-level visitors was the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
Despite some controversy surrounding the
registration and counting in Srebrenica, the elections,
thankfully, passed without major incident. They
resulted in a Bosniak Mayor and an equal distribution
of seats between Serbs and Bosniaks in the Municipal
Assembly. The parties must now come together to work
in a spirit of reconciliation in the interests of all of
Srebrenica’s residents. A life of dignity and coexistence
must be returned to Srebrenica. It should live up once
again to the etymology of its name, “the silver city”.
In the still heavily scarred and divided city of
Mostar, the prospect of delivering change through the
ballot box remains on hold. Due to the ongoing failure
of the parties to implement the Constitutional Court’s
ruling on Mostar’s electoral system, the town was the
only community in the country that did not hold local
elections on 7 October. With no agreement in sight close
to two years after the Court made its ruling, my Office
is currently engaged in a facilitation effort that aims
to help the local parties to deliver a domestic solution
to implement the Court’s ruling without further delay.

4

The discussions are in a crucial phase, and it is time
for all the parties to compromise and to implement the
Court’s ruling.
I very much hope that by the next time I report to
the Council we will have seen elections held in Mostar
and that the country as a whole will be catching up with
its neighbours in the region.
Allow me to conclude by making the following two
points.
First, Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot afford to
continue falling further and further behind other
countries in the region. The consequences of this would
be dire, economically, socially and politically.
Secondly, challenges to the Peace Agreement have
become so frequent and direct during the reporting
period that they deserve special attention. The
questioning of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty
and its future as a State must stop. The international
community must not tolerate such challenges, and we
must ensure that we are equipped with the will and
capacity to manage them. In doing so, we will also be
supporting the efforts of those willing to work for the
collective good of delivering lasting peace and stability
within the Euro-Atlantic framework.
We are in a critical phase, and we must express
more clearly than ever what is expected of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s political leaders and what will not
be tolerated. They must stop their divisive behaviour
and finally start leading the way to the country’s full
reintegration, in the interests of all its citizens. In so
doing, they can look to the example of how post-war
Europe was built, with tolerance, dialogue and sound
compromise. As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany, Guido Westerwelle, put it recently, the word
“confrontation” has been replaced in Europe by the
word “cooperation”.
Allow me to conclude with the inspirational
thoughts expressed by the Secretary-General when he
concluded his recent visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina:
“In a fast-moving region, no one can afford to be
left behind. That will take collective leadership.
That will take unity. That will take a commitment
to work and move forward together”.
The President: I thank Mr. Inzko for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.

12-58681

S/PV.6860

Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me begin by thanking
Ambassador Inzko for his comprehensive and
informative briefing. Germany aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered later by the observer of the
European Union (EU).
I should like to focus my remarks on three key
points today.
First, and most importantly for the Security Council,
the security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
remained calm and stable. Since its beginning in 2004,
the EU-led force (EUFOR) Operation Althea has not
had to intervene a single time to restore peace. Most
recently, the fifth local elections since the end of the
war were carried out in a calm environment.
Authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina have thus
proved capable of dealing with threats to the safe and
secure environment. Based on that assessment, the
reconfiguration of Operation Althea was completed by
1 September. With a reduced number of forces based
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Althea is successfully
focusing on capacity-building and training.
My second point concerns the current political
situation in Bosnia. Ambassador Inzko’s briefing and
the latest EU progress report provide a relatively grim
analysis of the state of reforms in the country. It is true
that there is a lack of a shared vision for the overall
direction of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the part of the
political leadership, and that is worrisome. Yet we have
also witnessed important signs of progress, particularly
at the beginning of this year, such as the establishment
of a new State-level Government, agreement on a
national budget, and new laws on State aid and a census.
We have made clear to the political leaders in
Bosnia and Herzegovina that they should place the
interests of their country as a whole and the well-being
of their citizens at the heart of their efforts by moving
Bosnia and Herzegovina steadfastly forward on the
reform track towards EU accession.
An important step in that regard was the agreement
between the political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the European Union on a road map that identifies
key requirements for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s path
towards Europe.
The most imminent of the challenges ahead
remains the long overdue implementation of the SejdićFinci ruling by the European Court of Human Rights,
on the right of minorities to be elected to the Bosnian

12-58681

Presidency and the second chamber of Parliament.
The EU has both the political will and the necessary
instruments to best support Bosnia and Herzegovina
in that endeavour. The increased EU presence in
the field and the strengthened mandate of the EU
Special Representative reaffirm the European Union’s
commitment towards Bosnia and Herzegovina.
That leads me to my third and last point, namely, the
international community’s engagement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the future. Germany wholeheartedly
welcomes the contribution to peace and stability made
by the High Representative and his Office over the
past 17 years. After the war ended in 1995, the close
monitoring and executive control of the international
community were undoubtedly necessary.
Today, however, such policies serve instead as an
impediment to the accountability of political leaders
to their electorate and to their ownership of the reform
process. Instead of sticking to the institutional set-up of
the past, we need to focus on concepts and instruments
that can initiate forward-looking developments.
With the European Union perspective of Bosnia and
Herzegovina finally occupying centre stage, we can
afford to relieve the Office of the High Representative
of tasks that are better fulfilled by the European Union
and its representatives on the ground. We therefore
welcome the decision to suspend international
supervision in the Brcko District, where the EU has
instead opened a new regional office. Further progress
in that regard is needed.
Allow me to remind Member States of an issue that
is still unresolved — the question of immunity. In order
to safeguard the footprint of the Office of the High
Representative in stabilizing Bosnia and Herzegovina,
a sustainable and comprehensive answer to the question
of the immunity of present and former staff of the Office
of the High Representative from legal proceedings has
to be found. We hope for early progress on that issue and
invite members to join us in the necessary discussions.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his briefing on what
is taking place in that country, as well as for the very
serious and devoted way in which he is carrying out his
responsibilities.
At the outset, Colombia recognizes the fact that
reaching a political agreement in any circumstances
requires effort and commitment. The situation in

5

S/PV.6860

Bosnia and Herzegovina is a special case, in which
the international community has helped the parties to
overcome obstacles and to reach significant agreements
aimed at reaching a lasting and peaceful solution. It
is therefore worrisome to note a deterioration in the
political situation and a reverse in strengthening the
Euro-Atlantic agenda, as reflected in the report of the
Secretary-General (see S/2012/813).
Our delegation believes that it is of the greatest
importance that the parties renew their commitment
to the Dayton Agreement and work in the same spirit
that enabled them to reach agreements in the past. It is
to be hoped that the entities and their political leaders
eschew inflammatory rhetoric, as it jeopardizes the
stability of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
unnecessarily threatens the progress made on the
Euro-Atlantic agenda. Language calling for the break-up
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and acts that undermine its
rule of law are not an appropriate response to the effort
that its own people and the international community
have devoted to that process. Instead, the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republika Srpska
must work constructively and pay particular attention
to major issues, such as the economic and social
challenges that they face.
With regard to events such as the Srebrenica
genocide, acknowledged by the International Court of
Justice and the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, we call for reconciliation and for
any demonstration regarding such events to seek to heal
wounds and to move towards mutual forgiveness.
We note positively the dialogue on justice promoted
by the European Union. We trust that the local leaders
of both entities will take that opportunity to discuss
judicial matters constructively and to thereby help
strengthen the rule of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Finally, Colombia once again reiterates its support
for the Dayton Agreement on the establishment of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the decisions ensuing
from that Agreement. We underscore the importance of
the strict implementation of the Agreement within the
context of its annex 10.
For Colombia, the United Nations bears the
responsibility of cooperating in the process that is
under way. However, equally, the parties should
cooperate with the High Representative, whose Office
must continue its work until the goals and conditions
of the 5+2 agenda are met. I wish to underscore the

6

important role of the multinational stabilization force
in strengthening Bosnia and Herzegovina’s future.
Colombia supports the extension of its mandate.
I do not wish to conclude without welcoming and
expressing every good wish to the Ambassador of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, who is here with us at this
Security Council meeting.
Mr. Khan (Pakistan): I thank High Representative
Valentin Inzko for his informative briefing today and
for the comprehensive report submitted to the Security
Council earlier (see S/2012/813). We appreciate the
important role that he is playing. Mr. Inzko has given
us some good and some bad news.
The good news is that the country’s fifth local
elections, held on 17 October and administered
completely by domestic authorities, were conducted
generally in line with democratic standards. We
congratulate the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina on
the success of those elections. We also welcome the
relatively calm and stable environment that prevails in
the country.
The bad news is alarming. The High Representative
has identified three disappointing developments: first,
little progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration;
secondly, direct challenges to the Dayton Peace
Agreement; and, thirdly, the intensification of divisive
and provocative rhetoric that could further vitiate
the atmosphere and undermine long-term peaceful
coexistence in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Those developments have led the High
Representative to cast off his usual optimism and to
warn the Council that progress on the five objectives
and two conditions has all but stalled. The most
disturbing concern is the Republika Srpska’s open
defiance of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is an intrinsic principle
built into the Dayton Agreement. Pakistan supports
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as the efforts to strengthen the
State at the national level, while preserving the rights
of all communal entities.
The Dayton Agreement has ensured peace
for 17 years. A direct challenge to the Agreement
should not be allowed to disrupt the fine and delicate
equilibrium that it has worked out. The sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina should
not be diluted. The Security Council must arrest any
drift towards dissolution.
12-58681

S/PV.6860

Sharp political differences among the political
parties, as well as a deliberate effort to impair the
federal structure, will weaken the State and will divert
attention from the pressing issues of economic growth,
social development and efficient fiscal management.
We are glad to hear from Mr. Inzko that there are now
signs of rapprochement towards a new coalition.
We condemn the statements of senior officials of
the Republika Srpksa that deny the genocide committed
in Srebrenica in 1995, a fact which has been established
beyond the shadow of a doubt by the International Court
of Justice and the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugloslavia. Such statements do serious harm to the
reconciliation process inside Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as within the region.
It is evident that there is a lack of progress on the
implementation of the five objectives and two conditions.
The time therefore is not right for considering the
closure of the Office of the High Representative. In
fact, in the present circumstances, there are compelling
reasons for the continuity of that mission.
It is vitally important that all parties recognize
the sanctity of the international legal framework for
the division of power. Pakistan supports all efforts to
ensure a safe and secure environment in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We urge the leaders of the country to
resolve their differences through dialogue with a view
to exploring common ground.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council must send
the right signals. We urge the Council to continue to
assess the situation and play its role in steering all sides
away from growing estrangement towards engagement.
That is best for the consolidation and stability of the
State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is also good for
regional peace and security.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his presentation. I endorse the
statement to be made by the observer of the European
Union.
I would like to take stock of developments in Bosnia
and Herzegovina over the past year.
The security situation on the ground has remained
calm and stable, as it has consistently for several years.
Furthermore, as stated by the Foreign Ministers of the
European Union (EU) and the Force Commander, the

12-58681

country’s authorities have thus far proven capable of
confronting any threat to the security climate.
Positive political developments have taken place
over the past six months. Important laws on the census
and State aid, required by the European Union, have
been enacted; the State budget was adopted, as was
an agreement on the distribution of defence and State
property between the central State and the entities.
Municipal elections organized by the Bosnians took
place in peaceful conditions, in particular in Srebrenica.
A new phase of political instability began this
summer. Nationalist rhetoric continues to stoke
tensions and suspicions and to hamper the authorities’
efforts to conduct necessary reforms. We regret that
development, and condemn those verbal excesses. Yet
we do not share the fears expressed in the report of the
High Representative (see S/2012/813), which to us seem
excessive, especially as political tensions have at no
point jeopardized the security climate.
We all know that the political challenges remain
numerous. More than ever, the response to those
challenges lies in giving substance to the European
perspective offered to the country. The European
Union has reaffirmed, including during the recent visit
of High Representative Cathy Ashton, its support for
the prospect of seeing the country join the European
Union as a united, sovereign country that enjoys full
territorial integrity.
That perspective is also reflected by the significant
and dynamic political, human and fi nancial engagement
of the European Union on the ground. The Office of
the European Union Special Representative has been
substantially strengthened, including in its regional
presence and with respect to the rule of law. Mr. Peter
Sørensen, the European Union Special Representative
and Head of the European Union Delegation, has our
full support.
We would like the current Government to resume
the course of reforms and, in particular, to truly strive
to bring the Constitution into line with the European
Convention on Human Rights.
We will be renewing the mandate of the European
Union Force-Operation Althea (EUFOR ALTHEA).
The reconfiguration of the mission has allowed us to
scale down the forces deployed and to refocus them
on capacity-building and training. EUFOR ALTHEA
retains a residual executive mandate to support the

7

S/PV.6860

capacities of the country’s authorities to maintain the
security environment if the situation requires it, which
thus far has never been the case.
The reconfiguration of the international presence
in Bosnia and Herzegovina is under way, as evidenced
by the end of the international supervision over the
district of Brcko and the completion of the European
Union Police Mission, of which some key residual tasks
have been assumed by the EU Special Representative.
An analysis of the reconfiguration of the Office of
the High Representative, requested by the European
Union Foreign Ministers, has also been launched. That
has led to initial steps taken in parallel with increased
engagement of the European Union. Those efforts
must continue because the reconfiguration is aimed at
achieving greater effectiveness based on the key role of
the European Union. We must continue to refocus the
action of the Office of the High Representative, ensuring
its complementarity with the action of the European
Union and continuing to identify and eliminate any
duplication with the European Union Office.
High Representative Inzko, the guarantor of the
peace accords on behalf of the international community,
has our support. But the current Governmental crisis
reminds us that it is high time for the Bosnian political
class to assume its responsibilities and restore its
unity with a view to the main priority, namely, the
European perspective offered to the country. Therefore,
the functions of High Representative must evolve
substantially.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We listened with interest to the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Inzko.
Regrettably, his report to the Security Council is again
written in alarmist tones and is critical of the Bosnian
Serb leadership (see S/2012/813). To create a more
balanced impression of the processes under way, we
recommend that he familiarize himself with the eighth
report of the Republika Srpska to the Security Council,
in which the dedication of the Bosnian Serbs to
international law and the letter of the Dayton Accords
is clear.
Russia supports the territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and is eager to see its institutions
function normally and sustainably while complying
with the principle of the equality of the three constituent
peoples set forth in the Dayton Peace Accords.

8

We agree that the situation in Bosnia over the
past six months has deteriorated somewhat. That has
happened in the light of the deteriorating relationships
between the two leading Bosniak parties, which could
have an impact on stability not just in the Federation,
but throughout the country. But let us not overdramatize
the situation. It is important that the local elections
of 7 October took place for the most part in a calm
environment and without significant violations.
The main task of the international community in
the current phase of the Bosnian settlement process is to
transfer responsibility for the fate of the country to the
Bosnians themselves. In that respect, we are in favour
of abolishing the Office of the High Representative
and, to that end, returning to the implementation
by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council of the five plus two programme. Like any other
issue of vital importance to the future of the country,
outstanding problems within that framework must be
resolved by the Bosnians themselves on the basis of
consensus between the three constituent peoples — the
Bosniaks, the Serbs and the Croats. In that respect,
we are encouraged by the continued internal Bosnian
dialogue.
Unlike the Bosnian Federation, the situation in the
Republika Srpska is stable. We are seeing continued
cooperation between the Bosnian governing party and
opposition on general Bosnian affairs on the basis of a
strict approach to upholding the Dayton Accords and
the legitimate interests of the Bosnian Serbs. We note
the importance of the signing by the President of the
Republika Srpska Milorad Dodik and the head of the
Bosnian Social Democrats Željko Komšić on 31 October
of a cooperation agreement that maps out compromise
solutions to a number of socioeconomic issues, as well
as to issues in the areas of justice and the functioning
of the administrative apparatus.
The leadership of the Republika Srpska is clearly
raising the question of the necessity of arriving at
an agreement with the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on issues concerning the reform of the
country and cautioning against violating the practice
of consensus, including when making decisions about
matters of foreign policy. We support them in their view
that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s existence is untenable if
those principles are not observed.
We welcome the suspension of the Office of the
Brcko Supervisor on 31 August according to the

12-58681

S/PV.6860

schedule decided at the May meeting of the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council. That is a
result of our joint efforts. We consider that decision to
be a first step towards winding down the Office of the
High Representative.
We agree with the importance of amending the
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina in order
to bring it into line with the verdict of the European
Court of Human Rights on the Sejdić-Finci case.
A compromise is possible in that regard through a
continuation of the dialogue. That said, there can be no
possible agreement with the expanded interpretation of
the European Court’s decision and the attempts to use
it as a pretext to review the entire Dayton architecture.
In August, the Bosnian sides submitted separate draft
constitutional amendments that reflected the verdict to
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly.
Their subsequent fate depends on the ability of members
of Parliament to agree on a decision.
We consider the creation of a strengthened European
Union (EU) mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina to be
another step towards winding down the Office of the
High Representative. In that context, we welcome the
division of the responsibilities of the High Representative
and the EU’s Special Representative. A prerequisite for
the work of those two international presences in Bosnia
and Herzegovina should be precise compliance with
their mandates. They must not encroach on each other’s
responsibilities, and they should certainly not duplicate
each other’s functions. While not a participant in the
European Union Force-Operation Althea, Russia
supports certain goals of its mandate relating to
providing security in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
cooperating on training personnel in the Ministry of
Defence and the country’s armed forces.
It is essential that we stop ignoring the fact that
for a number of years now the overall situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been fairly stable. We
should therefore look at the prospects and think about
how to reconfigure the international presences in the
country for the future. It is important that we increase
efforts to end the external protectorate, which has run
out of resources, as embodied in the Office of the High
Representative, and abolish the Bonn powers as soon
as possible. For now, the Office should be reorganized
to assist in implementing the five objectives and two
conditions, as well as in removing any legal clashes that
might have been created by the High Representative’s
imposition of restrictions on policies and appointments

12-58681

in the area of extra-judicial administration. We are
opposed to overburdening the European integration
agenda for Bosnia and Herzegovina with the activities
of the Office. The right to define future integration, like
the right to control the general direction of the processes
of reform, belongs to the Bosnians themselves.
In conclusion, the Russian Federation supports
a solid international reconciliation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and in that context, favours an impartial
investigation of every crime committed during the 19921995 conflict. We are compelled to conclude, however,
that, for reasons that are unclear, both the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
Bosnian judicial bodies prefer to prosecute Serbs.
The demonstrable bias of Mr. Serge Brammertz, the
Prosecutor of the Tribunal in The Hague, against contact
with organizations of relatives of Serbian and Croatian
victims of the Balkan crisis also raises questions. Such
failings must be eliminated.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome High Representative Inzko
back to the Security Council and to thank him for his
comprehensive briefing and his service to the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the interests of preserving
peace and promoting stability in the region.
I have three main points to make in reaction to
the High Representative’s report (see S/2012/813) and
briefing today. First, the United States would like
to congratulate the Bosnian people on their active
participation in the local elections that took place on
7 October. It is important that so many citizens turned
out to select their local leaders. Free and fair elections,
including voting rights for internally displaced
persons and returnees, are crucial to Bosnia’s future
membership in the European Union and NATO. We are
disappointed that the residents of Mostar were unable
to vote on election day because political leaders failed
to implement a constitutional court ruling on changing
the electoral system. But we welcome and strongly
support the efforts of the High Representative to
facilitate negotiations among the parties to resolve that
issue. We hope that the people of Mostar will be able to
exercise their right to elect their leaders soon.
Secondly, the United States is disappointed at
the lack of progress since the last report of the High
Representative (see S/2012/307). The promising
developments on the European Union (EU) and NATO
agenda that took place earlier in the year have stalled.
The decision by some parties to restructure the State
9

S/PV.6860

Government coalition after barely five months in office,
following 16 months of stalemate, has distracted the
Government from acting on the pressing reform agenda
that those parties profess to support. We hope that the
new coalition will complete Government restructuring
as soon as possible and resume work on the conditions
that the EU has established for Bosnia and Herzegovina
to be able to submit a credible membership application,
one that will comply with the verdict of the European
Court of Human Rights in the Sejdić-Finci case and
establish a coordination mechanism for engaging in
accession negotiations with the EU.
Furthermore, the United States stands ready to
support the activation of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
membership action plan at NATO, as soon as the
Government registers State ownership of the defence
properties required by the Ministry of Defence and
Armed Forces. Secretary of State Clinton and EU
High Representative Catherine Ashton delivered that
message when they visited Sarajevo together in October
and urged Bosnian leaders to put aside their differences
in order to complete the reforms necessary for EuroAtlantic integration.
Thirdly, the United States remains steadfastly
committed to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity. As Secretary Clinton said
during her recent visit to Sarajevo,
“It is totally unacceptable that, 17 years after
the war ended, some still question Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Such talk is a distraction from the problems facing
the country and serves only to undermine the goal
of European integration. The Dayton Accords must
be respected and preserved, period.”
The United States remains committed to supporting
the reforms made over the past 17 years that have enabled
progress towards EU and NATO integration. Attacks
by politicians from both entities on the independence of
the State judiciary, calls for the dissolution of the armed
forces, efforts to dissolve the State electricity transition
company — institutions that were created in order to
meet EU and NATO integration requirements — raise
serious questions about the sincerity of the stated
desires of those individuals to realize the aspirations
of the Bosnian people to become members of those two
intergovernmental organizations.
In that regard, let me reaffirm the unwavering
support of the United States for the High Representative’s

10

authorities to ensure full implementation of the Dayton
Peace Accords, including the use of the Bonn powers, if
needed. The United States will continue to support the
maintenance of the Office of the High Representative
until the five objectives and two conditions (5+2)
established by the Peace Implementation Council’s
Steering Board have been fulfilled.
We commend the High Representative’s decision to
close the Brcko Final Award Office and the suspension
of supervision of the Brcko District on 31 August,
moving Bosnia and Herzegovina closer to completing
one of the 5+2 objectives. We wish every success to
Brcko residents as their democratically elected leaders
assume full responsibility for governing the district.
In the 17 years since the signing of the Dayton
Peace Agreement, the United States, NATO and our
EU allies have worked diligently to help maintain peace
and security in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We remain
committed to supporting the Bosnian people in their
goal of Euro-Atlantic integration, and are prepared to
work with leaders who are committed to delivering
those results.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for presenting the
forty-second report on the implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina (see
S/2012/813). I would also like to express our full support
for Mr. Inzko and his Office.
The local elections held in Bosnia and Herzegovina
on 7 October were a major political landmark achieved
during the reporting period. We note with satisfaction
that they were conducted in line with democratic
standards and that the security situation in the country
remains stable. That confirmed the commitment and
capability of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to ensure a safe and secure environment in the country.
We also take positive note of the High
Representative’s assessment that during the reporting
period cooperation with the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia was satisfactory.
At the same time, we are concerned by the
relative stagnation of the political dynamic and by the
deepening divisions among political parties in Bosnia
and Herzegovina during the reporting period. As the
High Representative noted, little has been done to
implement the outstanding requirements for the closure
of his Office. We are particularly alarmed at the
12-58681

S/PV.6860

significant intensification of direct and open challenges
to the foundations of the Peace Agreement, including to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Government in February, following the compromise
reached by the main political parties, more than 16
months after the general elections of October 2010, and
the adoption in May of a national budget for 2012. All
those developments had inspired much hope for the
strengthening of the country’s institutions and for its
economic recovery in the framework of Euro-Atlantic
integration.

Azerbaijan condemns divisive rhetoric advocating
secession and dissolution of the State, as well as any
action or attempt to challenge the functionality of the
State and its constitutional responsibilities and to roll
back reforms related to the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. We agree with the High Representative
that abiding by the Dayton Agreement, particularly
the constitutional framework and the rule of law, is a
prerequisite for long-term stability. Obviously, efforts
to negate or undermine vital aspects of the Peace
Agreement and to undermine the unity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina require continued attention from
the Security Council and the broader international
community.

Togo was delighted that a new dynamic, based
on compromise and a spirit of consensus, had started
among Bosnian leaders; that all political actors had
become aware of and understood the urgent need to take
the destiny of their country into their own hands; and
that, despite the obstacles on the path to strengthening
the central State and its institutions, Bosnian leaders,
without exception, were finally ready to work to
consolidate the unity of the country and promote
common interests.

The economic and social situation in the country
continues to weaken, with a deteriorating fiscal
situation and poor growth prospects. The High
Representative noted the possible negative impact of
the current financial difficulties on the functioning of
State-level institutions. It is therefore essential that all
political factions of Bosnia and Herzegovina focus on
the country’s economic and development priorities.

But six months later, my country notes with regret
that the report just presented by the High Representative
on the issue before us appears to be in contrast with
the hope inspired by the previous report. This report
notes the stagnation and even setbacks on the political
front with regard to certain areas in which progress had
previously been noted and quite rightly commended by
the entire international community.

There is also a need for redoubled effort to resolve
long-outstanding humanitarian issues and to ensure
that the rights of returnees are fully guaranteed and
implemented.

My country regrets the situation, which is hampering
the full implementation of the Dayton Accords of
14 December 1995, which put an end to armed conflict
in the country. We believe that the situation, which is
due primarily to the unwillingness of certain actors
to continue on the path of dialogue and compromise
and their manifest will to further weaken the central
Bosnian State, is very troubling and warrants the full
attention of the Council.

We call on all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to engage in constructive dialogue with a view to
addressing pressing challenges and to strengthening
stability and unity in the country. It is also important
that the Security Council and the broader international
community continue to support the efforts of the
political leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina to that
end.
Mr. M’Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for presenting his
biannual report on the sociopolitical situation in that
country (see S/2012/813).
On 15 May we welcomed the important political
advances that Bosnia and Herzegovina made at the
beginning of this year (see S/PV.6771), set out in
the previous report of the High Representative (see
S/2012/307). We welcomed the formation of a central
12-58681

Togo is convinced that it is counterproductive for
certain entities within the Bosnian State, in violation
of international agreements and of the sovereign
constitution of the country, to continue to take legal
and political steps against the central institutions in
the fields of competence of the laws of the State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Those entities periodically
call into question the country’s territorial integrity and
threaten to proclaim independence. It is regrettable
that such nationalist views undermine the institutions
of the central State and the efforts of the international
community to bring peace and stability to the country
and the region.

11

S/PV.6860

Togo remains convinced that only a frank and
sincere dialogue and a search for compromise can
lead to a lasting, definitive settlement of differences.
We therefore call on all Bosnian political leaders to
cease promoting any unilateral or communitarian
solutions and to fight extremism and agitation likely to
destabilize the country. We urge them, rather, to seek,
through discussions, the same consensus and general
interest that had led to the formation of the Government
in February.
Regarding the five objectives and two conditions
necessary for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative, Togo is pleased that the office in Brcko
ended, on 31 August, its supervision mandate of the
District, in line with the 23 May recommendations of
the Peace Implementation Council. We hope that event
will be a strong signal for all Bosnian political actors
to fully engage in constructive dialogue with a view to
adopting all the necessary reforms for the country to
move towards greater internal and regional integration.
It is only at this price that they will be able to ensure
peace and prosperity for their citizens.
Given the challenges still facing the country,
maintaining an international presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina could be necessary in order to help it
reach a lasting political accord that can consolidate the
central institutions and ensure peace in the country and
the region.
I would like to conclude my remarks by reiterating
my country’s support for the efforts of the High
Representative and for the civilian and military
personnel working in the country to uphold the Dayton
Accords and the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like, at the outset,
to welcome High Representative Valentin Inzko and to
thank him for his informative briefing and report (see
S/2012/813).
Portugal aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
The year 2012 saw very positive political
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as countries
around this table recognized in the last Council debate
on this topic, in May (see S/PV.6771). As the current
year reaches its end, we should not forget positive
internal developments, such as the formation of the
Council of Ministers and, more recently, the municipal
elections of October, which were a broad success.

12

We should also note that the road map for accession,
signed on 27 June, is a significant and mutually agreed
step towards Bosnia and Herzegovina’s European
integration. The compliance of the federal Constitution
with the European Convention on Human Rights is
indeed key to the entry into force of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement and to a better working
relationship with the European Union.
It is incumbent on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
political leadership at all levels to foster a political
environment that is stable and conducive to
constructive decision-making. Portugal calls upon all
national stakeholders to spare no effort towards the
goal of making Bosnia and Herzegovina a stable and
prosperous State heading towards European Union
membership in the briefest possible time frame, and
overcoming the difficult circumstances on the external
and internal fronts that Bosnia and Herzegovina and its
neighbours still have to face.
In this context, Portugal condemns vehemently the
continued use of divisive rhetoric and regrets the doubts
that are needlessly cast upon Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
future by narrowly defined interests that relate only
slightly to the fundamental concerns of Bosnians
and their international partners. It is imperative that
common ground be found in internal politics so that
progress can be achieved in the crucial reforms that
the country needs to address not only in the social and
economic sphere, but also regarding its international
aspirations and obligations. In that regard, the efforts
that the European Union has undertaken in the past
year also deserve particular mention.
As we are well aware, we are set to adopt tomorrow
the authorization for the renewal of the European Union
Force-Operation Althea (EUFOR Althea). Recent gains
in the area of national security should be noted, as
should the secure and stable environment the country
has enjoyed in recent years. Portugal supports the
continuation of EUFOR Althea as a relevant element
in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s security with a significant
role in capacity-building and training, as well as its
executive military role in supporting the country’s
security.
I would like to end on a positive note. Portugal has
been deeply involved in peacekeeping in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since 1995. European security depends
on renewed and strengthened ties of alliance and
cooperation between nations so that we can all enjoy the

12-58681

S/PV.6860

peace and the stability that the Western Balkans and the
rest of Europe have so painstakingly restored. Bosnia
and Herzegovina can count on Portugal’s continued
support and friendship in the future.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese):I thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing. Recently, Bosnia
and Herzegovina has made progress in the fields of
national reconciliation, economic development and the
rule of law. The situation of the country as a whole has
remained stable. China welcomes those developments,
while it notes the difficulties and challenges that
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to face in its efforts
to stabilize the country and enhance the development,
support and help it continues to need from the
international community.
China respects the independence, sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. China also respects the choice of the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina with regard to the
future of their country and encourages all ethnic groups
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to live in peace and harmony
and pursue their common development. We hope that all
the ethnic groups of Bosnia and Herzegovina will stay
focused on the well-being and long-term interest of the
nation, and take practical measures to build up political
trust, promote national reconciliation, consolidate the
gains of the political process, settle their differences
through dialogue, fully implement the Dayton Peace
Agreement, and continue to strive for greater progress
in all fields of reconstruction.
The preservation of peace and stability and the
promotion economic development in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is in the common interest of all parties.
The question of Bosnia and Herzegovina is extremely
complex and sensitive because it not only involves
Bosnia and Herzegovina itself, but also bears on
the peace and stability of the entire Balkan region.
Therefore, the international community should take a
prudent approach to the matter and pay great attention
to the views and concerns of all parties.

(EUFOR) and hopes that the Force will increase its
support for the capacity-building of the armed forces
of Bosnia and Herzegovina so that the authorities will
be able to assume full responsibility for safeguarding
the national sovereignty, security and stability of their
country at an early date. China is ready to join the rest
of the international community in the ongoing effort
to contribute to the achievement of lasting peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa welcomes
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, back to the Council and thanks him
for his comprehensive briefing.
The report which the High Representative has
provided us presents a mixed bag of progress (see
S/2012/813). The country has remained stable, with no
serious security incidents. The holding of local elections
in a peaceful manner is also welcome. However, as
has already been indicated by various delegations, the
cohesiveness and unity of the Government of Bosnia
and Herzegovina have been severely challenged by
the disagreements between the political parties. That
has had negative implications for the fulfilment of the
5+2 agenda established by the Peace Implementation
Council (PIC) Steering Board.
We had hoped that the new coalition Government
formed in June would make progress in moving the
country forward to allow it to complete the 5+2 agenda
and assume full sovereignty and authority over its
affairs. We note the progress made in the implementation
of the Brcko Final Award and the subsequent decision
to suspend the supervision of the Brcko district. As
stated by the High Representative in his report, that
step constitutes an important step towards fulfilling the
objectives set by the PIC Steering Board, which have
also been endorsed in its communiqué of 23 May. It
is important that all concerned parties work within the
framework of the Final Arbitral Award to resolve that
matter.

China welcomes High Representative Inzko’s
efforts to promote the political process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and hopes that he will continue to play a
positive and constructive role in the implementation of
the Dayton Agreement, as mandated.

The issues of defence and State property, which
are necessary elements in fulfilling the outstanding
objectives of the 5+2 agenda, require continued
focus and attention. The implementation of existing
agreements, as well as the landmark decisions of
the Constitutional Court of 13 July relating to those
matters, are thus crucial.

China supports the extension of the mandate of
the European Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina

It is our view that peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are dependent on all parties’ respect for

12-58681

13

S/PV.6860

the rule of law and the legal instruments that underpin
the political structures in the country. We reiterate that
the political leadership and the international presence
should remain focused on recognizing the balance
contained in the Dayton Agreement and the subsequent
political structures, and exert every effort to ensure
that this balance is respected and maintained. In that
regard, we are concerned about provocative, divisive
and nationalistic rhetoric that could serve to undermine
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the State.
We should not forget that the Dayton Peace
Agreement is a temporary arrangement that has to
be replaced by a permanent constitution in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. All parties should commit to
constitutional reform, the purpose of which is to
establish stronger representative State structures. No
considerable progress can be made in establishing
lasting peace and stability without constructive dialogue
between the many ethnic groups and entities, as well as
between the various Bosnian structures and the High
Representative. Only through political dialogue would
it be possible to resolve outstanding issues such as the
reform of the Constitution.
Reconciliation should be the ultimate aim of a
continued dialogue. An essential aspect for reconciliation
is the commitment of all parties to fighting impunity
by bringing those accused of committing war crimes
to justice.
My delegation noted the reduction of the European
Union Force-Operation Althea presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We support the extension of its mandate
and the resolution currently being negotiated, and
specifically its focus on capacity-building, training
and retaining the capability to contribute to the
Government’s deterrence capacity.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to again
encourage all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
recommit themselves to the full implementation of their
obligations under the peace accords and agreements.
Political will and national ownership are essential
in moving the process forward to a long-term peace,
stability and reconciliation.
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
to thank him for his report (see S/2012/813).

14

We regret that the optimistic landscape of May has
been overshadowed by ill-timed actions and rhetoric.
We believe that it is vital that the international presence
continue to focus on acknowledging the balance gained
under the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the subsequent political
structures. We agree with paragraphs 22 and 28 of
the High Representative’s report, and we once again
express our commitment to the Dayton Agreement and
to the defence and preservation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The international presence cannot and should not
supplant the primacy of the State in the performance of its
tasks and responsibilities. The principle responsibility
for security and stability in the country falls to the
Government and people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. If
the necessary basis for a national political agreement
is missing, any involvement of the international
community will have potentially adverse consequences
and could set up serious obstacles to success and the
maintenance of a secure environment. We appeal to the
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to resume
the national dialogue that was proceeding earlier
this year, in order to achieve political consensus and
promote confidence.
We believe that conditions on the ground justify
the fact that the European Union (EU) Force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which has an executive mandate
pursuant to Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter,
remains in the country and continues to help the Office
of the High Representative and other international
organizations to carry out their respective mandates.
We assure the High Representative of our full support
in fulfilling his mandate.
Allow me to now highlight three relevant events
noted in the report of the High Representative.
The first is the holding of local elections. We
welcome the fact that these were administered entirely
by national authorities and certified by electoral
observers as meeting democratic standards. We trust
that the situation in Mostar will be resolved so as to
enable the electoral process to be completed.
Secondly, I note the suspension of the supervision
of the Brcko district. We welcome that step, which
recognizes the capacity of local institutions to function
effectively and permanently. However, it is still
necessary to retain the Arbitral Tribunal, established
pursuant to annex 2 of the General Framework

12-58681

S/PV.6860

Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as a mechanism to guarantee the important binding
obligations arising from the Final Arbitral Award.
Thirdly, we welcome the historic decision of 30 July
2012 issued by the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the constitutionality of the law on State
property in the Republika Srpska. This ruling protects
the interests of Bosnia and Herzegovina and enables a
negotiated solution on this issue. We also note that the
decision will have implications for resolving the issue
of military property.
To conclude, we recall that a decision must be taken
as to whether the Office of the High Representative will
be closed as soon as the remaining five objectives and
two conditions are met. My delegation is concerned
about the fact that, in the reporting period, no endeavours
were made to that end. We therefore urge all parties to
play an active part in the conclusion of this process,
which requires the High Representative to complete his
task and Bosnians to bear full responsibility for their
country. We await with interest the upcoming meeting
of the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council in late November.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to join
everyone in welcoming High Representative Valentin
Inzko back to the Council and to thank him for his
report (see S/2012/813). As always, it is a detailed report,
documenting objectively but also starkly the range of
serious ongoing challenges in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The United Kingdom would like to express its gratitude
to the High Representative for his ongoing commitment
to the implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement
against such a challenging political backdrop.
The United Kingdom shares the concern of the
High Representative over the current political situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This has been a year of
contrasts. The optimism in the early part of the year,
with the formation of the Council of Ministers and the
passing of key legislation, was replaced by a return
to political inertia. Serious disagreements within the
governing coalition after only four months stalled
progress on the country’s European Union (EU) and
NATO paths and frustrated progress towards delivering
the five objectives and two conditions necessary for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative.
This lack of progress is a symptom of a wider
political reality, in which Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
elected leaders are unwilling to put the needs of the

12-58681

country and its citizens above their own narrow
interests. Political inertia is now in danger of becoming
established practice, and we urge the country’s leaders
to focus on the reforms necessary to deliver a better
future for its citizens. It is the foremost responsibility
of democratically elected politicians to govern in a
way that promotes the interests and welfare of the
population they represent. This is a responsibility that
is being neglected by the political leadership of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Making progress on the EU path and entrenching
fiscal sustainability will require a commitment to
reform and functionality that has so far been absent.
Last month’s local elections were a stark reminder of
the continued dominance of nationalist politics, but
with local elections now over, there is a period of
opportunity that the political leaders must seize.
In this regard, we share the High Representative’s
concern, and that expressed by many representatives
around this table, about the intensification of nationalistic
rhetoric and challenges to the State. During the recent
election campaign and even before it, Republika Srpska
authorities increased the intensity and frequency of
their attacks on State-level institutions and sought to
undermine the functionality of the Government.
For anyone who doubts the seriousness of these
challenges to the Dayton framework, I recommend
that they read carefully some of the footnotes to the
High Representative’s report, which catalogue a range
of public statements that I trust that all around this
table would find completely unacceptable, as they
seek to undermine the principles of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. Such an approach will only obstruct the
reform process and offer no benefit to any section of
the population.
Let me emphasize once more the position of the
British Government, quoted by the High Representative
in his statement earlier in this meeting. Bosnia and
Herzegovina will join the European Union only as a
single, sovereign State.
The country has a clear route towards EU and NATO
membership, which will provide a proven framework of
peace, security and regional cooperation. The United
Kingdom is fully supportive of this goal and will do
everything it can to facilitate progress, but Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s leaders need to help their own citizens
towards this positive future. This is a future that the
population of Bosnia and Herzegovina deserves no

15

S/PV.6860

less than the populations of the other countries in
the region, including those that have been making
good progress in recent years towards European and
Euro-Atlantic integration. The political leadership in
Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to transform its current
approach and to focus with energy and commitment on
the reforms that will carry the country down the path
towards eventual EU and NATO membership. That,
rather than the protracted power struggles among the
leaderships of the various Bosnian political parties,
represents the way forward for the country.
We strongly support the roles of the EU Special
Representative and of the EU Head of Delegation,
Mr. Peter Sørensen, who is doing an excellent job in
placing EU accession at the forefront of the country’s
political agenda. We also commend the collaborative
working relationship forged between him and High
Representative Inzko. Moving forward, the EU Special
Representative’s role will be vital in re-energizing the
EU’s approach in-country.
While we understand some of the difficulties on
reaching agreement on essential reforms, it is clear that
Sarajevo has fallen further behind its neighbours on the
path towards EU accession. We urge political leaders
to focus on the swift implementation of the road map
they agreed with the European Commission in June.
Only then can it move forward with its Stabilization
and Association Agreement and consider submitting a
credible membership application.
The political situation is also having a negative
impact on economic confidence. We share the
High Representative’s concerns about growth, high
unemployment and the accompanying social problems.
They have been compounded by endemic corruption
at all levels of Government. Local officials must take
determined action to eliminate corruption in all its
manifestations.
It is because of those underlying political challenges
and risks to stability that the United Kingdom supports
the High Representative’s assessments that the
European Union Force-Operation Althea continues
to play a central role in efforts to maintain a safe and
secure environment, and that it remains a vital factor
in stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. International
safeguards remain essential, alongside a reinforced EU
presence. We therefore welcome the agreement reached
at the October EU Foreign Affairs Council to continue
to fulfil EUFOR’s executive mandate. We look forward

16

to the Security Council agreeing on a renewed mandate
for EUFOR shortly.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like, at the outset, to welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and to thank him for his comprehensive report (see
S/2012/813) on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina for the period
21 April to 26 October. We share his assessment and we
wholeheartedly endorse the recommendations he made
at the end of his briefing.
The report before us, while providing new
information on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
clearly reports a break in the progress achieved during
the previous period. It raises serious concern about
the breakdown of relations among the partners in
the Federation. After a promising beginning to this
year marked by encouraging political dialogue, the
concluding of an important agreement that led to the
formation of a State Council of Ministers and of a new
Government and the adoption of the 2012 budget, a series
of unilateral pronouncements and actions on the part of
politicians have undermined the very foundations of the
Dayton Accords, and even the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unity of the Federation.
Those Accords undeniably brough peace and
stability to a region in turmoil, one that has suffered
more than others from war and its humanitarian
consequences for the people of the region. Their
implentation to date has given reason for hope about
Bosnia and Herzegovina recovering its proud identity in
its diversity and has opened the way for integration into
the Euro-Atlantic community. No one denies the difficult
challenges in effectively implementing the Dayton
Accords. Still, the agreed constitutional mechanisms
and the arrangements safeguarding compliance with
commitments and promoting cooperation and dialogue
within the Federation remain the sole means to protect
the interests of all Bosniaks.
Building the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
such that all its constituents can take ownership of it is
a long-term project. It requires patience, courage and,
especially, the political will to work together for peace
in the present and for prosperity for future generations.
To that end, all domestic and international efforts
should come together for pacification and responsible
behaviour on the part of all politicians in the country,
so that they can overcome their differences and put the

12-58681

S/PV.6860

interests of their citizens first in their thoughts and
actions, where they belong. As the High Representative’s
report points out, the backsliding visible in political
life in Bosnia and Herzegoina and the quasi-paralysis
of the Government have had a negative impact on the
country’s economy and on the citizens’ ability to meet
basic needs.
We are all aware of the tragic conditions and suffering
borne by the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are
pleased that peace and security nevertheless continue
to prevail, despite internal political problems. We must
do all we can to remedy the situation. My country is
happy to have contributed to efforts to stabilize Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We continue to uphold its sovereignty
and territorial integrity, and we call on the leaders of
factions to renounce provocation and confrontation.
The Security Council should send that message clearly
today to all those who strive to undermine Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s stability and the ability of its Dayton
Accords institutions to function.
My country greatly appreciates the efforts of the
High Representative. Despite the many frustrations
he must certainly feel, we encourage him to persevere
in the help and good offices he lends to the cause of
stability and coexistence in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We call on all parties to re-engage in political dialogue
and to do all they can to re-establish trust and consensus
and to work towards outcomes acceptable to all.
The High Representive and our friends the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina can trust in Morocco’s
engagement and support in safeguarding the country’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, including our
commitment to contribute to a prosperous future for all
elements of its population.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to welcome High
Representative Valentin Inzko to the Council and to
thank him for both his comprehensive briefing and his
report on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (see
S/2012/813).
It is a matter of satisfaction that there has been
peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina during
the period covered by the report. However, political
developments are of serious concern. There has
been little progress in the country’s Euro-Atlantic
integration. Negative rhetoric has adversely affected

12-58681

economic prospects. Those issues need to be addressed
by political entities within the framework established
by the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We commend the conducting of local elections
on 7 October, and we hope that grass-roots
democratic institutions will promote nation-building,
intercommunity harmony and the rule of law. The
joint declaration of the Foreign Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro and Serbia
on cooperation to protect and promote the rights of
refugees, returnees and internally displaced persons,
signed earlier this year, should serve as an important
confidence-building measure. Such cooperation
will not only promote regional cooperation, but also
facilitate their common aspirations for Euro-Atlantic
integration.
We have noted that the progress on outstanding
issues for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative has been somewhat slow. We are,
however, glad that the recent State property ruling by
the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
has laid out guiding principles for the resolution of the
State property issue. We also welcome the closure of
the Brcko Final Award office on 31 August.
Through their continued presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the European Union and NATO military
missions have carried out an important role in ensuring
that country’s citizens’ safety and security, even when
the political situation is tense. We commend the efforts
made by the European Union-led force and support the
extension of its mandate.
As I have said in previous meetings, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a novel experiment in building a new
nation from the rubble of the civil war that the peoples
of the former Yugoslavia had to endure in the 1990s.
It is never easy to build a multi-ethnic, multilingual,
multicultural and multi-religious country. The problems
that have been mentioned in the report and the briefing
of the High Representative are bound to be encountered
in the path of building a nation inhabited by people of
different faiths, ethnicities and languages.
Our own experience over the last six decades has
convinced us that although the path to building such
a nation is long and arduous, the fruits are well worth
the efforts.
Resolving the problems facing the Bosnian peoples
therefore calls for patience, determination and mutual
17

S/PV.6860

accommodation. Unilateral actions, mutual suspicion,
rhetorical statements and violations of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace will only vitiate
the political and social atmosphere and delay the
achievement of their goals.
The General Framework Agreement for Peace and
its implementation have ensured peace and security in
Bosnia and Herzegovina over the last 17 years. Nothing
should be done to undermine the Peace Agreement’s
foundations or roll back the reforms undertaken to
implement it. We would therefore urge the leadership
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the international
community, to persevere in spite of the problems that
are encountered. We hope that the Bosnian parties
will engage, in a spirit of compromise and maturity,
in addressing political problems so that the Peace
Agreement and its implementation are strengthened.
They should also take concerted steps so that the
currently deteriorating economic prospects are reversed
and the country can return to the path of high growth of
the pre-recession years.
In conclusion, I would like to highly commend the
work being done by the High Representative in assisting
the people and leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
their nation-building endeavours. We fully support his
efforts.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Starčević (Serbia): First of all, I would like to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko, the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to
thank him for his report to the Council (see S/2012/813).
At the outset, let me point out that Serbia has stable
relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina and fully respects
the Dayton Peace Agreement as the basis of stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region of the Western
Balkans. We are committed to the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to
non-interference in its internal affairs. We shall support
any agreement relative to the future constitution of that
country that is reached by consensus between the two
entities and the three constitutive peoples.
Serbia welcomes all the consensus decisions
adopted by the governmental bodies and representatives
of the two entities in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
deems them important steps forward on that country’s

18

road to the European Union. Likewise, concrete
encouragements from the European Union are needed
for the further stabilization of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
In the context of the European integration of the
entire Western Balkans, Serbia is ready to continue to
promote cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as exchange experiences with and render support
to that country, with the aim at reaching our common
goal of joining the European family of nations.
In the opinion of my country, sustainable solutions
for lasting stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina can
be achieved only through dialogue and compromise
between the two entities and three constitutive peoples.
We consider that the international community should
treat the relations between the three constitutive peoples
in Bosnia and Herzegovina with great care and respect
for their interests. Serbia is encouraging all sides in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to invest additional efforts in
reaching such solutions for all outstanding issues.
Serbia has demonstrated its full readiness to
confront the past and contribute to a better future for
and the well-being of the region, doing all that was
necessary in that respect. Therefore, we consider that
all war crimes committed on the territory of the former
Yugoslavia must be processed in order to establish
lasting stability and reconciliation in the region.
In that context, Serbia welcomed the setting
up, at the insistence of the Republika Srpska and in
agreement with Baroness Ashton, High Representative
of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy, of a commission to review judiciary
and prosecution practices in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which began its work last year. In November 2011, the
Commission adopted preliminary recommendations
which highlighted the lack of objectivity, transparency
and efficiency in the judiciary of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, especially with respect to the processing
of war crimes. It also recommended that the positions
of international judges and prosecutors be terminated
by the end of 2012.
Those recommendations are a good basis for
the strengthening of the institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and finalizing the process of reconciliation.
We hope that the legitimately elected representatives
of all peoples and entities will very soon display the
ability and capacity to take over the responsibility for
managing the affairs of the State independently, which

12-58681

S/PV.6860

would make the case for the maintenance of the Office
of the High Representative and the so-called Bonn
powers invalid.
Regarding the bilateral cooperation of my country
with Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly in the
economic field, let me point out that this cooperation
has registered significant results. Proceeding from
the Agreement on Special Parallel Relations, Serbia
has had successful cooperation with the Republika
Srpska, but, at the same time, has made every effort to
strengthen cooperation with the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, with considerable results.
To promote and strengthen that cooperation,
important agreements were reached during the visit
to Sarajevo by His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić,
Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia, on 13 and
14 September 2012. On that occasion, it was agreed,
inter alia, that the Ministries of Foreign Affairs of the
two countries would draft a list of the outstanding issues
to be addressed, identify the most important areas of
cooperation and take concrete steps to urgently reactivate
the Joint Commission for Economic Cooperation and
the Interstate Council for Cooperation. That process
has already been operationalized during the political
consultations held between the State Secretary of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia
and the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia
and Herzegovina on 5 November 2012. A new impetus
to the strengthening of bilateral cooperation between
our two countries is expected during the visit of His
Excellency Mr. Vjekoslav Bevanda, Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
is planned for the end of this year.
By actively participating in, and chairing numerous
regional initiatives, the Republic of Serbia has
confirmed its commitment to strengthening regional
cooperation. The successful cooperation with Bosnia
and Herzegovina within the Southeast European
Cooperation Process, the Central European Initiative,
the Regional Cooperation Council and the AdriaticIonian Initiative, inter alia, contributes to the further
strengthening of good-neighbourly relations and to a
common European future.
I would like to point out that Serbia continues to
be fully committed to achieving just, comprehensive
and sustainable solutions to the problem of refugees.
I reiterate the importance of the International Donors’
Conference on Durable Solutions for Refugees and
Internally Displaced Persons, held in Sarajevo in April.
12-58681

It was a good example of the successful cooperation of the
four countries of the region — Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia, Montenegro and Serbia — in achieving, with
the assistance of international organizations and the
donor community, a basis for lasting housing solutions
for the refugees. If the remaining funds needed are
secured, the solution to that problem would no doubt
contribute to the promotion of good-neighbourly
relations and the achievement of lasting stability and
reconciliation in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): At the outset, allow
me to extend my sincere congratulations to Your
Excellency on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of November. Let
me also welcome His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and to thank him for his briefing and his report (see
S/2012/813).
Croatia aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union (EU), to be delivered shortly. However,
allow me to make a statement in my national capacity
as well.
Bosnia and Herzegovina developing as a fully
functional State and joining NATO and the EU is not
only something that Croatia strongly supports and will
continue to support, but is also crucial to stability in
South-Eastern Europe.
Croatia notes with regret that, 17 years after
the war, there are still doubts about the territorial
integrity and the constitutional framework of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Consequently, instead of discussing
today Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress on the NATO
Membership Action Plan and the opening and closing
of European Union membership negotiation chapters,
we are compelled to struggle with separatist tendencies
and the obstruction of democratic processes.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has a future as a member
of the Euro-Atlantic community, as a modern European
State with a developed democracy and a viable and
competitive economy, and as a State with a particular
political system. In many aspects, that system, rooted
in the Dayton Peace Accords, is based on ethnic
representation, which is meant to be founded on
genuine equality among the three constitutive peoples.
That equality is the key to successfully achieving an
ethnic balance among its citizens, stability and the
19

S/PV.6860

functionality of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is, and will
continue to be for the foreseeable future, a conditio sine
qua non of the political, economic and cultural life of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
However, such equality is not secured through the
current electoral legislation. The Croats of Bosnia and
Herzegovina are the least numerous but are nevertheless
a constitutive people. Breaching their right to have
political representatives whom they themselves elected
is dangerous not only for their political existence but
for Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole. It would be
equally detrimental if the other two constituent peoples
were unable to elect their genuine representatives.
That said, it should be stressed that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is also a State of all its citizens, regardless
of ethnicity or faith. As such, it must implement the
verdict of the European Court of Human Rights on
the Sejdić-Finci case. That the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina who do not belong to one of the three
constituent peoples are discriminated against by the
election process and that Bosniaks and Croats in the
Republika Srpska and Serbs in the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina suffer the same type of discrimination
is a legacy of the Dayton Peace Accords. Nevertheless,
we urge the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to reach a viable and sustainable solution on that issue.
We believe that the relevant objective, which is a key
element for the entry into force of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union, will
be achieved at the earliest possible time.
With regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress
towards joining NATO, we urge the political leaders in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to further the efforts towards
implementing the six-party political agreement on the
issue of military property and to work constructively
to implement it without delay in order to start the first
cycle of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Membership Action
Plan as soon as possible.
Croatia wants to develop the Euro-Atlantic
partnership with Bosnia and Herzegovina. We stand
ready to cooperate closely with Bosnia and Herzegovina
on all issues relating to Croatia’s future European Union
membership and to provide Bosnia and Herzegovina
with firm political and robust technical support in that
process of European integration.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.

20

Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU). The acceding country
Croatia, the candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Iceland, the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Albania, the European Free
Trade Association country Norway, member of the
European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
I join other speakers in welcoming High
Representative Valentin Inzko back to the Council and
express our support for him and his Office.
Some five weeks ago, Bosnia and Herzegovina held
local elections, which, it should be noted, took place
in an overall satisfactory manner, although they were
postponed in Mostar. In addition, there were important
signs of progress in the first half of 2012, with strong
support from the European Union. That proves that
moving forward is possible.
Yet the political and economic situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina continues to be difficult. The lack
of progress in implementing the necessary political
and economic reforms, the continued use of divisive
rhetoric, and deeply rooted divisions among political
parties continue to cause a considerable headwind
for the efforts of those who want to see Bosnia
and Herzegovina as a stable, viable, multi-ethnic,
prosperous and united State, cooperating peacefully
with its neighbours and irreversibly on track towards
EU membership. We therefore encourage the Security
Council, as well as the European Union and others
that are working towards that end, both on the ground
and within the wider international community, to send
a message of support for the efforts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s political leadership.
The recent political instability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, both at the State and Federation levels,
has weakened the earlier positive momentum in the
implementation of the reform agenda. Following the
municipal elections on 7 October, the European Union
has stepped up its engagement with the country’s
authorities in order to underline the responsibility of
political leaders to constructively address today’s
pressing challenges. Those include in particular the
rule of law, the economy, jobs and social welfare. To
make credible progress on meeting those challenges
requires that Bosnia and Herzegovina move forward on
the European path. During their joint visit to Sarajevo

12-58681

S/PV.6860

on 30 October, High Representative and European
Commission Vice-President Ashton and United States
Secretary of State Clinton jointly highlighted those
priorities and reaffirmed their commitment to Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s future.
The European Union believes that it is critical that
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s obligations under the interim
Stabilization and Association Agreement are fulfilled
as a matter of priority. Failing that, the country would
not be in a position to make the progress on its path
towards European integration that its citizens expect
and to which they are entitled. In particular, Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs to urgently bring its Constitution into
compliance with the European Convention on Human
Rights and to implement the ruling of the European
Court of Human Rights in the Sejdić-Finci case. That
will allow the European Union to take a decision on the
entering into force of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina, paving the
way for further steps forward, including a credible EU
membership application.
The European Union also strongly encourages
Bosnia and Herzegovina to move forward in the
implementation of the road map agreed among its
political leaders in the high-level dialogue on the
EU accession process. The role of the road map is to
facilitate the implementation of the key requirements
in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s path towards Europe. The
European Union also welcomes the decision to suspend
international supervision in the Brcko District, taken at
the last meeting of the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board meeting in May, and the accompanying
closure of the High Representative’s Office in Brcko on
31 August.
Since September 2011, the European Union
has strengthened its political presence in Bosnia
and Herzegovina in order to facilitate its progress
towards European integration. The European Union
is now represented by a single EU presence on the
ground — the EU Special Representative and Head
of Delegation — which is fully engaged in supporting
Bosnia and Herzegovina in all EU-related matters. It
further increased its presence in 2012, including in the
field, by opening regional offices in Mostar and Brcko
and increasing the size of the regional office in Banja
Luka. The EU Special Representative and Head of
Delegation is also offering the EU Force Commander
political guidance on military issues with a local

12-58681

political dimension, in particular concerning sensitive
operations and relations with local authorities and the
local media.
The European Union also continues to support
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress in the security field.
While the overall security situation has remained calm
and stable and Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities have
proven capable of dealing with threats to the security
environment so far, Ministers last month confirmed that
the European Union is ready to keep the multinational
stabilization European Union Force-Operation Althea
focused on capacity-building and training, while also
retaining the capability to contribute to the Bosnia
and Herzegovina authorities’ deterrence capacity, if
the situation so requires, by continuing an executive
military role in support of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
efforts to maintain a safe and secure environment under
a renewed United Nations mandate.
Separately, as a sign of progress, the European
Union concluded the operations of its civilian police
monitoring mission on 30 June. We nevertheless
remain committed in the area of the rule of law and
have established a Law Enforcement Section in the
EU office. We also continue to provide considerable
pre-accession assistance.
In the context of the overall strategy of the EU
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, we look forward to
continuing in the appropriate forum the discussion with
the international community on the reconfiguration of
the international presence and call on the authorities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to meet the outstanding
objectives and conditions for the closure of the Office
of the High Representative.
The European Union reiterates its unequivocal
commitment to the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a sovereign and united country. We
remain ready to provide the necessary assistance to
support progress towards Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
European perspective. It is that approach and that
European perspective that will take the country
forward on its reform agenda, towards stability and
development, on its path to the European Union.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

21
