111.

32/89.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Comrnittee

World Disarmament Conference

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2833 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971, 2930 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972,
3183 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3260 (XXIX)
of 9 December 1974, 3469 (XXX) of 11 December
1975 and 31/190 of 21 December 1976,
Reiterating its conviction that all peoples of the
world have a vital interest in the success of disarmament negotiations and that all States should be in a
position to contribute to the adoption of measures for
the achievement of this goal,
Stressing anew its belief that a world disarmament
conference, adequately prepared and convened at an
appropriate time, could promote the realization of
such an aim and that the co-operation of all nuclearweapon Powers would considerably facilitate its attainment,
Taking into account the provisional agenda of the
special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament, 44 to be held in May and June 1978, and
the recommendations proposed in the report of the
Preparatory Committee for the Special Session of the
General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament,45 endorsed
by the Assembly in its resolution 32/88 A and B of
12 December 1977,
l. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee on the World
Disarmament Conference to submit to the General
Assembly at its special session devoted to disarmament
a special report on the state of its work and deliberations;
2. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to maintain
close contact with the representatives of the States
possessing nuclear weapons in order to remain currently informed of their respective attitudes, as well
as to consider any relevant comments and observations
which might be made to the Committee and to submit
a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-third session the item entitled "World
Disarmament Conference".
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1977
32/152.

lncendiary and other specific conventional weapons which may he the subject
of prohibitions or restrictions of use for
humanitarian reasons

The General Assembly,
Convinced that the suffering of civilian populations
and combatants could be significantly reduced if general agreement can be attained on the prohibition or
restriction for humanitarian reasons of the use of specific conventional weapons, including any which may
be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects,
Mindful that positive results as regards the non-use
or restriction of use for humanitarian reasons of spe44 /bid.,

para. 17.
17-32.

4.5 /bid .. paras.

57

cific conventional weapons would serve, in addition,
as encouragement in the broader field of disarmament
and might facilitate subsequent agreement on the elimination of such weapons which were completely banned
for use,
Recalling that the issue of prohibitions or restrictions
for humanitarian reasons of the use of specific conventional weapons has been the subject of substantive
discussion for a number of years, notably at the sessions of the Conference of Government Experts on the
Use of Certain Conventional Weapons held, under the
auspices of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, at Lucerne from 24 September to 18 Octobcr
1974 16 and at Lugano from 28 January to 26 February 1976, 47 and at four sessions of the Diplomatic
Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of
International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed
Conflicts and in the General Assembly since 1971,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General 48
on the work of the Diplomatic Conference relevant to
the prcsent resolution,
H aving concluded from these reports that discussions
have taken place primarily on the questions of prohibiting the use of conventional weapons, the primary effect
of which is to injure by fragments not detectable by
X-ray, of restrictions in the use of land-mines and
booby traps, and of prohibitions or restrictions of use
of incendiary weapons, including napalm, and that consideration was also given to other conventional weapons, such as small-calibre projectiles and certain blast
and fragmentation weapons, and to the possibility of
prohibiting or restricting the use of such weapons,
Noting resolution 22 (IV) on follow-up regarding
prohibitions or restrictions of use of certain conventional weapons adopted by the Diplomatic Conference
on 7 June 1977, 49 in which the Conference recommends, inter alía, that a conference of Governments on
such weapons should be convened not later than 1979,
1. Relieves that the work on such weapons should
both build upon the areas of common ground thus far
identified and include the search for further areas of
common ground and should in each case seek the
broadest possible agreement;
2. Decides to convene in 1979 a United Nations
conference with a view to reaching agreements on
prohibitions or restrictions of the use of specific conventional weapons, including those which may be
deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects, taking into acc.ount humanitarian
and military considerations, and on the question of a
system of periodic review of this matter and for consideration of further proposals;
3. Decides to convene a United Nations preparatory
confcrence for the conference referred to in paragraph
2 above and requests the Secretary-General to transmit
invitations to all States and parties invited to attend
the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and
Devclopment of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts;
46 For the report of the first session, see Conference of Government Experts on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
(lntemational Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva, 1975).
4 7 For the report of the second session, see Conference of
Government Experts on the Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons (International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva,
1976).
4 BA/9726, A/10222, A/31/146, A/32/124 ud Corr.l.
49 A/32/124, annex 11.

General Assembly-Thirty-eeeond Session

58

4. Recommends that the Preparatory Conference
for the United Nations Conference on Prohibitions or
Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively lnjurious or
to Have Indiscriminate Effects should meet once in
1978 for organizational purposes and, subsequently,
with the task of establishing thc bcst possiblc substantive basis for the achievement at thc United Nations
Conference of agreements as envisagcd in the present
resolution and of considcring organizational matters
relating to the holding of the United Nations Conference;
5. Requests the Secrctary-Gencral to assist the
Preparatory Conference in its work;
6. Decides to includc in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third scssion an item entitled "United Nations
Conferencc on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have lndiscriminate
Effects: report of the Preparatory Conference".
106th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

32/153.

Non-interference in the interna! affairs
of States

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/91 of 14 December 1976
on non-interference in the interna! affairs of States,
T aking note of the reports of the Secretary-Generalºº
containing the views of Member States on ways by
which greater respect for the principie of non-interference in the interna! affairs of States can be assured,
l. Urges ali States to abide by the provisions of
paragraphs 3 and 4 of General Assembly resolution
31 /91, which de no unce any form of interference in
the interna! or externa! affairs of other States and condemn ali forros and techniques of coercion, subversion
and defamation aimed at disrupting the pol-itical, social
or economic order of other States;

2. Calls once again upon ali States, in accordancc
with the purposes and principies of the Charter of
the United Nations, to undertake necessary measures in
order to prevcnt any hostile act or activity taking place
within their territory and being directed against the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of another Statc;
3. Considers that a declaration on non-interference
in the interna! affairs of States would be an important
contribution to the further elaboration of the principies
for strengthening equitable co-operation and friendly
relations among States, based on sovereign equality and
mutual respect;
4. Request.s the Secretary-Gencral to invite ali
Member States once again to exprcss their views on
the question of non-intcrfcrcnce in thc interna! affairs
of States, and to report to the General Asscmbly at
its thirty-third session.
106th plenary meeting
19 Dcccmher 1977

:{2 / l !'i4.

lmplementation of the Declaration on
tlw Strl'ngthening of lnternational Seeurity

The General Assemb/y,
Having considered the item entitled "Implementation of the Dcclaration on the Strcngthening of International Security",

Bearing in mind thc Dcclaration on the Strengthening of lntcrnational Security" 1 and thc rclcvant resolutions of the General Assembly conccrning thc implementation of the Dcclaration,
Noting with satisfaction current efforts towards the
strcngthening of international peace and security, the
realization of arms limitation and disarmament mcasures, thc universalization of the process of relaxation
of tension and the promotion of pcaceful co-operation
in accordance with the purposes and principies of the
Unitcd Nations,
Reafjirming the close link existing betwccn the
strengthening of international security, disarmament.
decolonization and development, and stressing the need
for concerted action to achieve progress in those areas
and also the importancc of the early implementation of
the decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its
sixth" 2 and seventhr.a special sessions on the establishment of thc new international economic order,
Noting with profound concern the continuing existence of crises and hot-beds of tension in various regions
endangering international peace and security, the continuation and intensification of the arms race as well
as acts of aggression, foreign occupation, the threat
or use of force, alien domination, forcign interfercncc
and the cxistencc of colonialism, neo-colonialism, racial
discrimination and apartheid, which remain the main
obstacles to the strengthening of peace and security, and
in particular the danger arising from the attempts of
South Africa to acquire nuclear weapons,
Recognizing the need for objective dissemination of
information about developments in the political, social,
economie, cultural and other fields of ali countries and
the role and rcsponsibility of the mass media in this
respect, thus contributing to the growth of trust and
friendly relations among States,
1. Calls upon all States to adherc fully to, and
implement consistently, the purposes and principies of
thc United Nations and ali the provisions of the Dcclaration on the Strcngthening of International Security
and to contribute effectively to the increasing peacekeeping and peace-making role of the United Nations;
2. Reiterate.1· with emphasis its recommcndation
that the Sccurity Council should consider appropriate
steps towards carrying out effectivcly, as providcd in
the Charter of the United Nations and thc Declaration
on the Strengthcning of lnternational Security, its primary rcsponsibility for thc maintenance of intcmational
pcacc and seeurity;
3. Rea[!inm· the legitimacy of the strugglc of peoples undcr colonial and alíen domination to achicve
self-detcrmination and independence and urges States
to increase thcir support and solidarity with them and
their national liberation movements and to undertakc
'd

Resolution 2734 (XXV).

r, 2 Sec rcsolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-VI).

aOA/32/164 ami Add.l, A/32/165 and Add.l and 2.

r,:: Sce resolution 3362 (S-Vll).
