A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/84
11 January 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 72
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/49/709)]
49/84.

The South Atlantic region as a
nuclear-weapon-free zone

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denuclearization of the South
Atlantic, 1/ adopted on 22 September 1994, at Brasilia, by the third meeting
of member States of the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic,
Determined to continue to contribute to the process of general and
complete disarmament, under effective international control, in particular in
the field of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, with a
view to strengthening international peace and security,
Stressing the growing importance of the symbiotic relationship between
disarmament and development in current international relations, and
recognizing the importance of promoting social and economic development and
international cooperation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
Recalling the principles and norms of international law applicable to
maritime space, in particular the use of the high seas for peaceful purposes
and the freedom of navigation and overflight,
Cognizant of the support received for the full entry into force of the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the

1/

A/49/467, annex II.

95-76093

/...

A/RES/49/84
Page 2

Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco) 2/ and for the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in Africa,
1.
Welcomes the commitment made by the States of the Zone of Peace
and Cooperation of the South Atlantic to prevent the proliferation of nuclear
weapons, in accordance with internationally recognized legal instruments;
2.
Welcomes also the recent progress towards the full entry into
force of the Treaty of Tlatelolco for all States of Latin America and the
Caribbean, which will permit the consolidation in the near future of the
status of the whole region as a nuclear-weapon-free zone;
3.
Welcomes further the efforts made towards the implementation of
the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa 3/ leading to the conclusion
of a treaty establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa;
4.
Solemnly endorses the objective of the States of the Zone of Peace
and Cooperation of the South Atlantic to turn the region of the South Atlantic
into a nuclear-weapon-free zone;
5.
Calls upon all States to cooperate fully for the achievement of
the objective of turning the region of the South Atlantic into a nuclearweapon-free zone.
90th plenary meeting
15 December 1994

2/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068.

3/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth Session, Annexes,
agenda item 105, document A/5975.
