90

General Aleemhl;r-'lldrtieth SeHion

(g) The right to intellectual freedoms, as provided
for in article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, shall be guaranteed;
3. Deplores the refusal of the Chilean authorities to
allow the Ad Hoe Working Group to visit the country,
notwithstanding previous solemn assurances given by
the authorities in this regard, and urges them to honour
these assurances;
4. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to extend the mandate of ,the Ad Hoe Working Group, as
presently constituted, to enable it to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session and to the Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-third session on
the situation of human rights in Chile and, in particular, on any developments which occur to re-establish
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms;
5. Requests the President of the thirtieth session of
the General Assembly and the Secretary-General to
assist in any way they may deem appropriate in the
re-establishment of basic human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Chile.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3449 (XXX). Measures to ensure the human
righ18 and dignity of all migrant workers
The General Assembly,
Considering the Convention on Diplomatic Relations24 and ,the Convention on Consular Relations,211
Considering also its resolution 2920 (XXVII) of
15 November 1972 on the exploitation of labour
through illicit and clandestine trafficking,
Recalling its resolution 3224 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974 on measures to improve the situation of migrant workers,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1749 (LIV) of 16 May 1973, in which the Council affirmed the need for the United Nations to continue examining the situation of migrant workers,
taking into account economic, political, social and
cultural factors with respect to human rights and
dignity,
Noting with satisfaction the awareness of the international community of this problem and the necessity to
protect the human rights of migrant workers,
Noting with satisfaction the work being undertaken
by the specialized agencies in the field of migrant
workers,
Taking into consideration the urgent need carefully
to examine the problem of migrant workers who surreptitiously enter another country to obtain work,
1. Calls upon the United Nations organs active in
the ,field of human rights to continue devoting their
attention to this question;

2. Requests the United Nations organs and the specialized agencies concerned to ut~ in all official
documents the term "non-documented or irregular
-migrant workers" to define those workers that illegally
and/ or surreptitiously enter another country to obtain
work;
24 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. SOO, No. 7310, p. 95.
25 Jbid., vol. ·S96, No. 8638, p. 261.

3. Appeals to the Governments of Member States
to remind their competent administrative authorities of
their obligation to respect ,the human rights of all
migrant workers, including those that are non-documented or irregular;
4. Urges the Governments of Member States to
grant all facilities and help to diplomatic and consular
agents accredited in their countries so that they can
fulfil their functions in relation to the protection and
defence of the human rights of migrant workers, including those that are non-documented or irregular.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3450 (XXX).

Missing persons in Cyprua

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3212 (XXIX) of 1 November 1974,
Noting resolution 4 (XXXI) adopted by the Commission on Human Rights on 13 February 1975,26
Gravely concerned about the fate of a considerable
number of Cypriots who are missing as a result of armed
conflict in Cyprus,
Appreciating the work of the Initemational Committee of the Red Cross in this ,field,
Reaffirming the basic human need of families in
Cyprus to be informed about missing relatives,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to exert every
effort, in close co-operation with the · International
Committee of the Red Cross, to assist in tracing
and accounting for persons missing as a result of armed
conflict in Cyprus;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-second
session with information relevant to the implementation of the present resolution.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3451 (XXX). Alternative approachea and ways
and means within the United Natiom syatem
for improving the effective enjoyment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3,136 (XXVID) of 14 December 1973 and 3221 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974,
Considering that the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights27 and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
Optional Protocol theret<>27 will soon enter into force,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report on alternative approaches and ways
and means within the United Nations system for improving the effective enioyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms; 28
2. Urges Member States that have not already done
so to submit their views to the Secretary-General in
accordance with paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution 3221 (XXIX);
26 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-eighth ~ession, Supplement No. 4 (B/5635), chap. xxm.
21 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
28 A/10235.
