32

General Assembly-Twentieth Session

another agency under the provisions of paragraph 2
above, by the end of the year.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.

2095 (XX). Continuation of the World Food
Programme
The General Assembly,
Conicious of the vast and growing needs of the
peoples of the developing countries, of the pressing
requirement for assistance in their economic and social
development, and of the sufferings caused by hunger
and malnutrition,
Recalling its resolutions 1496 (XV) of 27 October
1960 and 1714 (XVI) of 19 December 1961, and the
resolution adopted by the Conference of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations on
24 November 1961 concerning the establishment of an
experimental World Food Programme.
Having considered the report of the United Nations/
F AO Intergovernmental Committee on the future of
the \Vorld Food Programme 46 transmittrd by the
Economic and ~ocial Council,
Having studied the report of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Director-General of the
Food and Agriculture Organization on the future development of the Programme 47 as well as the report
of the Executive Director of the World Food Programme,48
Having considered the results obtained by the Programme during its initial phase and the contribution
which it is making towards achieving the goals of the
United Nations Development Decade and of the
Freedom from Hunger Campaign undertaken by the
Food and Agriculture Organization,
Taking note with satisfaction of the contributions of
food-stuffs, money and services already made by States
Members of the United Nations and members and
associate members of the Food and Agriculture Organization, as well as the co-operation of recipient countries
in the elaboration and implementation of development
projects, in which for the first time food aid is being
utilized for development in a multilateral framework,
Recognizing the potentialities of this Programme,
in which the United Nations and the Food and Agriculture Organization have co-operated through the
joint United Nations/FAO Administrative Unit,
Appreciating the co-operation and assistance extended to the Programme by the interested specialized
agencies and operating programmes of the United
Nations, and by a number of other inter-governmental
and non-governmental organizations,
Having considered Economic and Social Council
resolution 1080 (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965 and the
resolution on the continuation of the World Food
Programme adopted by the Council of the Food and
Agriculture Organization at its forty-fourth session,
1. Decides to extend the \Vorld Food Programme,
established under General Assembly resolution 1714
(XVI) and the resolution adopted by the Conference
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations on 24 November 1961, on a continuing basis
46 Transmitted

under the symbol E/4060.
Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Thirty-ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 16, document
E/4015.
48 Transmitted under the symbol E/4043.
47 Official

for as long as multilatrral food aid is fonncl frasiblc
and desirahk, on the understanding that the Programme
will be regularly reviewed bef9re each pledging conference and that, if circumstances so require, it may
be enlarged, curtailed or terminated at the end of any
prriod for which resonrcrs have been pledged;
2. F.stablishes for the three-year period 1966-1968
a target for voluntary contributions of $275 miltion, of
which not less than 33 per cent should he in cash and
services, and urges States Members of the United
Nations and members and associate members of the
Food and Agriculture Organization to make every
effort to ensure the early attainmrnt of the target;
3. Requests the Secretary-(;eneral, in co-operation
with the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture
Organization, to convene a pledging conf~rence at
Pnited Nations H eadcinarters as soon as feasible:
4. Decides that the next snbsequent pledging conference, snbject to the rrview provided for in paragraph 1 above, should be convened in 1967, at which
time Governments would he invited to pledge contrilmtions for 1969 ;ind 1970, with a view to reaching such
target as mav be recommended by the General A,sembly and tl{e Confrrencr of the Food and Agrirnltme
Organization ;
S. R eaffirins its previous drcision to thr effect that
the United Nations/FAQ Intergovernmental Committee of the \Vorld Food Programme shall comprise
twenty-four Statrs Members of the United Nations or
members of thr Food and A~-ricultnre Organization,
twelve of thrse members to he elrcted by the Economic
and Social Council and twelve by the Council of the
Food and Agricultme Organization. it being understood that outgoing mrmhers shall he eligihlr for reelection;
6. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the Council of. the Food and Agriculture Organization,
as soon as possihlt' after the adoption of the prt'sent
resolution by the General Assembly and the Confrrence
of the Food and Agricultttre Organization, to elect
twelve members each, four members each for a term
of one yt>ar, four members each for a term of two years,
and four membrrs t>ach for a term of three years;

7. Decides that thereafter all the members of the
United Nations/FAO Intergovernmental Committee
shall be elected for a term of three years, and requests
the Economic and Social Council and the Council of
the Food and Agriculture Organization to make such
provisions as. will ensure that the terms of office of
four members elected by the two Councils respectivelv
shall expire in each calendar year

8. Further requests the Economic and Social Council
and the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization, when electing members of the United Nations/
F AO Intergovernmental Committee, to take into account the need for balanced representation of economically developed and developing countries and other
relevant factors such as the representation of potential
participating countries. both contributing and recipient,
equitable geographical distribution. and the representation of both developed and developing countries havingcommercial interests in international trade in foodstuffs. especially those highly dependrnt on such trade:
9. Requests a review of the General Regulations of
the Programme in the light of the present resolution
and calls upon the Economic and Social Council and

•

Resolutions adopted on the report.I of the Second Committee

the Council of the Food and Agric:nlture Organization
to take appropriate action.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 neamber 1965.

2096 (XX). Programme of studies on multilateral
food aid
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolution 2095 (XX) of 20
December 1965 extending the ·world Food Programme,
Considering that the problem of hunger will continue
to be one of the most serious problems facing the international community in the years to come,
Noting the finding of the Conference of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
at its thirteenth session that, while it was possible to
discern a trend towards the reduction of world surpluses, the need for food aid was on the rontrary
increasing,
Considering further that, withont prejudice to the
efforts being made to increase food production in developing countries, it is essential to intensify international co-operation in this field so long as many countries continue to experience difficulties in importing the
additional food-stnffs needed for their steadily increasing populations,
·
Considering that the experience gained with the
\Vorld Food Programme and the increase in its resources should enable it to enlarge its potential in this
field and also to facilitate progress towards the objectives of the recommendation contained in annex A.II.6
of the Final Act of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, 49
Recognizing that various proposals intended to make
the \Vorld Food Programme a more effective instrument of international co-operation, induding the proposal to convert it to a world food fund, have given rise
to a number of fundamental issues, and that among
these the United Nations/FAQ Intergovernmental
Committee of the World Food Programme at its eighth
session had identified the following as signific-ant:
(a) The needs and absorptive C'apacity of developing
countries for food aid,
( b) ,The technical and economic feasibility of utilizing the productive capacity of developing countries,
efficient primary exporting countries and developed
countries to sustain an enlarged. W"11-ha1anced programme of food aid to needy peoples,
( c) The implications for the <1gricultural export
earnings of developing countries. developed primary
exporting countries and countries heavily dependent on
the export of primary commodities,
( d) The problerns nf distribution and administration,
( e) The relationship between food aid arrangements
:ind commodity trade arrangements,
(f) The problems of financing. h0th over-all and
for individual countries,
·
Bearing in mind that, while these issues are of particular significance to the World Food Programme,
their study goes beyond the terms of reference of the
United Nations/FAQ Intergovernmental Committee
and comes within the c-ompetence of such organizations
as the United Nations. tlw Food and Agrirnlture Or49 See Proceedings of the [/nited Nations Co11fere11re on
Trade and Development, vol. l. Final Art and Report (llnite<I
\' ations puhlkation, Sales No. : 64 TI R.11), p. 32.

33

g-anization of the United Nations, the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Monetary Fund and the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade,
Considering further that the Committee on Commodity Problems of the Food and Agriculture Organization, at its thirtv-ninth session, had drawn attention
to the following a·dditional issues:
(a) The implications of proposals on total aid to
developing countries,
( b) The aid-giving capacity of donor countries,
( c) The impact on agricultural trade as a whole and
the possible effects on prices of food commodities no'
in surplus,
Appreciating that a study of this kind should be as
comprehensive as possible and should deal with the
proposals made and the problems they raise in terms
as concrete as possible, with reference to different
types of food commodities and the implic"tions for
different categories of countries,
Noting that the United Nations/FAQ Intergovernmental Committee decided to refer the whole matter
to its parent bodies for consideration,
Noting further the action taken since that time by
the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization
and the relevant items in the programme of work recommended to the Trade and Development Board by its
Committee on Commodities.
Recalling the words of His Holiness Pope Paul VT
to the General Assembly on 4 October 1965: "Your
task is to ensure that there is enough hread on the
table of mankind", 50
1. Requests the Secretary-General-in co-operation
with the Director-General of the Food and Agricnltnre
Organization of the United Nations and in consultation
with the executive heads of other interested international organizations and programmes, including the
Tnternational Bank for Reconstrnction and DevelopmFnt. the Tnternational Monetarv Fund and the General
i\greement on Tariffs and Trade, and utilizing the total
facilities of the United Nations. including the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the
TT nited Nations Development Programme and the
\Vnrlcl Food Programme-to examine, with a view to
snggesting various alternative types of action and in the
c-ontext of the efforts being made in connexion with
th<> United Nations Development Decade, the means
and policies which would be required for large-scale
intFrnational action of a mttltih1teral character, under
t lw auspices of the United Nations system, for combating
hunger effectively. this comprf'hensive study to he based
upon. hnt not necessarily limited to, the proposals
already made for adapting the techniques of food aid
so :is to benefit developing- rnuntries which are exporters
of food-stuffs. as well as those which are importers. and
with rlne regard. infer alin. to the issues mentioned in
the sixth and eighth preambular paragraphs of the
present resolution, especially those relating to the need
for financial resources and to the possible rebtionship
of this tvpe of action to long-term internationa 1 :1greF111ents on stRple food-stuffs:
2. Requests the Secretary-GenerRl to submit to the
General Assemblv :it its t~enty-first session. through
the Economic :ind Social Council. a report whic-h wot;ld
deal, inter alia. with the :irrangements mRdF for under"o Official Records of tfre General Assembly, Twrntietli
Session, Plrnary Meetin_lls, 1347th meeting, para. 40.
