S/PV.9138

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9138th meeting

Tuesday, 27 September 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-60259 (E)
*2260259*

S/PV.9138

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine.
I now call on the representative of the Russian
Federation, who has asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Once again, we would like to make clear
our position regarding yet another attempt by our
Western colleagues to push through the participation
of the President of Ukraine, Mr. Zelenskyy, in today’s
meeting via video-teleconference. We have repeatedly
underscored that, in and of itself, we are not against
the participation of the President of Ukraine or his
representatives. However, that participation must be in
person. Furthermore, that has been required for more
than 75 years by the rules that guide the work of the
Security Council. It is therefore also a question of
respect for the Council, which must not be turned into
a forum for political shows or cinema. Connivence on
these matters causes very serious harm to the Security
Council’s prestige.
It is precisely this type of show that the Ukrainian
delegation put on in the General Assembly during highlevel week, (see A/77/PV.7) when well-rehearsed extras
were brought into the Hall to applaud a pre-recorded
video of the statement made by the Ukrainian
President. That was then sent out on social media in
order, apparently, to show so-called “broad support”
among the members of the General Assembly. One
need not think that no one noticed, as many delegations
expressed their astonishment when groups of supporters
under the leadership of Western delegations came
in and, once their roles were over, left in an equally
organized manner.
It is unfortunate that these primitive public relations
stunts devalue the role of the Security Council and the
United Nations, which is supposed to be a forum for
serious dialogue — and not for public relations shows.
2/18

27/09/2022

This once again illustrates the true regard of Western
delegations for the United Nations, who really do not
care about maintaining its foundations, authority and
prestige, or even how it is viewed in the eyes of the
international community, and who are ready to sacrifice
it all in their Russophobic frenzy.
I would like again to underscore that we stand
for the sovereign equality of States and categorically
against double standards when there is discrimination
practiced at the United Nations. Many Member States
find themselves in a difficult domestic political
situation, yet their leadership are not subjected to
the same thing. There is also the matter of the lion’s
share of humanitarian assistance being earmarked
for Ukraine, while those in need in other parts of the
world are seemingly forgotten by Western donors, even
though billions of dollars are being spent on new arms
supplies to Kyiv. There are also double standards in
how migrants are treated, when refugees from Ukraine
are welcomed with open arms in European countries
while those from Africa, the Middle East and other
places are rejected.
We would ask all Members of the United Nations to
take a principled position on this.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: The exceptional level of attention to the
war in Ukraine reflects the widespread global concern
about its dangerous and far-reaching consequences.
That concern can only deepen, as the most recent
developments in the war are ominous, pointing to more
death, destruction and suffering.
Indeed, since the previous Security Council
meeting on Ukraine, on 22 September (see S/PV.9135),
we have seen actions that threaten to further escalate
the conflict. As we meet, so-called referendums were
just conducted by de facto authorities in the Donetsk,
Luhansk, Kherson, and Zaporizhzhya regions.
Ukrainians were asked whether they approved their
regions joining the Russian Federation. Voting took place
in polling centres. De-facto authorities accompanied by
22-60259

27/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

soldiers also went door to door with ballot boxes. Those
exercises, which began on 23 September, have been held
during active armed conflict, in areas under Russian
control and outside Ukraine’s legal and constitutional
framework. They cannot be called a genuine expression
of the popular will.
Unilateral actions aiming to provide a veneer of
legitimacy to the attempted acquisition by force by
one State of another State’s territory, while claiming
to represent the will of the people, cannot be regarded
as legal under international law. Let me reiterate here
that the United Nations remains fully committed to
the sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial
integrity of Ukraine, within its internationally
recognized borders, in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions. I would like to recall
that, as the occupying Power, the Russian Federation
is obliged under international humanitarian law to
respect the laws of Ukraine in the administration of
occupied territories.
The past few weeks have also seen heavy fighting
in southern Ukraine, in the direction of Kherson and
Zaporizhzhya, as well as escalating military operations
in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. In mid-September,
the Ukrainian military undertook a successful counteroffensive to restore Ukrainian control over most of
the Russian-held areas in the Kharkiv region. We
have continued to see not only daily attacks on many
Ukrainian cities, including in Donetsk and Luhansk,
but also the targeting of civilian energy and water
infrastructure, reportedly by Russian forces. The recent
reports of drone attacks in and around Odesa are also
deeply disturbing.
To date, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) has
recorded 14,844 civilian casualties, with 5,996 persons
killed and 8,848 injured. That is 278 more civilians
killed and 649 more injured since I previously briefed
the Council, on 7 September (see S/PV.9126). Those are
verified individual incidents; actual figures are likely
considerably higher.
We have also heard alarming rhetoric regarding the
use of nuclear weapons, which is unacceptable. Such
rhetoric is inconsistent with the joint statement of the
leaders of the five nuclear-weapon States on preventing
nuclear war and avoiding arms races, made on 3 January.
Let me reiterate the Secretary-General’s appeal for all
nuclear-armed States, including the Russian Federation,

S/PV.9138

to recommit to the non-use and progressive elimination
of nuclear weapons.
Amid those grim developments, the United Nations
continues to work to alleviate the suffering caused
by the war, to support accountability for violations
and abuses of human rights and of international
humanitarian law and to prevent the deterioration of
the already volatile situation around Ukraine’s nuclear
sites. The United Nations and partner organizations
need safe and unimpeded access to deliver life-saving
assistance to all in need. In the areas of the Kharkiv
region back under Ukrainian control, they were able
to organize several aid convoys. However, in areas
outside Government control in the Donetsk, Luhansk,
Kherson, Mykolaiv and Zaporizhzhya regions, access
is the biggest challenge.
The United Nations Human Rights Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine continues to report on violations
of human rights and international humanitarian
law. We are gravely concerned about allegations of
violations committed in parts of north-eastern Ukraine,
including after the recovery of more than 400 bodies
from improvised graves in Izyum. OHCHR is working
with local authorities to investigate that and other
allegations of human rights violations and abuses in
areas in the Kharkiv region that were until recently
under Russian control.
There are other extremely disturbing reports.
Following investigations in the areas of Kyiv, Chernihiv,
Kharkiv and Sumy, the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine, mandated by the
Human Rights Council, has concluded that war crimes
were committed in Ukraine. Among other findings,
the Commission was struck by the large number of
executions and other violations carried out by Russian
forces. In the four areas it covered, the Commission
has processed two incidents of ill-treatment against
Russian Federation soldiers by Ukrainian forces.
Rarely, if ever, has the international community
collected so much evidence of human rights violations,
potential war crimes and other atrocities as they were
happening. It is tragic that we have not been able to
stop them. But it would be shameful if we were not able
to ensure justice for the victims and their loved ones.
Those responsible for the outrages being committed
in Ukraine — wherever they sit — must be brought
to account.

22-602593/18

S/PV.9138

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We remain deeply troubled by the reports of
continuing attacks, as recently as last week, in the
vicinity of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. The
United Nations continues to support the efforts of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We urge
all concerned to provide maximum cooperation with
the IAEA. It is imperative that all attacks on nuclear
facilities end and that the purely civilian nature of such
plants be re-established.
By now, the global implications of this war on
food and energy security, felt by millions of people,
are well-known. During the general debate, many
Member States decried that predicament. The Black
Sea Grain Initiative continues to gather pace, with
more than 4.5 million metric tons of foodstuffs shipped
from Ukrainian ports, including to the Horn of Africa,
Yemen and Afghanistan. Efforts to remove remaining
obstacles to the export of Russian food products and
fertilizers also continue. Those products are not under
sanctions, and it is crucial to get them back to world
markets. Averting a global food crisis makes it vital to
renew the Black Sea grain deal when it expires at the
end of November.
In his remarks to the General Assembly during the
general debate (see A/77/PV.4), the Secretary-General
warned that the Charter of the United Nations and
its ideals are in jeopardy and that we have a duty to
act. I repeat his appeal to all Member States to help
prevent further escalation and to do all we can to end
the war and ensure lasting peace, in accordance with
the principles of the Charter and international law.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Volodymyr
Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine
President Zelenskyy (spoke in Ukrainian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): The Security
Council is an institution that works according to wellknown and well-defined rules, and the representatives
of Russia are still following them. So far, they have not
been using weapons instead of words in the Chamber.
They are not knocking out their neighbours’ chairs in
the Council, but surely no one would be surprised if
the Chamber were turned into a zone of violence by
the representatives of Russia. Russia already despises
the Charter of the United Nations; Russia is already
breaking the rules of the world order. It is therefore only
a matter of time before it destroys the last international
4/18

27/09/2022

institution that can still function, which is why I am
now calling on the Council to take action.
Anyone in the world could now give hundreds of
examples of how Russia has violated and continues
to violate the international legal order, destroying the
main body of international law. It constantly provokes
escalation by responding to any proposals for talks
with renewed brutality on the battlefield, causing
even greater crises and posing even greater threats to
Ukraine and to the world.
Of all the threats, I will name but five that are
already occurring as we speak.
First, Russia has ignored the International Atomic
Energy Agency’s call for the immediate deoccupation
of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and the
termination of any hostile actions against nuclear
facilities in Ukraine. That serves as additional proof
that Russia is deliberately keeping the world on the
brink of radiation disaster.
The second threat is Russia’s use of nuclear
blackmail. The threat of use of nuclear weapons has
become a consistent narrative by Russian officials and
in Russian propaganda. That proves that Russia has
no right to possess nuclear weapons, as it is unable to
guarantee the safety of the world — not even from the
threat of use of nuclear weapons.
Thirdly, last week I addressed the General
Assembly and presented Ukraine’s formula for peace
(see A/77/PV.7). Russia’s response to that real path to
peace was to announce mobilization. Moreover, Russia
is deliberately focusing its mobilization policy on the
indigenous peoples in the territories it controls. Not
only does that concern the Caucasus or Siberia, where
Russia is sparing no effort to mobilize as many men
as possible from indigenous populations, but it also
concerns the Ukrainian territory of Crimea, which
Russia seized back in 2014. Of all ethnic groups in
Crimea, Crimean Tatar men received the most Russian
draft notices in proportion to the total number. Frankly
speaking, that is a genocidal policy.
Fourthly, before the eyes of the entire world,
Russia is conducting sham referendums in the occupied
territory of Ukraine. People are being forced to fill out
papers while under threat from submachine guns, all
for the purpose of coverage on television. The alleged
results of the sham referendums have been prepared well
22-60259

27/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9138

in advance, just like the issue of compulsory passports
for the populations of the occupied territories.

A clear signal is now needed from every country in
the world. I believe in their ability to act.

But what was the reason behind that? The answer
lies in the fifth and final threat I want to mention,
namely, the annexation of the captured territories. That
is the most brutal violation of the Charter of the United
Nations. It is an attempt to steal the territory of another
State and erase the norms of international law. It is also
a highly cynical attempt to force the male population
of the occupied territory of Ukraine to mobilize into
the Russian army in order to send them to fight against
their own homeland.

I thank the French presidency for the opportunity
to participate in this meeting and thank members for
their attention.

There is only one way to stop all of that.
First, Russia must be met with complete isolation
in response to everything it does. A State cannot
remain a permanent member of the Security Council
with the right to the veto if that same State is waging
a genocidal policy, threatening nuclear strikes and
keeping the world teetering just one step away from a
radiation disaster. Russia should be excluded from all
international organizations and, if such an exclusion
is procedurally complicated, its participation should
be suspended.
Secondly, there is a need for new and tougher
global sanctions against Russia. Any annexation in the
modern world is a crime against all States that consider
the inviolability of borders to be vital for themselves.
Thirdly, Russia’s criminal actions do not change
anything for us. We will not succumb to the blackmail of
terrorists. Not only are we defending our independence
and the right to life of our people in Ukraine and in this
war, but we are also defending international law. As
such, Ukraine must receive all the necessary defence
and financial support to ensure the aggressor’s defeat.
Fourthly, Ukraine should receive clear and legally
binding guarantees of collective security, since the
independence of our country is of such fundamental
importance for many elements of global security. The
world also needs a respective security architecture.
Fifthly — and I want everyone to understand how
important this is — Russia’s recognition of the sham
referendums, its implementation of the so-called
Crimea scenario and its attempts to annex Ukrainian
territory will mean that there is nothing to talk about
with the President of Russia. Annexation is the kind
of move that will pit him, alone, against the whole
of humankind.

Glory to Ukraine.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now give
the floor to those members of the Council who wish to
make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
for her briefing today and thank President Zelenskyy
for his statement.
A little more than seven months ago — just seven
months — we met at night in this Chamber (see
S/PV.8970) to discuss how we could preserve peace in
Ukraine. At that moment, Putin chose war instead. The
timing could not be clearer: Putin was showing exactly
what he thought of the Security Council.
Last week, leaders from more than 100 countries
from around the world gathered in New York to
reaffirm their commitment to the Charter of the United
Nations and many of the key principles it stands for,
namely, sovereignty, territorial integrity and peace and
security. Instead of attending high-level week, Putin
announced a renewed conscription effort in Russia
and instructed areas under Russia’s military control to
prepare for illegitimate snap referendums. He sent an
emissary who threatened the use of nuclear weapons
on a non-nuclear country to secure Russia’s illegitimate
military gains.
The purpose of all of that is clear: Russia intends
to try to annex those territories, and Russia does not
respect this organ. The pattern, too, is clear: Putin
intentionally chose this moment to insult the Charter
that outlines the principles we all collectively stand for,
namely, sovereignty, territorial integrity and peace and
security. He did so during the most important week for
the United Nations — high-level week.
Putin intends to commit an act that the Charter of
the United Nations was expressly designed to prevent:
an attempt by one Member State to take the territory
of another by force. We know that will happen because
it follows a well-worn Kremlin playbook. Russia runs
sham referendums in areas controlled by Russia’s
military and its proxies, coercing people to vote at

22-602595/18

S/PV.9138

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

gunpoint. It then uses those referendums to try to lend
a semblance of legitimacy to its attempted annexations
of another sovereign State’s territory.
The rush for Russia to institute and complete those
attempted annexations destroys even the facade of
legitimacy. As Ukraine successfully regains control
over more of its territory that was wrongfully seized by
Russia and more of Russia’s atrocities are uncovered,
Russia is rushing to draw a veil over its military losses
and the war crimes it has committed.
We know that the outcomes of those sham
referendums were predetermined in Moscow. In no way
do they represent a legitimate expression of the will of
the Ukrainian people. The will of the Ukrainian people
is made clear every day as they fight valiantly for their
country, as they protect their territorial integrity and
as they defend their sovereignty. The Ukrainian people
have already demonstrated they will never accept being
subjugated to Russian rule. The Security Council and
the international community must do the same.
Let me therefore be clear: the United States will
never recognize any territory that Russia attempts to
seize or allegedly annex as anything other than part
of Ukraine. We reject Russia’s actions unequivocally,
and we will continue to work with our allies, partners
and the like-minded to impose costs on Russia and to
provide historic amounts of support for Ukraine. Justice
demands nothing less. Protecting the Charter demands
nothing less.
In our many meetings here in the Security Council,
we have heard repeated calls for the Charter to be
respected. But it is not enough to call for respect for
the Charter; we must have the courage to defend it.
That means standing up for Ukraine and the victims
of Russian atrocities. It means having the courage to
call out aggression and attempts at naked territorial
expansion when we see it. It means showing we care
about peace by demanding that Russia honour the
Charter. Not doing so only enables Russia to commit
further abuses.
Russia started this war, and I hope that every
member of the Council will do the right thing by
standing up for international law and the Charter by
calling on Russia to end it now. Ukraine’s fight is not
only a fight for survival, but a fight for democracy and
the very principles that we all hold dear. That is why
we will be submitting a draft resolution condemning
the sham referendums, calling on Member States
6/18

27/09/2022

not to recognize any altered status of Ukraine and
obligating Russia to withdraw its troops from Ukraine.
Russia’s sham referendums, if accepted, will open a
Pandora’s box that we will not be able to close. We ask
other Council members to join us in reaffirming our
commitment to the Charter and meeting the challenge
head-on.
If Russia chooses to shield itself from accountability
here in the Council, we will then look to the General
Assembly to send an unmistakable message to Moscow.
The world must stand together and defend the Charter
of the United Nations, have courage and support
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. This is
about defending the Charter. This is about defending
our collective rights. And this is about peace and
security for us all.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania) (spoke in French): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing,
which was, as always, insightful and useful.
(spoke in English)
I would like to begin with the following quotation:
“Don’t believe those who try to frighten you with
Russia and who scream that other regions will
follow after Crimea. We do not want a partition of
Ukraine; we do not need this.”
That is what the President of Russia said in 2014.
Everyone can judge for themselves. I doubt, however,
that that comes as a surprise to anyone since, for more
than nine months, what we have heard from the Russian
delegation here has little or nothing to do with what
happens there on the ground — two parallel realities.
Let us now have a closer look of what will be known
as the sham referendums being conducted these days by
an extensive use of the Kremlin’s tricks. With the latest
escalatory decisions and the partial mobilization, the
war has finally entered Russian homes, and we have
seen the reactions. Russians are resisting, are protesting
openly and are leaving their country en masse to
escape being drafted because they do not know why
they should die in a war that they do not want and do
not understand.
In the city of Kherson, election officials went
door to door with riot police. It is a well-known fact
that, when you vote at gunpoint, the process is more
expeditious. The so-called voting has been recorded
on park benches, shops and even the makeshift booths
22-60259

27/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

in police stations, better known locally as torture
chambers, which were put to such good use. Elsewhere,
doors have been broken down to facilitate the voting
process — so much for the solemn moment of voting;
so much for the rules and norms of the States of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Yet the result is not in doubt. The vote count,
engineered in Moscow with an already-scripted result,
will reveal that residents would love to be ruled by the
invading Power, Russia. The haste with which the sham
referendums are being held makes it unlikely that the
spectacle will convince anyone, including Russians
themselves, of their legitimacy. No one in the world
will take seriously the results of people voting in a
referendum at gunpoint in the ruins.
Let us make it clear: the sham referendums in
Luhansk, Donetsk, Zaporizhzhya and Kherson have
nothing to do with democracy, nothing to do with the
free will of Ukrainians and nothing to do with any
international election standard. They are just a replay
of the same old script applied to Georgia and Crimea.
Now they are translating into reality a desperate effort
to hide failure and a worthless attempt to legitimize
conquest in the eyes of an incredulous and deeply
troubled world. Russia is projecting panic instead of
power and instilling fear instead of force.
Why is there such haste? It is because the army of
Ukraine is astonishingly pushing Russia out. Russians
were told that everything is going to plan. It never has.
Russia knows that it is losing big. Therefore, what I
have qualified before here as the Russian referendum
“assembly line” (S/PV.9104, p.5) has been quickly put
into action.
“We don’t want more of Ukraine”, said President
Putin in 2014. Suddenly, the appetite of the Kremlin
has grown. Four fresh territories are on the menu,
comprising no less than 18 per cent of Ukraine’s
territory. International law prohibits the occupier from
changing borders. Russia may claim that it has nothing
to do with such plans, since they have been organized
by the residents of the regions. But reality now and in
the recent past has clearly shown that that is not true.
By mid-March, the Russian occupation authorities in
Kherson and Zaporizhzhya appointed administrative
leaders. According to Ukrainian law, heads of local
state administrations are proposed by the Cabinet of
Ministers of Ukraine and appointed by the President of
Ukraine, not by Russian proxies.

S/PV.9138

The sham referendums are in contravention of the
Constitution of Ukraine. A referendum can be called
by the President or Parliament, or by a public initiative
involving the valid signatures of at least 3 million
registered voters, with at least 100,000 such signatures
from each oblast. Furthermore, the martial law
currently in force in Ukraine prohibits the holding of
any kind of elections or referendums. Finally, we have
our own documents. According to Article 3, paragraph
a, of the annex to General Assembly resolution 3314
(XXIX), “annexation by the use of force of the territory
of another State” is itself an act of aggression. The sham
referendums run contrary to the Charter of the United
Nations, United Nations resolutions and international
law and are making a mockery of the principles that
Russia has pledged to uphold as a permanent member
of the Security Council, including when it threatens the
use of weapons of mass destruction.
As stated last week by Prime Minister Edi Rama
at the General Assembly (see A/77/PV.12), we strongly
condemn Russia’s ongoing war and the premeditated
mock elections in Ukraine. They have zero-legality,
zero-legitimacy and zero-credibility, and Albania will
not recognize them. The Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, the election monitoring
authority par excellence, condemned what it qualified
as “illegal referenda”.
In addition, attempts to compare the referendums
with other cases out of every historical and political
context are simply worthless cynicism. We call on all
United Nations Members — everyone for whom the
principles of territorial integrity, sovereignty and the
inviolability of borders have meaning — to oppose
Russia’s actions, condemn the referendums and their
anticipated results and never recognize any attempt to
steal Ukrainian land through violence and terror.
While the war goes on and Russia is hastily trying
to change Ukraine’s map, the Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine established by the Human Rights Council
has concluded, based on evidence, that war crimes have
been committed by the Russian Federation in Ukraine.
Last week, in this Chamber, the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (see S/PV.9135) said that
the bodies lying on the streets he saw in Bucha were
real, not staged. The crimes committed in Ukraine
are being meticulously documented. They will not be
erased and will follow perpetrators until their last days
on Earth.

22-602597/18

S/PV.9138

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Furthermore, we in the Security Council cannot
stay idle. As we heard from the delegation of the United
States, together we have prepared a draft resolution to
condemn the sham referendums, which has been shared
with Council members. Borders cannot change to satisfy
Russia’s appetite, and Ukraine is not — and cannot
be — Russia. We must remain united and continue
helping Ukraine defend itself and regain its territory.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I too would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing and
President Zelenskyy for his statement.
The President of Ukraine used the phrase “sham
referendums”. Ireland fully agrees. We condemn
the sham referendums being conducted in occupied
Ukrainian territory by Russia or its proxies. No one who
believes in, and is fully committed to, the principles
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States,
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, could
do otherwise.
Why is that? It is because those referendums — the
sham referendums — are both illegal and illegitimate.
They are illegal because they violate the United Nations
Charter and Russia’s obligations under international
law, including the law of occupation. They also ignore
Ukraine’s Constitution, which provides a legal basis
for any referendums that would affect the territorial
boundaries of Ukraine. They are illegitimate because
they do not reflect the popular or freely expressed will
of the Ukrainian people.
As we have previously heard in the Chamber, more
than 1 million people from those occupied territories
have been moved to Russia. That is as a result of Russia’s
military invasion, including by forced deportation.
Indeed, more than 7 million people are internally
displaced within Ukraine because of the war.
Such referendums will never deter us from
supporting the people of Ukraine. Might does not
make right. Furthermore, the referendums will not
have any legal or political effect on the status of the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant or other Ukrainian
nuclear facilities. Those referendums are a cynical ploy
not only to further undermine Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity, but also to try and reset an
unjustified war. It is a blatant land grab to redefine
areas of Ukraine as part of Russia — I repeat, a blatant
land grab.
8/18

27/09/2022

Ukraine has had a hard-won independence. It has
had a hard-won path to establishing itself as a sovereign
democracy, free from foreign interference. It sticks
bravely to that choice, no matter what is thrown at it. In
particular, Ireland condemns Russia’s nuclear threats,
and all nuclear threats, whether explicit or implicit,
regardless of circumstance.
Ireland once again calls on Russia to end its
aggression immediately, comply with its obligations
under international law and withdraw all forces
unconditionally from the sovereign territory of Ukraine.
As much as people elsewhere in the world, the people
of Ukraine, who are suffering the devastating impact of
this war, deserve no less.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I will very briefly intervene.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing.
As stated by my Minister for External Affairs
in the Security Council at the previous meeting on
this subject (see S/PV.9135), the trajectory of the
Ukraine conflict is a matter of profound concern for
the international community. India has repeatedly
called for an immediate cessation of hostilities and has
underscored the need to resolve the ongoing conflict
through dialogue and diplomacy. That was also stated
unequivocally by Prime Minister Modi during his
meeting with President Putin on the sidelines of the
recent Shanghai Cooperation Organization summit
in Tashkent. We firmly believe that the global order
should be anchored in international law, the Charter of
the United Nations and respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States.
India’s approach to the Ukraine conflict will
continue to be human-centric. For our part, we provide
both humanitarian assistance to Ukraine and economic
support to some of our neighbours in the global South
that are under economic distress, even as they stare at
the escalating costs of food, fuel and fertilizer, which
has been a consequential fallout of the ongoing conflict.
The need of the hour is to end the conflict in
Ukraine and return to the negotiating table. The war
has already resulted in the loss of countless lives and
misery for people, particularly for women, children
and the elderly, with millions becoming homeless and
forced to take shelter in neighbouring countries. Let us
all work together to ensure that it comes to an early end.
22-60259

27/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I would like to begin
my statement by thanking Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo her briefing.
We join other speakers in expressing our deep
concern about the ongoing Russian aggression against
Ukraine, in violation of the fundamental principles of
international law, especially relating to the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and the
recognition of States. In our view, the invasion of
Ukraine undermines the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and stands in contrast to
the norms that have guided recent inter-State relations
and given endurance to the international system.
As confirmed by several Heads of State and
Government during the just ended general debate of
the General Assembly, the impact of the war has had
palpable effects on the lives of millions of people across
the world. It is their desire that this war and many such
others be ended as soon as possible for peace to prevail.
We therefore caution against heightened rhetoric and
giving expression to contemplations that threaten the
use of nuclear weapons, as that can lead only to the
dark abyss of a nuclear catastrophe, with no winners.
We urge maximum restraint by all sides in what has so
far been an effort at conventional warfare.
Ghana is particularly concerned about the ongoing
referendum in the regions of Donetsk, Luhansk,
Kherson and Zaporizhzhya. We regret the attempts that
are being made to disintegrate the legitimate authority
of the Government of Ukraine over its State territory.
As we have heard, the process of the referendum can
least be described as free, fair, democratic or reflective
of the will of the people of Ukraine.
We reiterate our principled position against the
acquisition of territory through the threat or use of force.
We cannot continue to live in parallel universes and,
accordingly, urge the international community to use
the full weight of its will to serve as a bulwark against
such practices, which have a propensity to unravel the
tenuous global stability that we presently have.
We note with concern the unfortunate rise in
humanitarian casualties as fighting continues in
the eastern and southern parts of Ukraine. Unless
an immediate ceasefire is reached, the escalation
of military combat would result in further dire
consequences for all. We therefore reiterate our call
for an immediate cessation of hostilities. We also call
on the parties to refrain from targeting civilians and

S/PV.9138

destroying civilian infrastructure, in accordance with
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. We urge the Russian
Federation, which has often attempted to situate its
special operations within the ambit of international law,
to respect the sovereignty of Ukraine and withdraw its
troops from the internationally recognized borders of
its neighbour.
To safeguard international peace and security,
we must urgently deepen diplomacy and widen
international efforts to defuse the rising global tensions
so as to facilitate a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
The situation in Ukraine reinforces the imperative
for a reformed and responsive Council that is able to
address all threats to international peace and security,
including by all actors. Pending the much-needed
reforms, we must continue to work together to find
pragmatic ways to address the challenges that confront
our collective security.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. I
welcome the participation of President Zelenskyy in
today’s meeting.
Russia’s holding of sham referendums in the
Donetsk, Luhansk, Zaporizhzhya and Kherson regions
of Ukraine is an egregious violation of Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. As the
United Nations has told us today, that process is both
illegal and illegitimate. It is a shameless propaganda
effort aimed at justifying Russia’s illegal presence on
sovereign Ukrainian territory. We have seen Russia’s
referendum playbook before, in Crimea. We see it
playing out again now: disinformation, intimidation
and fabrication.
As my Foreign Secretary told the Council last
week (see S/PV.9135), we know that President Putin
is planning to rig the outcome. Those are regions that
voted overwhelmingly to join an independent Ukraine
in 1991 and to back President Zelenskyy in 2019. When
given a free vote, their choice has been clear: to be part
of a free, independent, democratic Ukraine.
Since invading, Russia’s control in those regions
has been through violence, torture, filtration and forced
deportation. We have all seen images of soldiers with
automatic rifles accompanying the ballots as they move
from door to door, forcing Ukrainians to take part. Any
referendums held under those conditions, at the barrel

22-602599/18

S/PV.9138

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

of a gun, can never be remotely close to free or fair.
And the very idea that a referendum on a fundamental
question could be held at three days’ notice in the
middle of a war zone is frankly farcical.
We must all unequivocally reject those illegitimate
actions and Russian attempts to illegally annex
Ukrainian territory and support the draft resolution the
United States and Albania have brought forward today.
This is a critical moment. There is no middle
ground. No Member of the United Nations should turn
a blind eye to Russia tearing up the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. If we allow Russia to
believe it can change sovereign borders by force, then
the entire system on which we base our shared safety
and security is under threat.
Those Potemkin referendums, as well as Putin’s
decision to mobilize Russian men to fight in his illegal
war, are admissions that his invasion is failing. Instead
of sending thousands more of his own citizens to their
deaths and inflicting further destruction on Ukraine,
he should end this senseless war today.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
Brazil shares the concerns about the referendums
in regions of Ukraine. In the current conditions, that
is yet another step that leads to an escalation of the
conflict. Far from expressing the will of the people
of the Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhya
regions, the referendums tend to make the prospect of
peace negotiations even more distant.
The Charter of the United Nations and the
International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights
and on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights recognize
the inalienable right of all peoples to self-determination
and to freely decide their political status. That is a
fundamental principle of international law, which is the
very basis of the legitimacy of States.
Many times before, especially in the context of
decolonization, the holding of referendums was the means
chosen for peoples to express their free will. Council
resolutions established the use of that instrument as a
legitimate practice to decide on issues of sovereignty
and territorial integrity. Its validity, however, depends
on certain conditions. It is unreasonable to assume
that populations in areas in conflict are able to freely
express their will. International practice recommends
that referendums on questions of sovereignty be
10/18

27/09/2022

conducted in a transparent manner, without restrictions
on the freedom of expression and with the possibility
of monitoring by independent observers. That does
not seem to be the case for the regions of Ukraine I
mentioned. Brazil stands by the principles of respecting
the territorial integrity and political unity of sovereign
and independent States.
We reiterate our call for an immediate ceasefire
and the opening of peace negotiations. The Istanbul
agreements in July and last week’s prisoner exchanges
were positive signs that demonstrate the value of
diplomacy in reducing the human suffering resulting
from the conflict. Those advances, while extremely
relevant, are insufficient. It is essential that the parties
refrain from adopting measures that result in an
escalation of hostilities, including in rhetorical terms.
The moment calls for restraint and pragmatism.
We believe that the Security Council is primarily
a forum for negotiation and for dialogue. So far, we
have collectively failed to find creative solutions to
the conflict. Negotiation and dialogue, advocated
by most members in their interventions over the past
seven months, presupposes a willingness to listen.
Perhaps we should ask ourselves how sensitive we are
to the concerns of others, especially to the lives of
those on the ground, which should come before any
political considerations.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for
her briefing and President Zelenskyy for his comments
to this meeting.
We are monitoring reports of the convening of
referendums in the Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and
Zaporizhzhya regions. General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) is explicit in stating that any attempt aimed
at the partial or total disruption of the national unity and
the territorial integrity of a country is incompatible with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. We therefore call upon all States to refrain
from actions aimed at the partial or total disruption
of national unity, infringing upon the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine or any other country. We
reiterate that, in accordance with Article 2, paragraph
4, of the Charter of the United Nations, any attempt to
alter borders by the threat or use of force or in any other
manner inconsistent with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations is in violation of international law.
22-60259

27/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We support the right to self-determination of peoples
as stated in General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV),
which also states, in its annex, that the enjoyment and
exercise of that right shall not be construed
“as authorizing or encouraging any action which
would dismember or impair, totally or in part,
the territorial integrity ... of sovereign and
independent States”.
In short, Mexico’s position remains in line with
General Assembly resolution 68/262 and, given
the gravity of the context in which those so-called
referendums have taken place, we reiterate our call
for urgent dialogue between the parties, as well as
the strengthening of diplomatic channels to promote
confidence-building measures and, as my country’s
Foreign Minister noted today, open up new areas for
mediation that could lead to a cessation of hostilities.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has noted the latest developments in the situation
in Ukraine, and we listened carefully to the views
expressed by the parties in that regard. Our position and
proposal on how to view and handle the Ukraine issue
is consistent and clear, namely, that the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all countries should be respected,
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations should be observed, the legitimate security
concerns of all countries should be taken seriously
and all efforts towards the peaceful resolution of the
crisis should be supported. China has always stood
on the side of peace, with a commitment to promoting
peace and dialogue, and we will continue to play a
constructive role.
In the just-concluded General Assembly general
debate, many leaders expressed their concerns about
the prolongation and expansion of the crisis in Ukraine
and its spillover effects and called for dialogue and
negotiation to end the hostilities and manage the
negative impacts caused by the spillover of the crisis.
The recent developments once again remind us that
peace is the quest of all. Bloc confrontation, political
isolation, sanctions and putting pressure will lead only
to a dead end. The task at hand is to push the parties
to open the door for a political settlement as soon as
possible, include the respective legitimate concerns in
the negotiations and put all viable options on the table.
The signing of the Black Sea Grain Initiative showed
that, even in conflict situations, diplomacy can produce
results and bring hope.

S/PV.9138

We need to uphold the international order based
on international law and adhere to the basic norms
of international relations based on the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter, which should
not be mere political slogans. As the core of the collective
security mechanism, the Security Council should make
full use of the mediation tools under the Charter and
adhere to the right direction of a ceasefire and peace
talks. In particular, it should take constructive and
responsible actions to build the conditions and open
up space for a political solution. China will work with
all peace-loving countries to continue to make tireless
efforts to de-escalate the situation and resolve the crisis.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing on the dire
situation in Ukraine.
We again send our heartfelt condolences to
all Ukrainians who are suffering the physical,
psychological and economic ravages of war.
We are very concerned by the reports of the
referendums being held in Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson
and Zaporizhzhya and their impact on Ukraine’s status
as a Member of the United Nations and on international
peace and security.
The Secretary-General clearly stated:
“Any annexation of a State’s territory by another
State resulting from the threat or use of force is a
violation of the Charter of the United Nations and
of international law.” (S/PV.9135, p.2)
That is the fundamental truth that should be heeded
by the Russian Federation and all Members of the
United Nations.
The referendums will undermine the prospects of a
longer-term negotiated peace settlement. By attempting
to create a fait accompli, they will encourage those
who increasingly put their faith in the strengthening of
armed alliances in preparation for war.
As if that were not sufficiently alarming, we have
heard serious threats being made of the use of weapons
of mass destruction. To pull back from the brink of
disaster, Kenya calls for an immediate cessation of
hostilities and a stop to all attempts to unilaterally
alter internationally recognized borders. Our frequent
briefings, debates and consultations on the situation in
Ukraine are taking place as the economic and conflict
situations in different parts of the world worsen.

22-6025911/18

S/PV.9138

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

27/09/2022

Unfortunately, the most powerful actors are focusing
far more on the conflict in Europe than on any other
crisis. There appears to be little appetite and, because
of this war, even less unity to deliver the reforms and
policies that we all know are needed.

The multilateral system cannot continue as it is
today. The major Powers are so bent on protecting and
projecting their interests and security concerns that
they seem unable to act in the broader interests of our
United Nations.

Bold action is required to halt the extreme food
insecurity, and even starvation, in the world. The World
Food Programme (WFP) has calculated that in East
Africa, as an example, fertilizer prices have more than
doubled in the past year, in particular since the invasion
of Ukraine. Fuel prices have also risen sharply. The
WFP calculates that the result will be a year-on-year
decline of 16 per cent in cereal production, representing
7.2 million metric tons. In an already food insecure
region, the impact will be to increase the number of
hungry people by almost 7 million. That situation is
reflected in other regions.

Today the inarguable truth is that the protections
afforded by membership of the Organization are
insufficient. Rather than the Charter granting us
equality, we are governed by the destructive logic
encapsulated by the saying,

It is a matter of life and death for all actors to
respond to the global food insecurity crisis. The Black
Sea Grain Initiative and the agreement to ensure
unimpeded exports of Russian food and fertilizer to
world markets were a promising start.
It is imperative that all institutions that are enforcing
compliance with sanctions ensure that all unintended
blockages are removed. There are sufficient reports
of negative secondary effects on banking, insurance,
transport and other critical enabling mechanisms.
We also urge major grain and fertilizer producers
to avoid stockpiling and breaking delivery contracts.
Ongoing plans to create emergency mechanisms in
that regard may be to the serious detriment of global
food security.
We urge that any efforts to design and deploy
emergency food- and energy-security mechanisms be
accompanied by planning for transformed food systems
in the most food-insecure regions. A major part of that
would be making the necessary investments in sharply
increasing agricultural productivity, particularly
in Africa.
Doing that is key to preventing cycles of
humanitarian crises and the declining donor-funded
responses to the worst of them. It will also allow investing
in climate-change-resilient food systems at a time when
catastrophic effects are being experienced in multiple
regions. Finally, greater production, increased storage
and sufficient transport infrastructure will lead to low
food prices and therefore greater political stability.
12/18

“The question of justice only enters where
there is equal power to enforce it, and that the
powerful exact what they can, and the weak suffer
what they must.”
It is time that we sought real changes in global
institutions, including the Security Council. It is time
for real inclusion and real fairness. We can start with
procedural rules in the Council and eventually make
changes to the Charter. Reforms should not be limited
to allowing only for other major Powers to have a seat
at the table. It is clear from the historical record that
the voice and presence of developing countries with no
major military interests to protect regionally or globally
need to be strengthened significantly. A multilateralism
founded on the principle of the powerful exacting what
they can while the weak suffer what they must is a poor
protection against the scourge of war, as we are all
witnessing today.
Kenya once more reaffirms its recognition of
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within
its internationally recognized borders.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her updates.
Having just concluded this year’s high-level week
of the General Assembly, a resounding message that we
heard from many world leaders remains at the forefront
of our minds: the world wants peace in Ukraine. It
seems, however, that we are moving further away from
this common objective of peace and stability. The
referendums that are now under way further complicate
efforts for a peaceful resolution to this conflict. In order
to be credible and sustainable, any processes that aim
to bring us closer to peace must be inclusive, and any
actions that undermine the prospects for constructive
dialogue must be avoided by all parties.
22-60259

27/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We re-emphasize the need to respect the principles
of territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence,
which are at the core of the United Nations Charter
and central to constructive relations between States.
These principles protect all States equally, whether
large or small, and collectively we must not allow them
to erode. In pursuit of peace, the Security Council has
an essential role to play in preserving these principles,
prioritizing the peaceful settlement of disputes and
maintaining international peace and security. We recall
in this regard the January 2022 joint statement of the
permanent members of the Council, affirming that a
nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought.
Over the past few months, we have seen incremental
movement between the parties that has led to tangible,
positive outcomes on concrete issues. We commend
the United Nations and others that have facilitated
constructive engagement in this regard. Most recently,
the fruits of these efforts have included prisoner
exchanges conducted with the assistance of Türkiye
and Saudi Arabia and agreements related to the export
of grains and fertilizer, which have helped to alleviate
pressure on global food supplies and prices.
There is further potential to build on these
agreements. Moreover, the direct engagement that
brought them to fruition can help defuse tensions and
open a pathway for conflict resolution. To this end, the
parties must be supported in moving towards dialogue
and away from further escalation. We once again
underline the necessity of all parties abiding by their
obligations under international law and international
humanitarian law.
The war has been carried on for over seven months
with no signs of abating. During this time, nearly
14.5 million people were forced to flee their homes,
with more than 7 million of them now displaced
across Europe. Humanitarian costs have been
immense, with more than 17 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance.
It is long past time for this conflict to come to an
end. For that to happen, we continue to emphasize the
importance of an immediate cessation of hostilities
throughout Ukraine. Additionally, it is essential to
build on and amplify positive developments between
the parties, so that we can begin to pull back from this
dangerous point of heightened global tensions. What
we need now is to secure a peace that is sustainable

S/PV.9138

and in accordance with the United Nations Charter and
international law.
Ms. Juul (Norway): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing.
In recent days, we have all seen images of armed
Russian soldiers going door to door in occupied parts
of Ukraine to collect votes for a so-called referendum
on joining Russia. This is a phony pretext from the
aggressor, Russia, to try to annex more parts of Ukraine.
Let me be clear: Ukraine has not authorized
these referendums, and Norway rejects these Russian
fabrications in occupied regions of Ukraine. Whatever
outcome Russia announces, they remain contrary
to international law, have no legal effect and would
in no way change Ukraine’s sovereignty within its
internationally recognized borders.
We are also clear that no territorial acquisition
resulting from the use of force shall be recognized as
lawful and that no Russian claim to annex territory
can take away Ukraine’s right to defend its own
land. All States, including Russia, have an obligation
under Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations
to refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State and to settle their
international disputes by peaceful means.
Russia’s announcement of the mobilization of
reserve forces is another issue of grave concern. It
is a dangerous escalation that will lead to increased
suffering for people in all parts of Ukraine.
Unspeakable horrors were revealed in Bucha,
Izyum and other places occupied by Russian forces.
The Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine concluded, in the update given last Friday,
that war crimes have been committed in Ukraine by
Russia. The use of explosive weapons in populated
areas — not distinguishing between civilians and
combatants or adults or children — has been a source
of immense harm and suffering. The Commission also
found accounts of ill treatment and torture carried out
during unlawful confinement and that Russian soldiers
have committed sexual and gender-based violence.
The age of victims ranged from 4 to 82 years. The
Commission has documented cases in which children
have been raped, tortured and unlawfully confined.
Norway condemns these acts in the strongest terms and
calls for accountability for the perpetrators.

22-6025913/18

S/PV.9138

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This war has had abhorrent impacts on the people
of Ukraine and is now being felt across the globe. We
must work urgently to bring it to an end.
Norway expresses its full support for the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices, and, when the time comes, we
will stand firmly with United Nations efforts to build
and sustain peace.
The Ukrainian people are paying with their lives
to defend universal values and their own independence.
Ukraine can count on Norway’s continued support.
Russia must stop the war and fully, immediately
and unconditionally withdraw its forces and military
equipment from all territory of Ukraine. And,
again, Norway will never recognize these so-called
referendums, and we stand by Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I welcome the participation of President
Zelenskyy in this meeting. I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.
We are concerned about the many indicators that the
war in Ukraine is escalating. During the general debate
in the General Assembly, we heard most world leaders
emphatically call for negotiations to find a lasting
solution to the situation in Ukraine. We will continue
to call for de-escalation. The parties must refrain from
any action that might add fuel to the fire and prioritize
issues that can ensure peaceful coexistence.
The Charter of the United Nations, which is the
cement of our coexistence, must be the compass of all
parties as we respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of each member of the international community.
We call on the parties to do their utmost to resume
negotiations unconditionally in order to put an end
to the war. The humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate, and the shockwave of the war continues to
widen, causing ever-more death and desolation.
My country urges the parties to cease all outrageous
rhetoric likely to aggravate the belligerence and to stir
up the use of weapons of mass destruction.
In conclusion, we call once again on the parties to
silence their weapons and to seize every opportunity
to seek peace. We support the various initiatives, both
bilateral and multilateral, aimed at a constructive
dialogue and a lasting peace between the parties.
14/18

27/09/2022

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Referendums on accession to the Russian
Federation were held in the Donetsk and Luhansk
People’s Republics, as well as in the Kherson and
Zaporizhzhya regions. The official results will be
announced over the next few days. This is a long-awaited
event for the people of Donbas. It should bring peace to
their lands, which they have not seen for eight years,
during which time the people have lived in constant fear
for their lives. Throughout those years, bombardments
of the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics killed
about 10 people a week, including children. As for the
residents of the Kherson and Zaporizhzhya regions,
they will finally be able to rest assured that no one
will take away their right to speak Russian and have
their children educated in the Russian language. They
will also know that on Victory Day, which is a sacred
holiday to us all, they will be able to pay tribute to those
who fought against Nazis to liberate their lands rather
than those who collaborated with them and committed
heinous crimes.
From 2014 onwards, Kyiv deliberately adopted
a course towards physical extermination of the
unwanted people of the Donetsk and Luhansk
People’s Republics — who are, by the way, Ukrainian
citizens — with the backing of the European Union and
the United States. They did not lift a finger to force the
Kyiv authorities to uphold the Minsk agreements, which
guaranteed the safety of the people of those republics
and a dignified future within Ukraine. Let me recall
that the Minsk agreements provided for a ceasefire and
direct dialogue between Kyiv and Donbas, granting
a special status to Donbas through the adoption a
new constitution.
The authorities in Kyiv cynically flouted all
those agreements and violated resolution 2202 (2015).
Western delegations not only failed to condemn it, but
even secretly and clearly supported that. Had it not
been for that criminal connivance and hypocrisy, had
the West forced its subordinates in Kyiv to uphold the
basic human rights of respect for its people and their
right to life, there would have been no need for our
special military operation.
Ukrainian authorities openly proclaimed that
the Russian and Russian-speaking residents of those
territories were “non-humans” and “species”. In an
interview in August 2021, Volodymyr Zelenskyy
advised all those who considered themselves Russian
or loved the Russian language to leave Ukraine for
22-60259

27/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Russia for their own sake and for the sake of their
children. Now the people living in the Donbas, Kherson
and Zaporizhzhya regions are carrying out his cynical
recommendation. They are returning back home and
taking back the lands where their ancestors lived
for centuries.
What also played a role is the fact that we were able
to save the people of Crimea, who chose to return to
Russia in 2014, from the tragic Donbas scenario. Back
then, we heard similar accusations of aggression and
annexation. Over these eight years, life in Crimea has
changed for the better. People no longer fear for their
lives. The economy is thriving, and infrastructure is
developing. For all those years, we have been investing
in the development of that region, as we will do with
Donbas and other territories that Kyiv is deliberately
trying to ruin.
I know that our former Western partners will not
listen to us, or rather they will pretend to have not heard
us. But I will say that the referendums were held under
exceptionally transparent conditions, with all electoral
norms being fully observed. That is a firm fact, whatever
the Kyiv regime and its Western sponsors say to the
contrary. More than 100 independent international
observers from 40 States monitored the vote. They
have actively shared their feedback on media and social
networks. They say that they were surprised to see how
enthusiastic the people in the Donetsk and Luhansk
People’s Republics and the Kherson and Zaporizhzhya
regions were about the referendums and how long they
had waited for them.
Unfortunately, neither those assessments, nor
interviews with residents of those regions, are aired
in Western media coverage. Western States said from
the very beginning that they would not recognize the
results of those referendums, and they threw their entire
weight behind the propaganda machinery to besmirch
those votes. We are not surprised by the propagandist
fake information that people were allegedly forced to
vote and that they have been tortured for days in order
to make them vote in favour of accession to Russia.
The Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany,
Annalena Baerbock, said that they were being “shot
and raped and then made to check the box on the ballot
sheet while soldiers with Kalashnikovs stood beside
them”. It would seem then that they have to vote after
they have been shot and raped. Those soldiers who
were holding the Kalashnikovs, incidentally, were

S/PV.9138

protecting the participants of the referendums from
likely provocations on the Ukrainian side.
Apart from the propaganda machine, the Ukrainian
armed forces employed the full capacity of its own, or
rather, the Western military machine, intensifying their
artillery bombardment of cities where the referendums
were being held in order to sew panic among the people
there in a futile attempt to disrupt the voting.
The hysteria of Western delegations, including
today in the Security Council, shows that the direct
vote of citizens has long ceased to be the criterion of a
democratic election. Self-determination is considered
a democratic choice only if the West approves of it.
In general, the Western model of democracy has been
reduced to the liberal minority dictating its will to the
conservative majority. This negation of the right to
non-liberal and non-Russophobic non-conformity is
applicable not only to Ukraine, incidentally, but also to
their allies in the Western bloc. As recently as the day
before yesterday, Head of the European Commission
Ursula von der Leyen openly threatened Italy with
consequences if Brussels did not like the outcome of
the election in that country. Hungary is already on the
blacklist.
Speaking about candidates for accession to the
European Union, despite the fact that it has historically
sympathized with Russia, today Serbia is being forced
to adopt an anti-Russian position and to support the
sanctions against my country, which would devastate
Serbian economy. As a recent example, the United
States Ambassador in Belgrade yesterday called on
Serbia demanding explanations from the Serbian side
regarding the plan for consultations between Russian
and Serbian foreign ministries that was signed on the
sidelines of the high-level week. What is that if not
neocolonial diktat?
When denying the people of Donbas and the
liberated territories of Ukraine their right to selfdetermination, Western delegations are demonstrating
egregious double standards. The loudest critics of the
referendum in the Donbas, Kherson and Zaporizhzhya
regions used to be at the forefront of those supporting
Kosovo’s independence back in the day. They used to
say that the territory of Kosovo had the right to secede
from Serbia in case of a real threat that the rights of
Kosovar Albanians could be seriously violated. They
called it “remedial secession”. Let me emphasize that
those were not just claims, but the official legal position

22-6025915/18

S/PV.9138

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

presented by Western countries at the International
Court of Justice in 2008. At that time, however, Kosovar
Albanians had not been threatened by anything for
quite some time. Yugoslavia no longer existed and
Serbia, which had been bombed by NATO, had foreign
contingents stationed as peacekeepers.
I would like to underscore that, unlike Crimea, the
Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics, Kherson and
Zaporizhzhya, Kosovo had no referendum. There was
no free expression of the people’s will. There only was
a declaration of independence adopted by the interim
self-governing authorities, which had clearly exceeded
their remit. But for the West, it was enough to recognize
Kosovo’s independence.
They said the international law did not prohibit
declaring independence. Today we hear a completely
different position from Western delegations. That is
another demonstration of their cynical double standards.
I want to tell my colleagues from developing
countries to not let themselves be misled. Let it be clear
that, although, for show, Western delegations today are
lamenting alleged violations of international law and
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
in reality they do not care about either of those. They
fully support the right to self-determination only when
it suits their geopolitical interests, as in the case of
Kosovo, as well as for pursuing their own agenda in the
Balkans, while preventing nations from pursing a path
of sovereign development. But when self-determination
appears to be the only way to save the people of Donbas
from genocide, the West says they have no such right.
The Charter of the United Nations stipulates
the principle of respect for territorial integrity.
However, such respect under international law is not
unconditional. As we know, the General Assembly
provided collegially and by consensus an interpretation
of the principle of territorial integrity in its Declaration
on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. According to the
Declaration, all States should respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of any State whose Government
respects the principle of self-determination of peoples
and represents all peoples within its territory. Today
our Western colleagues prefer to not recall that
crucial criterion.
After the 2014 coup d’état; after the ban on the
Russian language, education and media; after the
16/18

27/09/2022

Maidan authorities for years had bombed the area
where people refused to recognize the results of the
coup d’état; after they burned alive Russian activists
in Odessa; after they established a regime in Kyiv that
raised Ukrainian nation above all and glorified the
Nazi collaborators and their legacy — after all that
how dare anyone say that the Kyiv authorities represent
the interests of the people of Donbas and the Russianspeaking population at large, whom they subject either
to Ukrainization or extermination?
It is clear, however, that States that fully respect all
of their resident peoples and historical ethnic groups
need not fear for their territorial integrity. Our European
neighbours, except the hopelessly Russophobic Baltic
States, are well aware of that and never behave like the
Kyiv regime does at home. Belgium, Switzerland and
Finland are the brightest examples of tolerance for a
plurality of cultures and languages. The same can be
said of the vast majority of Asian and African States with
diverse ethnic compositions. It was only in Ukraine,
where Russian-speakers account for at least 40 per
cent of the population, where the West was given carte
blanche for the forced Ukrainization of those people,
contrary to all civilized norms and recommendations
of international organizations. So why is the West so
surprised that people in Ukraine are now welcoming
Russian troops as liberators, no matter how hard the
Kyiv regime, which is only sustained by NATO spears,
tries to assert the opposite, while threatening to punish
the inhabitants of those regions for collaborationism?
By the way, the authorities in Kyiv do not shy away
from sometimes using the Russian language for tactical
and propaganda purposes. Suffice it to mention that
lately, President Zelenskyy has recorded a few video
addresses in Russian in an attempt to disrupt the partial
mobilization recently announced in Russia and drive a
wedge between the authorities and society — following
the traditional Maidan playbook. In his address today,
President Zelenskyy again claimed that our mobilization
efforts were aimed at primarily recruiting non-ethnic
Russians, namely, men representing indigenous peoples
of the Russian regions. But making such claims will
not work in Russia. Western propaganda makers
have but a poor understanding of the mentality of the
Russian people.
Our people can tell truth from lies. They know what
they are fighting for — the way their grandfathers and
great-grandfathers fought for centuries every time an
external enemy tried to weaken our country. Time after
22-60259

27/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

time, in bloody battles, in different historical periods,
we fought in battles to defend our right to freedom — our
right to follow our own path. Our people remember their
history, and they remember how hard it was earned. But
today, like decades and centuries ago, we stand ready
to uphold the interests of our homeland and protect
the weak. It is in our genes. No Western propaganda
or sophisticated political gameplay are going to change
that. Everyone understands all too well that the only
goal of the West, which we have been facing head-on
near our borders, is to weaken and exsanguinate Russia
as much as possible, and Western policymakers dream
of subjugating Russia to their will.
Kyiv’s Western sponsors completely disregard the
wishes and interests of Ukraine. The people of Ukraine,
just as the people of Russia, want peace. But that does
not fit into the plans of London and Washington, who,
as usual, are earning billions of dollars on the back of
other people’s suffering — or Brussels, which plays
along with them. Otherwise they would not have
stopped Kyiv in March when a peace deal was already
visible. Instead, a terrible provocation in Bucha took
place, followed by an order given to fight to the last
Ukrainian, under the supervision of NATO mercenaries
and instructors. The result of that scenario, as we
predicted, turned out to be terrible.
The people of Crimea and Donbas, but also those
of the Kherson and Zaporizhzhya regions have turned
their backs on Kyiv. This process will invariably
continue unless Kyiv realizes its mistakes and strategic
miscalculations, begins to be guided by the interests of
its own people and stops blindly carrying out the will of
those who are quite pleased with themselves for having
pushed the two brotherly nations against one another.
We would like to believe that, among our colleagues
in the Security Council and the General Assembly,
someone will be able to intelligently explain that simple
truth to Kyiv.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I would like to thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
We have been calling on Russia to end its war of
aggression against Ukraine for seven months. Despite
our calls, Russia has opted for escalation and decided to
take its violations of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law even further. By announcing, on
21 September, a partial mobilization of its people, Russia

S/PV.9138

has finally admitted the truth: it is waging an illegal
war in Ukraine — not a so-called special operation.
In its headlong dash forward, since 23 September
Russia has also been organizing sham referendums in
the currently occupied territories of Luhansk, Donetsk,
Kharkiv and Zaporizhzhya, which are an integral part
of Ukrainian territory and not controlled by Russia
entirely. As President Macron stated, those so-called
referendums are nothing but a farce. They have no legal
basis or legitimacy. Let us be very clear: the results
of the referendums, which are known in advance,
do not represent the expression of the will of the
Ukrainian people, who continue to fiercely resist the
Russian invader.
The way Russia is operating is well-known — it is
taking the same action it did during its illegal annexation
of Crimea in 2014. Russia intends to instrumentalize
those sham referendums in order to legitimize the
annexation of the territories it is illegally occupying.
The Secretary-General has recalled that any annexation
of a State’s territory by another State resulting from the
use or threat of use of force is a violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law. France
will never recognize those illegal annexation attempts
by Russia.
It is crucial that every Member of the United
Nations unequivocally reject this charade. If we let
Russia forcibly alter the internationally recognized
borders of Ukraine, we are letting it once again trample
on the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity
enshrined in the Charter and international law. The
fate of the occupied territories in Ukraine concerns us
all. How can any country consider itself safe if we let
Russia do what it is doing?
The sham referendums are a new lie by Russia to
disguise reality. As our Minister Catherine Colonna
reminded us last week in this very Chamber (see
S/PV.9135), the reality is that Russia is continuing a
war of its own provocation, that it maintains and that it
aggravates every day.
The reality is that Ukraine is exercising its right to
self-defence and is fighting to defend its territory. The
reality is that the Ukrainian army’s counter-offensive
is succeeding thanks to the courage of its people. The
reality is that tens of thousands of Russian citizens are
currently fleeing their country to escape mobilization
and an unjust war.

22-6025917/18

S/PV.9138

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

France will continue to provide Ukraine with the
support it needs for as long as is necessary in order to
ensure respect for its independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We stand by Ukraine and its people.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of Albania has asked to make a
further statement.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I hate to ask for the floor a
second time, since it gives the impression that I was not
clear enough at first, but in this case I need to. This is
not, of course, to prolong today’s discussion, in which
everything was made clear, but to set the record straight.
The Russian delegation once again made a parallel
with the Republic of Kosovo — an independent country
that has been recognized by half of the United Nations,
including half of the members of the Security Council.
Such a parallel is wrong, inaccurate and regrettable. I
already reacted to similar remarks on the matter in June
(see S/PV.9069), therefore I will be very brief.
Nothing could be more difficult and forced than
comparing an international effort to end a conflict,
protect civilians and establish a peace process to find a
lasting solution — which was the case in Kosovo — with
a pure and unprovoked act of aggression and the sham
referendums engineered in Moscow that are currently

18/18

27/09/2022

being carried out in Ukraine. No one is, can be or will
be fooled by that comparison.
No attempts to compare the incomparable or
easy shortcuts out of a historic political context will
help Russia divert attention from its war of choice in
Ukraine or hide its blatant breach of international law,
which has made it an international pariah.
Kosovo and Serbia are today bound by a dialogue
to solve their problems. They meet; they do not fight.
Above all, the issue here is not Kosovo or any other part
of the world, but Russia’s aggression, Russia’s crimes
and Russia’s grabbing of territory to the detriment of its
neighbour. We will not be misled.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked to
make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will be very brief.
I would simply like to draw members’ attention
to the fact that what we have just heard from the
representative of Albania confirms the double standards
that I referred to with regard to Kosovo. I gave an
example as to how our Western colleagues dealt with
Kosovo and are now calling on us to take a completely
different approach with respect to the referendums
taking place in the territory that we are discussing.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

22-60259
