S/PV.7967

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7967th meeting

Tuesday, 13 June 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Moustafa
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mrs. Carrión

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa and the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (S/2017/465)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-16683 (E)
*1716683*

S/PV.7967

Central African region

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

(spoke in English)

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (S/2017/465)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. François Louncény Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Central
Africa and Head of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/465, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa
and the activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fall.
Mr. Fall (spoke in French): I have the honour to
present the report (S/2017/465) of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) . The report submitted to the Security
Council today lays out the current situation with respect
to peace and security in the Central African subregion,
as well as the activities undertaken by UNOCA since
November 2016.
Since my last briefing (see S/PV.7828), political
tensions have persisted in some Central African
countries, mostly due to recent or future electoral
processes. Ongoing tensions have hampered progress
towards strengthening the rule of law, peace and
development and have posed a threat to human
rights, in particular the freedoms of expression and
assembly, while the political space continues to shrink.
I have maintained regular contact with stakeholders,
particularly Governments and policymakers, to
advocate for the peaceful resolution of disputes through
inclusive and frank dialogue.
2/6

13/06/2017

In Gabon, the national dialogue that took
place from 29 March to 25 May produced a series
of recommendations, including on institutional
and constitutional reforms in the legislative and
election-management bodies. Two key recommendations
pertain to the responsibility of announcing the electoral
results, which is transferred from the Ministry of
Interior to the election-management body, and the
revision of the length of the mandate of the members
of the Constitutional Court, from seven years and
unlimited renewals, to a non-renewable nine-year
term. With regard to the President of the Republic,
the report recommends no changes to the length of the
presidential mandate — seven years — and does not
recommend instating a term limit. The outcome of the
national dialogue has been criticized by some of the
main opposition leaders. I will continue to use my good
offices to engage with all Gabonese stakeholders to
continue to defuse post-electoral tensions.
In Cameroon, tensions seem to be progressively
subsiding as a result of measures announced by the
Government to address grievances expressed by
lawyers and teachers of the English-speaking regions
of the north-west and south-west of the country, such
as reforms in the judicial and education sectors. In
addition, after a three-month interruption, Internet
service has been restored to the affected regions.
There is a growing consensus among the protagonists
that contentious issues need to be addressed through
peaceful means and dialogue for the sake of the
stability and national unity of Cameroon. I believe
that the Anglophone question and the related sense of
marginalization in the north-western and south-western
regions can be resolved only through genuine and
inclusive political dialogue.
However, I remain concerned that 27 civilians
detained in connection with the crisis in the Englishspeaking regions, including three leaders of the
Cameroon Anglophone Movement, will be tried in a
military court under the provisions of recently adopted
terrorism laws for acts of terrorism and complicity to
perpetrate such acts, and may face the death penalty
if found guilty. In that regard, on 7 June the presiding
judge dismissed the request for the provisional release
of the three leaders of the Anglophone movement and
ordered the case to resume on 29 June.
17-16683

13/06/2017

Central African region

In the Republic of the Congo, the unresolved
aftermath of the March 2016 presidential election is a
growing source of concern, with persistent humanitarian
and human rights ramifications in the Pool region, and
lingering political tensions between the Government
and the opposition. Last week, I returned from the
Republic of the Congo, where I continued to engage and
encourage all stakeholders, especially the Government,
to promote dialogue as the best way to address the
sociopolitical challenges facing the country, while also
ensuring humanitarian access to the Pool region.
As reported by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Onanga-Anyanga yesterday (see
S/PV.7965), the Secretary-General has launched an
action plan to respond to the evolving situation in
the Central African Republic, following last month’s
increase in violence in the country’s south-east.
UNOCA will work closely with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) in support
of the rapid revitalization of the political process,
which is at the heart of the proposed action plan. More
specifically, UNOCA will pursue its engagement with
the subregion collectively, through existing regional
mechanisms and individually with key countries, to
ensure that they continue to play a constructive role in the
resolution of the crisis in the Central African Republic.
As the Council noted during its visit to the Lake
Chad basin region in March, the activities of Boko
Haram have undermined development and exacerbated
economic hardship in the region. Boko Haram remains
a serious threat to regional stability despite the military
progress achieved by the Multinational Joint Task Force
against the terrorist group. Last month, in line with
resolution 2349 (2017) of 31 March, two teams from
UNOCA travelled to Chad and Cameroon to assess the
impact of Boko Haram on the population, especially on
women and children. Threats by Boko Haram continue
to hinder humanitarian access to the affected areas,
further compounding the situation of refugees and
internally displaced persons. It is crucial, therefore,
to sustain international support to the subregion and
provide increased assistance, including equipment and
logistics, to the Multinational Joint Task Force in order
to strengthen its operational effectiveness.
The continued threat posed by the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) to regional stability should
not be underestimated, especially as the Ugandan and
the South Sudanese forces have now disengaged from

S/PV.7967

the African Union Regional Task Force, along with the
United States special forces. I am concerned about the
impact of that withdrawal, as it will create a security
vacuum that may be exploited by the LRA and other
armed groups operating in the region. MINUSCA is
not mandated to conduct anti-LRA military operations
and the Central African Republic national security
forces, which could in the long run fill the gap left by
the exit of the Ugandan forces, still require training and
structural reforms. All training efforts will need to be
in line with the overall security sector reform process
and coordinated with other partners supporting the
Central African armed forces. I would like to express
my deepest gratitude to the Ugandan forces, those of
other contributing countries, and the military personnel
of the Regional Task Force for their dedication to
fighting the LRA. Collectively, there is a need to
remain focused on efforts aimed at the total eradication
of the LRA. UNOCA will remain engaged, including
by reviewing the United Nations regional strategy, in
order to address the threat and impact of the LRA and
to ensure coordination among the various stakeholders
working on the issue.
The 44th ministerial meeting of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa (UNSAC), held in Yaoundé from
29 May to 2 June, assessed the peace and security
situation in the subregion, including elections-related
and socioeconomic tensions, the upsurge of violence
in the Central African Republic and its regional
dimension, including transhumance related tensions,
the fight against terrorism and violent extremism and the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. Twentyfive years after the establishment of UNSAC, member
States found it fitting to evaluate its performance with
a view to enhancing its operations and effectiveness.
In that respect, Member States adopted, in the form
of a declaration, a number of measures on UNSAC’s
working methods and on enhancing synergies with
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), and better addressing the evolving peace and
security situation in the subregion. UNSAC member
States also adopted a ministerial declaration on the
Central African Republic, reflecting their continued
concern for the situation in that country.
(spoke in French)
The Central African Convention for the Control of
Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition
and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used

17-166833/6

S/PV.7967

Central African region

for Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly, also
known as the Kinshasa Convention entered into force
on 8 March. The Secretary-General congratulated the
States members of UNSAC on that achievement, while
encouraging those countries that had not yet done so to
ratify the Convention as soon as possible. UNOCA will
continue to encourage the Member States concerned
to do so and will continue to support subregional
disarmament efforts.
In the past six months, UNOCA has strengthened
its cooperation with its two main subregional partners,
ECCAS and the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community (CEMAC). In particular, in
accordance with the framework for cooperation and
plan of action between UNOCA and ECCAS, we have
institutionalized quarterly technical meetings that
have strengthened our common understanding of the
situation in the subregion and enabled UNOCA to
bolster its support for ECCAS.
Among other things, ECCAS has asked for support
in revitalizing and operationalizing its Mediation and
Preventive Diplomacy Unit and in strengthening its
collaboration with civil society with regard to early
warning. In April, the Council of Ministers of ECCAS
also adopted a timetable and terms of reference for
institutional reforms to be implemented by December
2018, with the main goal of strengthening the political
role of the ECCAS secretariat and making it more
effective, while accelerating subregional integration by
merging the CEMAC with the ECCAS. UNOCA and
the Department of Political Affairs will continue to
support the process of institutional reform.

13/06/2017

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Fall
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Central Africa and Head
of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA), Mr. François Louncény Fall, for
his briefing. Uruguay acknowledges the important
work carried out by UNOCA in terms of good offices,
preventive diplomacy and mediation, and in support of
United Nations and regional and subregional initiatives
to achieve peace and security in the region.
With regard to the briefing by the Special
Representative, we note that the tensions caused by the
controversy surrounding electoral processes continue
to affect the Central African subregion, although,
in a few cases, tensions have been eased by attempts
at dialogue between Governments and opposition
groups. In that regard, we welcome in particular the
various efforts made by countries in the subregion
to peacefully reduce tensions through genuine and
inclusive dialogue. We encourage all interested parties
to cooperate with each other with transparency and
in good faith in order to resolve the various political,
social and economic issues.

In order to ensure the coherence and coordination
of the work of the United Nations, UNOCA will
continue to enhance its collaboration with the Envoys
and Special Representatives of the Secretary-General,
the Regional Directors of the United Nations system
entities and the Resident Coordinators in the subregion.
It will continue to mobilize the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, including the Peacebuilding
Fund and the Peacebuilding Commission, with a view
to achieving the common goals of preventing conflict
and peacebuilding in Central Africa.

Having more women participate in the
decision-making process would help us to make
headway on the issue. There is still a very low level of
women’s participation in the subregion. As mentioned
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/465),
there have been a few positive developments in that
regard, such as the establishment and development of
a regional platform on the issue of women, peace and
security. Nonetheless, the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), whose goal is to ensure that women play
a greater role in decision-making, remains a challenge
in Central Africa. Uruguay believes that more effective
participation by women in the post-conflict transition
phase would be vital to ensuring lasting peace.

UNOCA looks forward to resolute commitment on
the part of the Security Council in efforts to promote
peace and security in Central Africa and reaffirms
its pledge to work closely with Member States in the
Central African subregion to achieve that goal.

I would like to highlight two very important
situations that Uruguay believes clearly reflect the
difficult living conditions faced by a large number of
civilians in many countries of the subregion — the
humanitarian and human rights situations.

4/6

17-16683

13/06/2017

Central African region

According to information provided by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
violence and insecurity caused by Boko Haram has
destroyed families and communities in the Lake Chad
basin region, where 2.4 million people are displaced
and more than 7 million require food assistance.
Throughout the region, there are more than 10 million
people in need of humanitarian aid, which makes it the
backdrop for one of the worst humanitarian crises in the
world. In that regard, we commend the collective efforts
of the international community — and of the countries
in Central African subregion in particular — to address
the threat posed by terrorist groups, such as Boko
Haram and Lord’s Resistance Army. Such efforts have
eased, at least to some extent, the tremendous suffering
they inflict on the civilian population.
As to the human rights situation, Uruguay is
concerned about the information contained in the
report with regard to ongoing human rights violations
in many countries of the subregion, where the
excessive use of force, detention and arbitrary arrests
of political opponents, civil society activists and media
professionals reflect a persistent trend that leads to the
reduction of political space. In addition, the prevailing
climate of impunity in some countries continues to be
of concern, given that, among other things, it is a major
hindrance to creating an environment that is conducive
to the holding of peaceful elections and a clear path to
democratic governance.
Lastly, I would like to express Uruguay’s support for
the Special Representative and all UNOCA personnel,
who work tirelessly to promote peace and security in
Central Africa.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Central
Africa, Mr. Fall, for his briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa
and the activities of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (S/2017/465). My delegation
would like to make the following observations and
recommendations.
First, Kazakhstan welcomes all ongoing political
and electoral processes in the countries of the Central
African region and believes that they should be held in
a strictly peaceful and legal manner in order to avoid a
deterioration of the political and security situation.
Secondly, the degradation of the socioeconomic
and humanitarian situation is another worrisome

S/PV.7967

aspect that can lead to an outbreak of violence. Longterm stability and sustainable peace can be achieved
only by strengthening the security/development nexus,
which is a bedrock of stabilization, reconciliation and
development in the region. It is therefore critically
important today to focus on the root causes of conflicts
in the region and address them using the full potential
of the United Nations and international organizations,
including the African Union (AU) and the Economic
Community of Central African States, Member States
and other stakeholders. It is our strong belief that all
United Nations agencies in the region must elaborate
a common strategy to deliver as one, and all donors to
the international conferences held in Oslo and Brussels
should fulfil their obligations in full and as soon
as possible.
Thirdly, we commend the success of all the States
of the region in their fight against armed groups in
the Central African subregion, especially the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) and Boko Haram. Kazakhstan
fully supports the work of the African Union, which
is aimed at enhancing the effectiveness of the
Multinational Joint Task Force in the fight against
Boko Haram. That terrorist organization is not a threat
only to the Lake Chad basin area, but to the African
continent, as a whole.
Fourthly, the LRA remains a significant threat to
the civilian population in affected areas. The AU-led
Regional Task Force did a great job. But, in order to
avoid a security gap after the withdrawal of Ugandan
and South Sudanese forces, we now need to consider how
the international community can strengthen the Central
African Armed Forces. We support the proposal by
Uganda, the Sudan and South Sudan to train the Central
African Armed Forces to take over the responsibilities
of the Regional Task Force. Kazakhstan welcomes
the decision taken by the African Union to extend its
Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of
the LRA mandate for another 12 months, until 27 May
2018, taking into consideration the need to review the
concept of operations and coordination mechanism for
cross-border operations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Bolivia thanks Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Central Africa, Mr. Fall, for his

17-166835/6

S/PV.7967

Central African region

informative briefing and wishes him every success in
his duties.
Bolivia supports and acknowledges the work of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) and understands the challenges the Office
faces in achieving peace, security and development
in the region. Although it is clear that several
Central African countries currently face challenging
security, humanitarian and economic conditions, we
recognize that UNOCA has contributed to significant
achievements in those areas.
The political situation in the Central African
subregion is plagued with tensions linked to various
types of processes. Bolivia believes that those processes
must be allowed to take place with full respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of each State. Although each country’s situation is
unique, we believe that conflicts in the region can
be resolved only through constructive dialogue and
respect for prevailing norms. In addition, neighbouring
countries, regional organizations and the international
community must pool and coordinate their efforts in
that endeavour.
With regard to security, cooperation in the fight
against Boko Haram, the so-called Lord’s Resistance
Army and other groups must be a priority for UNOCA
and other organizations and Governments in the
region. With respect to action against Boko Haram,
we commend the positive outcomes of programmes
developed by the Governments of the region and of the
Lake Chad basin and through international cooperation.
Although Boko Haram’s ability to launch attacks has
been reduced, its activities continue to pose a threat to
millions of civilians, who are victims of terrorism and
who find it difficult to recover from the scars it leaves.
Governments’ efforts to combat the root causes
of conflict must be supported. In that connection,

6/6

13/06/2017

I take this opportunity to welcome the work of the
Multinational Joint Task Force, the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel, among other organizations.
Although the so-called Lord’s Resistance Army has
been weakened, it nevertheless continues to be a threat
to the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. As a result of the recent
withdrawal of troops that were fighting the Lord’s
Resistance Army, a joint strategy should be developed
with the African Union and the countries involved in
order not to leave vacuums that could be exploited by
members of that group and to cooperate in the fight
against poaching and illicit trafficking in wildlife,
which is a source of financing for this and other groups.
Concerning the humanitarian situation, in the
Lake Chad basin alone approximately 10 million people
urgently need humanitarian assistance. Hundreds of
thousands of internally displaced persons and refugees
are vulnerable to food insecurity, diseases and a lack of
basic services. We call on the international community
and financial institutions to provide the necessary
resources to address the needs of vulnerable people of
the region.
In conclusion, Bolivia encourages UNOCA,
along with other regional organizations and the
international community, to continue working to
achieve peace, stability and development in the Central
African subregion.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

17-16683
