S/PV.8159

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8159 th meeting

Wednesday, 17 January 2018, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Umarov/Mr. Sadykov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kazakhstan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-01377 (E)
*1801377*

S/PV.8159

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, and Ms. Hajer Sharief, co-founder of Together
We Build It. Mr. Salamé and Ms. Sharief are joining the
meeting via video-teleconference from Tunis.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Salamé, Ambassador Irina Schoulgin
Nyoni, Deputy Permanent Representative and Chargé
d’affaires of Sweden, on behalf of the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, and
Ms. Sharief.
I now give the floor to Mr. Salamé.
Mr. Salamé: I would like to congratulate
Kazakhstan on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I also wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the
Council on the work of the United Nations to address
the crisis in Libya.
I wish to report that the United Nations is poised to
increase its presence in Libya. Our compound has been
prepared and protection arrangements made so that we
can increase the number of staff who are staying and
working in the capital — as security permits, of course.
At the same time, we are expanding our presence
across the country and visiting communities throughout
Libya. In the coming weeks and months, we will
continue to reach out to more cities and towns. It is only
by truly understanding the country that we can succeed
in the implementation of the action plan for Libya and
help its citizens put an end to a transition that is taking
too long.
2/23

17/01/2018

The second anniversary of the Libyan Political
Agreement was on 17 December 2017. Despite very
differing views about what the anniversary might
entail, Libyans ultimately chose for the day to pass
without violence or significant protest. The fact that
the anniversary proceeded peacefully is in no small
part due to the unity of the Council. The presidential
statement of 14 December (S/PRST/2017/26) sent a
clear message: the international community stands
behind the Agreement and will not accept attempts to
undermine it. That was reiterated by three neighbouring
countries, whose Ministers for Foreign Affairs met in
Tunis on 17 December 2017.
Whether it be the adoption of electoral legislation
or appointments to sovereign positions, such as
Governor of the Central Bank of Libya, all actions need
to proceed in line with the Agreement for its duration.
In practice, that means harmony between the House of
Representatives and the High State Council.
We must remain alert. Although 17 December is
behind us, the spectre of violence remains present.
Military forces are flexing their muscles in many parts
of the country. Close to the border with Tunisia, clashes
have occurred between forces affiliated with two
rival communities.
The area in the eastern vicinity of Tripoli remains
a worrying flashpoint. Tension has also heightened
around the city of Derna. The very reason that I am
not briefing the Council from Tripoli, as I had planned
to do, but from Tunis, is because bloody clashes at the
airport have halted all flights in and out of Mitiga airport
for the whole week. Civilians — men and women and
children — continue to be killed or injured in crossfire.
Armed groups fight recklessly in residential areas with
no thought for the safety of civilians.
The arms embargo has never been more important.
It is for this reason that recent reports of a large shipment
of explosives intercepted by the Greek Coast Guard
are particularly alarming. A country with 20 million
pieces of arms does not need a single piece more. I have
received the Panel of Experts today, and its members
are looking into this matter with the professionalism
for which they are known. The efforts of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) have
been pivotal to the relative quiet that Libya has enjoyed
over recent months. These extremely time-consuming
conflict-prevention efforts must continue if hope in the
political process is to be maintained.
18-01377

17/01/2018

The situation in Libya

This fragile and shaky status quo is not sustainable.
Libya needs a competent and efficient Government,
one that can deliver the public services that the
people desperately need, one that is able to unify their
country’s institutions, one that will preside over the
elections that will end this transition. In our view,
amending the Libyan Political Agreement is the most
appropriate means for fulfilling that endeavour, and
we have not wasted a single day in our push for it. I
am encouraged by the efforts of members of the House
of Representatives and of the High State Council to
achieve this goal and by several initiatives generated to
reach the consensus needed for that end. The work of the
joint drafting committee has crystallized consensus on
the adjustments to the executive authority. Although a
formal agreement has yet to be reached, this consensus
is desirable and it is reachable.
In line with the action plan, three goals are the
ultimate focus of our work. First, with regard to the
Constitution, Libya requires a strong, permanent legal
framework. The transition cannot definitively end
until Libya stands upon a true Constitution. The draft
Constitution as provided by the Constitutional Drafting
Assembly is currently undergoing judicial review.
Out of respect for the Libyan judiciary, we await the
decision of the courts. I expect this will be concluded
very soon — in fact, in the next 10 days. Once a decision
is reached, we will determine how we can best support
the process.

S/PV. 8159

Our other national rebuilding track consists of
reaching out to the major players and groups previously
marginalized. They are gradually being brought into
the political fold as equal and accepted partners as long
as they commit to the political process. Through town
halls, shuttle visits and whatever other tools we have
at our disposal, we are intensely working on tearing
down the walls among Libyan political factions and
untangling past local and political animosities, thus
moving towards the national conference, which will
provide a space for Libyans from all quarters to come
together and adopt a common vision for Libya.
The third focus of our work is elections. On
6 December 2017, the High National Electoral
Commission launched a voter-registration update. I am
pleased by the remarkable eagerness that Libyan men
and women have shown in registering. Our expectations
for participation have been exceeded. Some 600,000
Libyans have newly registered to vote in just over six
weeks. The number of people on the electoral register
now exceeds 2 million and continues to rise. The United
Nations has been able to provide the Commission
with extensive technical support for voter registration
and will continue to assess the arrangements for the
next steps.

Secondly, with respect to national rebuilding,
the fabric of Libyan society is frayed and requires
meaningful reconstitution if it is to be mended. Unless
a national polity is rebuilt, no meaningful progress can
be made in unifying institutions, preventing outbreaks
of violence or achieving widespread acceptance of
election results. Rebuilding a Libyan national polity
necessitates two parallel efforts.

However, before credible elections can be conducted
much work remains to be done. A constitutional
framework must be agreed upon. The security
conditions must be conducive to making the process
free and fair. There must be confidence that the results
will be accepted by all. For either the referendum,
presidential or parliamentary elections, laws are also
needed. Libya’s relevant institutions have an obligation
to produce the requisite legislation and to do so in a
manner consistent with the Libyan Political Agreement.
I urge these institutions to avoid mutual suspicion and
unilateral action and to put the interests of the Libyan
people above all other considerations.

First, the United Nations has successfully facilitated
numerous dialogues between local communities
formerly in conflict. Agreements have been adopted
and meaningful steps to address the past have been
taken. Communities once at odds have shown their
willingness to build a common future. The Government
of National Accord has recently started to play its part
in this effort, which has been demonstrated by its
support for the Misrata-Tawergha Agreement and its
provisional funding. On this matter, we will also do our
part in particular to guarantee a safe return to that area.

I thank the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Algeria,
Egypt and Tunisia for taking the time to meet with
me and for their strong backing of the action plan for
Libya. I also express my gratitude to the Kingdom of
Morocco for receiving me and for its continued support
for our work in Libya. It was an honour to meet with the
Secretary General of the League of Arab States, whose
support has been highly valued. This month, I also
travelled to two of Libya’s southern neighbours, where
I had the privilege to meet with President Mahamadou
Issoufou in the Niger and President Idriss Deby Itno

18-013773/23

S/PV.8159

The situation in Libya

17/01/2018

in Chad, two countries substantially affected by the
evolution of the Libyan scene. I have greatly benefited
from their wisdom.

Failure to address custodial abuses fuels local conflicts
and undermines national reconciliation and efforts to
build a rule-of-law-based State.

Of utmost importance for UNSMIL is our
relationship was the African Union (AU). This week I
returned from Addis Ababa where I met with the AU
Commission to discuss deepening our cooperation
and the AU’s support for Libya. Twice this month I
had the honour to meet and have an exchange with AU
Commission Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat, and
we shared common views on the way forward.

Transformative change is overdue. Most worrying
for us are the individual predatory agendas that
continue to dominate at the expense of the collective
good. No political solution can be durable unless an end
is put to the predatory economics that have dominated
the Libyan scene in the past few years, where public
resources are more often than not used for various
purposes other than in the service of the Libyan people.

The political crisis in Libya has been accompanied
by a humanitarian crisis of equal dimensions. Only a
strong, effective Government can turn the tide and put
an end to the suffering, but those suffering cannot wait.
To address the most urgent needs, the United Nations
will launch a humanitarian response plan next week.
The plan will target those in especially vulnerable
situations, focusing on such life-saving interventions
as basic services, shelter, food and demining. The
Stabilization Facility for Libya is another important
tool to help communities. These concrete actions are
now widely recognized by the Libyan people. I thank
the donors who have contributed to either of these two
funds, and I urge the Government of National Accord
to do its part as well.

Conflict over resources is indeed at the heart
of the Libyan crisis. The Mission will not spare any
effort to advocate that national wealth be directed
towards the provision of public services rather than to
special interests. This is all the more necessary as fuel
shortages, electricity shortages and water shortages
are common across the country. It is a painful irony
that a country of such plenty is consistently so short of
the necessities.

A matter of great humanitarian concern is the dire
situation many migrants in Libya continue to face. I
saw some of this situation first hand last month when I
visited a detention centre in Gheryan. Further, we have
evidence that many migrants are subject to grave abuses
inside and outside official places of detention, including
various forms of sexual violence. We keep pressing
the authorities to eradicate these egregious crimes
and bring those responsible to justice and, in view of
several serious incidents against humanitarian actors in
the conduct of their duties, I urge the Government to
ensure their safety. I also salute the strong cooperation
between the African Union, the European Union and
the United Nations. As members of the Council know,
a Task Force has been established between our three
organizations and it has made progress in supporting
voluntary returns of migrants. Co-chairing the
operational group in Tunis, UNSMIL is dedicated to
these efforts.
However, the concentration on migration should
not allow us to forget those many Libyans held without
judicial process and often subject to ill treatment.
4/23

I would note once again that it is our collective
responsibility to ensure that Libya’s remaining frozen
funds are effectively managed as a safeguard for the
future. Additional work is still needed to make this
truly happen.
As the Council is aware, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman visited Libya from
9 to 12 January. Mr. Feltman’s visit was timely and very
welcome. It was an opportunity to reinforce messages
to the Libyan political and military leaders that it is time
for compromise, in the interests of the Libyan people.
On behalf of the Secretary-General, Mr. Feltman urged
the Libyan interlocutors to truly commit to working
together and implement the action plan to create the
conditions necessary to end the transitional period.
I would once again like to express my appreciation
to the Council for its steadfast commitment and support
to the action plan for Libya and to our efforts to end the
crisis in that country.
The President: I thank Mr. Salamé for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Schoulgin Nyoni.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security
Council on the work of the Committee established by
the same resolution. The report covers the period from
18-01377

17/01/2018

The situation in Libya

17 November 2017 to 17 January 2018, during which
time the Committee dealt with various aspects of the
sanctions regime via the written silence procedure.
The Committee approved two requests for exemption
to the arms embargo, both of them submitted under
paragraph 9(c) of resolution 1970 (2011) by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). The
Committee also received two post-delivery notifications,
one from UNSMIL and the other from the Netherlands,
for previously exempted items. The Committee further
received an update from UNSMIL on issues faced
during and after the transfer of exempted items. The
post-delivery notification from the Netherlands also
contained such information. The Committee responded
to a letter from Turkey that voluntarily provided
information on the donation of certain items that fell
within the scope of the exception to the arms embargo
contained in paragraph 10 of resolution 2095 (2013).
Concerning the assets freeze, the Committee
responded to two requests for guidance, one received
from Algeria and the other from a United Nations
Department, on the scope and implementation of
this measure.
With respect to the measures aimed at preventing
illicit exports of petroleum, including crude oil and
refined petroleum products, from Libya, the Council
will recall that two vessels — the Capricorn and the
Lynn S — are currently included in the Committee’s
sanctions list. During the period under review, the
Committee received a letter from the Syrian Arab
Republic informing it that the Capricorn had unloaded
diesel oil in the tanks of the Syrian Company for Oil
Transportation and that the Syrian Government had
since informed all concerned authorities not to receive
this vessel again. The reply from the Committee is still
under consideration. On 27 November 2017, based on
information received from its Panel of Experts, the
Committee updated the list entry of the Capricorn,
indicating that the flag State, previously Tanzania, was
now unknown.
As regards the Lynn S, based on information
received from Libya and from the Panel of Experts, the
Committee has written letters to the reported States of
destination, seeking their clarifications on the matter.
On 16 January 2018, the Committee received
the interim report of the Panel of Experts pursuant
to paragraph 14 of resolution 2362 (2017). The

S/PV. 8159

Committee is scheduled to discuss the report and its
recommendations on 9 February.
The President: I thank Ambassador Schoulgin
Nyoni for her briefing.
I now call on Ms. Sharief.
Ms. Sharief: This opportunity to address the
Security Council is an opportunity any member of
Libyan civil society would appreciate. I want to thank
Kazakhstan for inviting me today as a representative of
the Together We Build It organization to share my civilsociety perspective with the Council.
The Libya we are discussing today is no longer the
wealthy country it used to be. Nowadays women, men,
youth and even elderly people sleep in front of banks
in the hope that they can withdraw some cash to cover
their basic needs. In hospitals, patients must provide
their own medications, as hospitals do not have even
these essential resources.
Just last week I saw the extensive bruises covering
a fellow activist’s face after she was badly beaten by
members of an armed group in the streets of Tripoli.
In 2011, the Security Council adopted resolution
1973 (2011), which called for the protection of
Libyan civilians.
The Libya we are discussing today is witnessing
forms of violence that go far beyond what the Security
Council aimed to protect against in 2011. For many
Libyans at that time, the resolution was a life-saver.
It was a rescue signal indicating that the international
community and the Security Council were willing to do
everything in their power to protect civilians.
Our hope turned to despair as many Libyans then
quickly felt abandoned by the international community
and the Council. There was no follow-up plan or strategy
to empower the Libyan people beyond the military
intervention. Neither was there a plan for recovery from
the extreme form of violence that was introduced into
the society in 2011.
While volunteering at Tripoli central hospital
during the war of 2011, I was struck by the fact that
the first patient I met was not the typical war victim
I used to see in the media. He was a civilian who had
been injured on his way to the grocery store. I still
remember his son’s words when his father passed away
a few days later: “What did my father do to them?”,
asked the young boy through his tears. At that very

18-013775/23

S/PV.8159

The situation in Libya

moment, I knew that the actions of the international
community had not changed only a political regime;
they had changed people’s lives dramatically. However,
despite all the disappointments, extreme violence and
lack of resources the country is enduring, Libyans are
doing their best to ensure that life goes on.
In Libya, support from the international community
continues to be greatly needed, but this support going
forward must be completely and urgently redesigned to
empower the Libyan people, including men and youth,
to play an active role in peacebuilding. We cannot have
a repeat of the 2011 international support efforts, which
directly affected power structures on the ground.
As such, when implementing the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) action plan
on Libya, crucial questions therefore need to be
addressed. Who receives support from the international
community? Who is invited to take part in negotiations,
and who needs mediation? Who is recognized by the
action plan as an important player, and what security
threats will the action plan identify and prioritize?
For example, the threat of open borders in Libya is
a matter of people’s security, as it poses the threat of
arms smuggling and human trafficking. However, most
of the international community’s recent efforts address
it only as a threat posed by immigration. For Libya,
violent extremism is a threat to personal freedom and
human rights, but for the international community it is
addressed only as an external threat to the West.
The role of civil society must be a necessary focus
of the UNSMIL action plan. In that regard, I would
like to focus on women and youth. In Libya, there are
many national and local initiatives that strengthen
peacebuilding, conflict prevention and conflict
resolution. My organization — Together We Build
It — created the 1325 Network in Libya, which works
in different parts of the country to provide women and
young people with a platform for self-development in
areas related to human security and countering and
preventing violent extremism.
The work of my organization as a civil society actor
has inspired many women and young people to become
active in promoting peace in the country. We recently
launched a new platform called Peace and Security
from the Libyan Woman’s Perspective, in which more
than 1,000 Libyan women participated in fewer than
three days. This shows that women and young people
participate in peace efforts whenever the opportunity
6/23

17/01/2018

arises. However, their efforts must be supported by the
international community so that the outcome of their
work will be reflected throughout the country.
Determining the real problem is the first step
towards the right solution. As such, the problem in Libya
is not only a conflict-related issue; it matters how parties
to the conflict communicate with each other. Part of the
Libyan solution would be to establish communication
channels not only among the parties directly involved
in the conflict, but among all actors in Libya — State
actors and non-State actors, including civil society.
Such channels must ensure that all actors have an equal
opportunity and the space to communicate feedback,
opinions and feelings with each other.
If UNSMIL’s action plan is to be a shared agenda
where international interests meet Libyan priorities and
needs, then the implementation of every aspect of the
plan must be systematically integrated with resolutions
1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015). Those resolutions should
serve as guidelines for the implementation of the action
plan, not only to position women and young people to
lead mediation and conflict resolution efforts, but also
to address the long-term structural issues that often
fail to sustain peace. As such, arising from our belief
in the United Nations and its principles, and based
on our belief that peace is based on equality, justice,
demilitarized security, non-violence and inclusive
social transformation, we urge UNSMIL and the
Security Council to ensure the full implementation of
the recently adopted resolution 2376 (2017), and take
the gender perspective into account by ensuring the full
and effective participation of women in the democratic
transition process, reconciliation efforts, the security
sector and national institutions, in line with resolution
1325 (2000). Moreover, for resolution 2376 (2017) to be
implemented, specific human and financial resources
must be allocated.
Women make up more than 50 per cent of Libyan
society and young people make up more than 50 per
cent. It is clear from the political process that the people
in charge of bringing about sustainable peace in our
country, our leadership, do not reflect the demographic
structure of our country. We would like to see greater
representation and participation of women and youth
throughout the political process. We would also like
UNSMIL to ensure the meaningful participation of
women and young people in the upcoming national
conference. We would like to see women and young
people taking part in all conference meetings — open
18-01377

17/01/2018

The situation in Libya

and closed-door meetings alike. Furthermore, we would
like the upcoming elections laws to ensure that women
and young people have a fair chance to participate,
with a minimum quota for women and a separate one
for youth. In addition, as Libyan civil society, we
would like the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to hold regular meetings with women and young
people in order to consult with them on all aspects of
UNSMIL’s action plan; strengthen disarmament efforts
as disarmament is the key element in preventing the
further escalation of conflict; and promote the full and
effective participation of women and young people in
all disarmament-related discussions.
A violence-free society is one in which Libyans
desire to live. Moreover, ensuring investigations
into and the monitoring of human rights violations,
including sexual violence, the safety, dignity and
longer-term needs of survivors and their families
should be at the heart of the such efforts. Grass-roots
civil society organizations, including local women
and youth organizations, should be supported in their
efforts to advocate that approach.
I would like to conclude my statement by echoing
the words of Tawfik Bin Saud, a young activist who
was shot dead in 2014. He stated that working for
peace should never stop; only war should stop. All
Libyans dream of prosperity, peace and stability. The
responsibility to make that dream come true rests on
the Council’s shoulders.
The President: I thank Ms. Sharief for her statement.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Salamé
and Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni for their briefings.
I also warmly welcome and thank Ms. Sharief, our
civil society briefer, who conveyed a very powerful
message and eloquently highlighted the importance of
an inclusive peace process that includes, in particular,
women and youth. Perhaps as a follow-up to the
discussion, it would be helpful to hear more from the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya about how it
integrates the gender perspective in its work.
Let me begin by welcoming the update of Special
Representative Salamé on the political process and by
reiterating the United Kingdom’s full support for his
work. In our presidential statement of 14 December
2017 (S/PRST/2017/26), we in the Security Council

S/PV. 8159

urged all parties to support the political process in a
spirit of compromise for the sake of the Libyan people.
That must include support for the efforts of Special
Representative Salamé to secure consent to amend the
Libyan Political Agreement and commitment to the
sequencing of the United Nations action plan.
As Ms. Sharief highlighted, civil society has an
essential role to play in ensuring that the voices of the
people are also heard during discussions on the future
of their country. All Libyans, regardless of their age,
gender or where they are from, must feel represented
and understood by their political leaders. That will
encourage Libyans to support their political leadership
and build trust in the political process. The greatest
immediate need is the establishment of a more inclusive
political platform, which is essential to creating an
executive better able to improve the security, human
rights and economic conditions in Libya. A more
inclusive political settlement would also build a context
more conducive to preparing for elections. We welcome
the Special Representative’s emphasis on ensuring
the right conditions are in place ahead of elections,
including the necessary political, legislative and
security preparations to guarantee their success.
As we saw from clashes at Mitiga Airport on
Monday, the security situation in Libya remains of deep
concern. As we have stated, there can be no military
solution in Libya. All parties must exercise restraint
and express their support for national reconciliation,
which must include the reconciliation of the security
forces. Unified security forces, under the command
of the civilian Government, which represent and work
for all Libyans will also enable the threat posed by
extremist groups to be tackled in a sustainable way.
They will help bring an end to the impunity of armed
groups, which are inextricably linked to the gravely
concerning human rights situation.
Ungoverned spaces in Libya create the conditions
for abuses and violations of international humanitarian
law, which take place against civilians, internally
displaced persons and migrants. We fully support the
work of the African Union-European Union-United
Nations Task Force in tackling slavery in Libya. We
call on all parties that are suspected of committing,
ordering or failing to prevent such human rights abuses
and violations to be fully investigated, and if found
guilty, to be held to account for their actions. We also
stand ready to consider the sanctioning of individuals
involved in people trafficking in modern slavery.

18-013777/23

S/PV.8159

The situation in Libya

We are also concerned by reported restrictions of
civil and political freedoms and the intimidation of
civil society organizations, public servants, religious
groups and national minorities, including recent attacks
on Sufi shrines and Amazigh representatives. These
groups must be allowed to participate in Libyan society
and the political process.
Finally, with regard to the economic situation, the
Council needs to continue to protect the Libyan people
from economic hardship, including by supporting
the restoration of the economy and the delivery of
service across the country. We must act robustly
against attempts to illicitly sell oil and establish
parallel institutions. We need to continue to ensure that
sanctions measures keep up with the situation on the
ground. That includes the work we have done to address
fuel oil smuggling. However, we should also be ready
to rectify inadvertent consequences, such as addressing
the depreciation of frozen Libyan Investment Authority
funds, which remain frozen at the Libyan Government’s
request until their eventual return for the benefit of the
Libyan people.
A stable, unified, inclusive Government is the best
way to improve the security conditions, the economic
fortunes and human rights situation for millions of
Libyans. It will also improve global peace and security
and our ability to address the challenges of migration.
We must continue to stand together in support of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salamé’s
efforts to achieve this. We, like him, urge Libya’s
political leaders to put their country first.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to express
its sincere thanks to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ghassan Salamé, Ambassador
Schoulgin Nyoni and Ms. Hajer Sharief for their clear
statements. We welcome the call of Ms. Sharief for an
inclusive approach, including the perspective of civil
society, particularly women and youth.
Please allow me to focus on three important
aspects: ending the political crisis, the human rights
situation and combating impunity, and coordinating
international efforts.
My first point concerns the political process. The
year 2018 will be crucial for Libya. The Libyan people
have long awaited an end to their country’s political
transition. The current window of opportunity to
achieve this, through the successful implementation
8/23

17/01/2018

of the action plan, should not be missed. We express
our deep concern about Monday’s clashes at Mitiga
Airport, which regrettably are symptomatic of the
fragile security context in which Libya’s transition is
taking place.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully supports
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Salamé’s action plan. Its success will depend, above all,
on the political will and courage of the Libyan parties
to take the required steps. We call on all parties to
continue to work within the framework of the Libyan
Political Agreement. This Agreement remains the only
viable framework to end the Libyan political crisis. In
this context, we urge the delegations of the House of
Representatives and the High State Council to swiftly
finalize their negotiations on the limited amending
of the Libyan Political Agreement. To thoroughly
prepare for elections, the sequencing of the steps of
the action plan will be of key importance. Concrete
results from the negotiations on amendments will give
the necessary boost to its implementation and will
provide the foundations for the next stage of convening
a national conference.
My second point concerns the human rights situation
and the prevailing culture of impunity in Libya. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands remains deeply concerned
about serious human rights violations and abuses that
continue throughout Libya. The human rights situation
of migrants and refugees remains of particular concern.
Immediate steps need to be taken to improve their
plight, and the international community, including the
Council, should do more. Dismantling the criminal
trafficking networks that exploit migrants and refugees
and destabilize Libya requires our specific attention.
During our membership of the Council, including
through the Libya sanctions regime, we will explore
new avenues in combating these inhumane practices.
We welcome the resolute action taken by the
International Organization for Migration, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
countries of origin and local authorities to facilitate
the safe return home of a growing number of migrants
who were facing dire conditions in Libya. This shows
the importance of our strengthened cooperation. Joint
efforts can lead to concrete and humane solutions in the
very complex field of migration.
Impunity in Libya remains a grave problem. In 2014,
Salwa Bugaighis, a leading women’s right advocate
18-01377

17/01/2018

The situation in Libya

in Libya, was brutally murdered. Her case is just one
example among many that have yet to be investigated
and prosecuted. We urge all parties to respect human
rights and international humanitarian law and reiterate
that all those responsible for violations and abuses must
be brought to justice. It is essential that we answer the
calls for accountability in line with resolutions 1970
(2011) and 2174 (2014). Their prosecution will help
prevent further atrocities and thereby contribute to
sustaining peace. In that regard, we welcome the efforts
of the International Criminal Court and call upon the
Libyan Government, and in fact all concerned, to
cooperate fully with the Court and the Prosecutor.
This brings me to my third point, namely, that
of the coordination of international efforts in Libya.
We welcome the progress made in the return of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
to Libya. The Mission’s partial relocation to Tripoli
is an important step forward. We look forward to the
further return to other parts of Libya, to the extent
that the security situation will allow it. The expansion
of UNSMIL’s presence in Libya will also benefit its
coordinating role in the fields of humanitarian aid,
security and human rights, which remains vital.
We welcome the progress made by the joint police
and security programme of UNSMIL and the United
Nations Development Programme in improving the
security situation in Tripoli, though Monday’s clashes
show that no progress can be taken for granted.
In conclusion, with the launch of the action plan
in September the Libyan parties have been presented
with a new opportunity to direct their country towards
a future of stability and prosperity. It is now up to
them to show the courage and leadership to make the
necessary compromises.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ghassan Salamé for his very
valuable briefing and commend his ongoing efforts to
find a political solution. On behalf of France, I assure
him of our full steadfast support. I also thank Ms. Hajer
Sharief for allowing us to hear the voice of Libyan civil
society. She stressed the importance, for Libya and in
general, of enabling effective women’s participation in
peace processes. Finally, I thank the Deputy Permanent
Representative of Sweden for her enlightened briefing
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

S/PV. 8159

I would like to underscore three principal points.
My first point is that, with regard to the political
situation in Libya, the stabilization of the country is
more than ever a priority for France. The implementation
of the Special Representative’s action plan is the key
to easing tensions and achieving an inclusive political
solution. We therefore continue to give our full support
to Special Representative Ghassan Salamé in that
endeavour. The first positive steps have already been
undertaken in the political process. Consultations
between the two chambers have led to a consensus
on key points in the revision of the Skhirat Political
Agreement. That Agreement remains the only valid and
legitimate framework throughout the transition, as the
Council recalled in its statement of 14 December 2017
(S/PRST/2017/26). However, we must now go further.
We must move forward in drafting the constitution and
all stakeholders must remain engaged throughout the
two next steps.
First, the inclusive national conference will be
decisive, as it should make it possible to contribute to
the national reconciliation of all Libyans and to garner
the necessary political consensus for the success of
the elections.
The second deadline is the holding of a transparent
and democratic electoral process in 2018 that will
enable the people of Libya to express themselves.
As the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral pointed out, the number of registered voters
recently exceeded 2 million, thanks to the efforts of
Mr. Salamé, who is making every effort to ensure the
success of the elections. We congratulate him, and the
international community must support a credible and
transparent electoral process. Mr. Salamé is actively
making preparations for those two deadlines, and we
can appreciate how lengthy the preparation process
is. The Security Council must fully support him and
call on all Libyan stakeholders to commit resolutely
and sincerely to the implementation of its action plan.
That is the message of the French Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Jean-Yves Le Drian, delivered to Mr. Al-Sarraj
and Mr. Haftar when he visited Libya on 21 December.
My second message, in the context of the volatile
situation on the ground, is to insist that there can be
no military solution in Libya and that all actors must
convince themselves of that. In recent days, radical
militias have launched a worrisome new offensive in
Tripoli, in the Sirte region where Da’esh continues

18-013779/23

S/PV.8159

The situation in Libya

its abuses. France condemns such use of armed force.
Defeating terrorism in Libya once and for all and
ensuring sustainable security will require a political
solution centred around national reconciliation and the
restoration of a State with full control of all its territory.
In that context, the Constitution and the building of
a unified national security architecture under civilian
authority is an absolute priority. In this fragile security
context, the economic and humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate. The Council cannot ignore that
situation, which weighs heavily on political balances.
Our role is also to ensure that all Libyans can enjoy the
country’s significant wealth. I am referring particularly
to Libya’s oil resources, which should remain under the
exclusive control of the Government of National Accord,
pursuant to Council resolutions. We must not hesitate to
strengthen the sanctions mechanism to fight against the
parallel economy that stokes political divisions.
Finally, I wish to address the situation of migrants
passing through Libya, who are victims of serious human
rights violations. We are maintaining close dialogue
with our partners and the Libyan authorities in order to
make progress in fulfilling the commitments to ensure
that migrants can received dignified treatment and in
facilitating cooperation with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner as it relates to access to
detention centres and the evacuation of refugees and
migrants. The issue of migrations was also at the heart
of our Minister’s visit to Libya on 21 December. The
Council has highlighted the importance for perpetrators
of such crimes to be prosecuted by the Libyan judiciary,
but individuals responsible for human trafficking and
the trafficking of migrants must also be sanctioned
under the existing United Nations regime. We must
continue to work together in that regard.
Moreover, Libya must meet its obligation to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court and
help it carry out its investigations and issue arrest
warrants. That would be an important signal of the
commitment of Libyan actors to international criminal
justice and to the fight against impunity, which are
essential for securing the trust of the Libyan population.
In conclusion, I note that all of our efforts must
converge on supporting Mr. Salamé’s plan of action. The
people of Libya, with the support of the international
community, have a major interest in seeing their country
advance towards national reconciliation and political
consensus. In that regard, our support for the United
10/23

17/01/2018

Nations and our unity within the Council will be more
important than ever if we are to successful navigate the
different stages of the action plan. France pledges its
full mobilization to that end.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere appreciation
for the tireless efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, to achieve peace and stability in
Libya and secure a prosperous future for our Libyan
brothers. In this regard, we cannot but highly value the
role of UNSMIL in those efforts.
I also thank the Deputy Permanent Representative
of Sweden, Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni, for her briefing on
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. I also extend
my thanks for the valuable information provided by
Ms. Hajer Sharief on the vital role of civil society to
restabilize Libya.
In Kuwait’s first meeting to discuss the situation
in Libya, I would like to reaffirm our full and firm
commitment to supporting all United Nations efforts to
put an end to the crisis in Libya, and most importantly
to achieve the desired objectives of the United Nations
action plan for Libya, including amending the Libyan
Political Agreement, organizing a national conference,
preparing for the elections and providing and delivering
humanitarian assistance to those in need, especially
at this crucial stage in the history of the sisterly State
of Libya.
At the same time, we appreciate the great efforts
made by the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, during his visit to Libya
last week to consolidate the democratic transition
process. Almost four months have passed since the
Secretary-General presented his action plan. Today, we
are witnessing encouraging signs and important steps
to reinvigorate the Libyan political process. We have
seen that in the detailed and extensive briefing made
by Mr. Salamé, which reflects the extent of progress
made in the country since his last briefing before the
Council (S/PV.8104).
We shall spare no effort to ensure the unity of the
Council and to avoid anything that might undermine
the unity of the Libyan people and the prospects
of security and stability in Libya under the Libyan
Political Agreement. We believe that the Agreement
18-01377

17/01/2018

The situation in Libya

is the best way to achieve a Libyan-led comprehensive
political solution, to reach a political settlement for the
Libyan crisis and to put an end to the deterioration in
the country. In that context, we stress the need for all
Libyans to adhere to paragraph 5 of resolution 2259
(2015), which rejects all attempts to undermine the
Libyan-led political process facilitated by the United
Nations. In that regard, we welcome the important
role of the Presidency Council of the Government of
National Accord and the role of all Libyan leaders in
fostering national reconciliation.
We have been closely following the meetings
of the joint drafting committee of the House of
Representatives and the High State Council through
the rounds of meetings hosted by Tunisia, to which
we are thankful, in order to reform the Political
Agreement. In that regard, we welcome the progress
made in reconciling the positions of Libyan parties and
agreeing on a reasonable and applicable time frame. We
also stress the need for all Libyan parties to complete
the rounds of negotiations in respect of introducing
the necessary amendments to the Political Agreement,
especially since its implementation is considered vital
to the success of the political transition process.
We urge our Libyan brothers to step up their efforts
to revitalize the political process for the sake of ensuring
unified and stable governance with broad representation
under the Political Agreement. That would allow for
the convening of the national conference as a prelude
to adopting an electoral and constitutional framework
that would guarantee the holding this year of general
elections that are acceptable to all Libyans. Those
efforts must include the adoption of a new electoral
law to organize the polling process and to allow for the
High National Electoral Commission to complete the
electoral list and the registration campaign as a primary
factor for the success of the elections.
We emphasize the importance of creating the
right conditions for holding the elections, at both the
security and the technical levels, so as to ensure the
participation of the largest number of Libyans. We urge
the international community and regional organizations
to provide the necessary support for, and supervision of,
the elections in order to guarantee their integrity. We
call on the House of Representatives to finalize the new
Libyan constitution, which will not be achieved unless
national interests prevail over all other considerations.
Any further delay will only prolong the suffering of the
Libyan people.

S/PV. 8159

The State of Kuwait has followed with great
concern the recent violence in a number of Libyan
cities, which claimed the lives of many innocent people.
In that regard, we condemn in the strongest terms the
assassination of the Mayor of Misrata, Mr. Mohamad
Eshtewi, in late December. We therefore call on the
Libyan authorities to bring the perpetrators of such
crimes to justice in order to prevent impunity. We also
emphasize the need for all parties to comply with and
respect the ceasefire agreed on in Paris on 25 July 2017,
and to fully comply with the provisions of international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law. We also condemn all terrorist acts in Libya and
urge that terrorism be combated in all its forms and
manifestations under a unified civilian Government.
Furthermore, we reiterate the importance of unifying
and strengthening the Libyan armed forces, under the
State military institution, to enable them to deal with
such dangers and to prevent them.
There is no doubt that the difficulties facing the
Libyan people are clearly increasing as a result of
the economic situation, which is deteriorating day
by day owing to the political instability. We agree
with Mr. Salamé regarding the need for concerted
international efforts to help the Libyan people to take
full advantage of the enormous wealth in Libya. We
commend the decision to establish a national fund to
compensate the victims of the conflict and hope that
adequate solutions will be found with regard to Libyan
foreign investments to prevent any losses.
Regrettably, the problem of illegal migration
remains a real obstacle to achieving the security and
stability in Libya to which we all aspire, in particular
following the emergence of heinous practices of slavery
against a number of migrants late last year. We condemn
such practices in the strongest terms and emphasize the
need for the international community, in general, and
the countries of origin and destination, in particular,
to address the root causes of that problem, especially
since Libya is a transit country and therefore suffers as
much as the destination cuntries.
In conclusion, we reaffirm the need to broaden the
dialogue on the amendments to the Libyan Political
Agreement. We believe that all participating parties
should be sufficiently flexible in order to achieve the
desired outcome.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We express our gratitude

18-0137711/23

S/PV.8159

The situation in Libya

to Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, for his briefing, We also
take this opportunity to reiterate to him our support
in his difficult responsibilities. In addition, we thank
Ambassador Irina Schoulgin Nyoni for her briefing on
the activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya. We also thank
Ms. Hajer Sharief for her briefing and the information
she provided to us. Her candidness, strength and
commitment regarding the destiny of her country fills
us with hope for the future of Libya.
My delegation highlights the commitment to and
readiness for political dialogue shown by the parties at
the meetings of the joint drafting committee, held in
September and October 2017, to reach joint agreements
that provide for the implementation of the Libyan
Political Agreement. We believe that such willingness
should be maintained and reflected in concrete results
that will make it possible to stabilize Libya.
In that regard, we look forward to the holding of
the national conference to be held in February. We
hope that it will be a space for encounter, reflection
and reconciliation that will allow the Libyan people
as a whole to move forward decisively in resolving the
structural problems facing them.
Moreover, we firmly believe that progress must
continue to be made on the results achieved by the
constituent assembly and that the constitutional
framework must be strengthened in order to develop the
complete normative infrastructure for the establishment
of reliable and capable institutions to strengthen the
Libyan political process.
Likewise, we acknowledge that the progress made
by the Libyan High National Electoral Commission in
voter registration is a fundamental step that will make
it possible to hold the elections planned for this year.
We call for such efforts to continue steadily until all
voters are registered.
In that regard, we pay tribute to, and emphasize
the efforts being made by, the various regional
organizations and stakeholders, such as the African
Union, to strengthen, support and cooperate in the
implementation of the Libyan political process and the
action plan established by the Special Representative.
However, we note with great concern that the
situation with regard to migrants and refugees has not
12/23

17/01/2018

improved, since, according to the report of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
of 10 January, in the first days of the year, the Libyan
Coast Guard recovered the bodies of 443 people who
lost their lives trying to cross the Mediterranean Sea.
Unfortunately, those victims must be added to the more
than 5,000 deaths registered during 2017 off the coast
of Libya.
In addition, we are very concerned about the
ongoing reports of violations of the rights of migrants
who end up being held indefinitely in detention centres
under appalling conditions and are often subjected to
degrading treatment, torture, the denial of medical
assistance and sexual violence, not to mention the
disturbing reports of the existence of slave markets. In
that regard, we call on the parties to make all necessary
efforts to prevent abuses and violations of the human
rights of migrants in centres under their control. We
remind them that they must meet their obligations
under international humanitarian law and ensure
respect for the rights of those people. We once again
reiterate our call on the Libyan authorities to begin the
relevant investigations to make it possible to identify
those responsible for such violations so that they can
be immediately brought to justice and answer for
their actions.
Moreover, we regret the reports of armed clashes
in the city of Tripoli on Monday, 15 January, in which
at least 20 deaths were recorded. We note with deep
concern that there are still outbreaks of violence to the
detriment of the security and integrity of the civilian
population. In that context, we again call on the parties
and local stakeholders to lay down their weapons and
to avoid all calls to violence, since such attitudes not
only threaten the lives of hundreds of innocent people
but also disregard and violate the progress made to
date in implementing the Libyan Political Agreement.
We remind all stakeholders and parties involved that
the only option for resolving the conflict is through
compliance with the Libyan Political Agreement as
recognized by resolution 2259 (2015). We reaffirm that
its implementation is crucial to completing the political
transition, as the Council stated in the presidential
statement of 14 December 2017 (S/PRST/2017/26).
In conclusion, it is important to reiterate and to
bear in mind that the impact that the Libyan conflict
has had on the security situation in the region is a direct
consequence of the interventionist practices and the
regime-change policies, which have had repercussions
18-01377

17/01/2018

The situation in Libya

for the Sahel, leading to the outbreak of chaos, terrorism
and violence with unfortunate results that continue to
play out to this day.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We express appreciation
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ghassan Salamé for his briefing as well as for his
continued diplomatic endeavours to bring about
lasting peace and stability in Libya. We also Sweden’s
leadership of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) and thank
the Deputy Permanent Representative, Ambassador
Irina Schoulgin Nyoni, for her briefing on the activities
of the Committee. We also thank Ms. Hajer Sharief for
her remarks.
We once again reiterate our support for the United
Nations action plan endorsed by the Security Council
in its efforts to bring about a Libyan-owned political
solution under the auspices of the United Nations. We
commend the Special Representative for his continued
efforts to facilitate the implementation of the action
plan in close collaboration with the Libyans and other
stakeholders. It is encouraging that progress has been
made on a limited amendment of the Libyan Political
Agreement, which we believe remains the only viable
framework for ending the transitional period.
We also appreciate the provision of assistance by
the United Nations to the relevant Libyan authorities in
order to facilitate the holding of elections in 2018. We
believe the registration of more than 2 million voters
demonstrates the commitment and readiness of the
Libyans to engage in a democratic electoral process
that would end the transitional period. Furthermore,
the efforts of the Special Representative to promote
local reconciliation and dialogue, including through the
holding of several town hall meetings and preparations
to hold a national conference, will contribute to
addressing the internal division among Libyans and
help foster a spirit of harmonious coexistence among
all segments of society.
We recognize that serious challenges remain
in fully implementing the action plan, including
the lack of effective and unified State institutions,
insecurity — including the recent outbreak of fighting
in Tripoli — and human trafficking, inter alia.
Therefore, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral’s continued efforts to implement the United
Nations action plan requires more coordinated and
coherent support from Libyans and the international

S/PV. 8159

community. In that regard, we urge all Libyan actors
to continue their engagement in the political process
in a constructive spirit with a view to finding a lasting
political solution and realizing the legitimate aspirations
of the Libyan people.
To seize the current window of opportunity, the
United Nations should further strengthen its partnership
with Libyans. In that regard, we welcome the recent
visit of Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman to
Libya, which further demonstrated the commitment
and readiness of the United Nations to support Libyans
in their endeavours aimed at bringing about peace
and stability.
The international community, and in particular
the Security Council, should also continue to support
the implementation of the action plan. We believe
the Council’s presidential statement of 14 December
2017 (S/PRST/2017/26) sent the right message, and its
full implementation will be vital to accelerating the
progress already made with respect to the action plan.
The role of neighbouring countries and regional
organizations also remains critical to ending the Libyan
crisis. In that regard, we welcome the visit of the Special
Representative to Addis Ababa and commend him for
holding useful and extensive discussions with senior
officials of the African Union (AU), including the
Chairperson of the AU Commission. We believe that
such meetings could further strengthen coordination
and ensure greater collaboration between the two
organizations with a view to achieving lasting peace
in Libya.
The agreement reached between the two
organizations to work together to build consensus
among Libyans, unify the Libyan institutions, form
an inclusive national Government, hold free and
fair elections in the country based on the relevant
decisions of the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council, and build on the African Union
road map and the United Nations action plan is very
welcome. In addition, addressing the plight of migrants
should also remain one of the top priorities of the
international community.
Finally, I would like to conclude by reiterating our
support for the Special Representative and the work
that he has been doing to facilitate the implementation
of the United Nations action plan. We all know that the
road ahead will not be easy, which is why it is vital to
further galvanize the support of the Libyans themselves

18-0137713/23

S/PV.8159

The situation in Libya

and the international community in order to bring to
fruition a Libyan-led political solution under the
auspices of the United Nations.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ghassan Salamé for his useful briefing on the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) as well
as on current developments in the country. In addition,
I would like to thank Ms. Hajer Sharief for her valuable
remarks on the current needs of, and challenges to,
civil society in Libya. I also thank Ambassador Irina
Schoulgin Nyoni for her helpful briefing on the ongoing
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
We are committed to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of Libya. We
believe that the Libyan Political Agreement is the only
framework for an inclusive political solution to the
conflict during the transition period. We commend the
United Nations action plan presented by Mr. Salamé
last September as the most appropriate solution to the
issue of Libyan national reconciliation. We therefore
encourage all Libyans to work together in a spirit of
compromise to finalize the political transformation. We
also wish to reiterate the importance of the participation
of women in the process.
We commend the project undertaken to bring
about national reconciliation in Libya, which is
supported by the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund
and implemented by UNSMIL and the United Nations
Development Programme, as it creates the conditions
for building the trust needed for national reconciliation.
In that regard, we take note of the Charter for Peaceful
Coexistence ,adopted in Fezzan last December.
However, we are concerned about the deteriorating
situation in the country, including the immigration
crisis and the threat it poses to regional and international
peace and security. In that regard, we call on the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, in cooperation with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Organization
for Migration, to address the root causes of large
movements of people, including forced displacement,
unmanaged immigration and trafficking in persons, in
order to prevent exploitation of refugees and migrants
by smugglers and human traffickers. All refugees and
migrants should be treated with humanity and dignity.
We therefore urge and encourage the Libyan authorities
14/23

17/01/2018

to take concrete steps to stamp out human rights
violations and abuses in centres under their control,
remove those reasonably suspected of carrying out
violence, investigate and prosecute those responsible
and publicly signal that such abuses will no longer
be tolerated.
Poland calls for an international order based on
respect for international law and the delivery of justice.
We also support holding accountable those who obstruct
and undermine the Libyan Political Agreement.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Salamé, the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Sweden and Ms. Sharief for their briefings.
When we talk about Libya today, so many of the
problems we face go back to one key issue: respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms. This conflict
began when the Libyan people rejected the Al-Qadhafi
regime’s decades of oppression and tyranny. That brutal
dictatorship left Libya with weak institutions, which
gave political spoilers, criminal gangs and terrorists a
chance to exploit Libya for their own purposes. After
organizing a revolution to demand a more stable, unified
and prosperous future for all, the Libyan people have
yet to achieve that fundamental goal. That is why the
United States stands firmly behind the efforts of Special
Representative Salamé and behind implementation of
the United Nations action plan.
As we have said many times before, political
dialogue and reconciliation is the only way forward.
There is no alternative to the United Nations process.
There is a window of opportunity right now for
Council members to push for new momentum in the
political process, and that is where we must focus all
of our efforts.
The recent video of Afghan migrants being sold
into slavery shows the dire consequences of allowing
Libya’s security vacuum to continue. It was a profoundly
disturbing sight. The existence of slave markets
anywhere in the world must offend the conscience of
every decent human being. These heinous abuses of
human rights must come to an end.
We appreciate that Libya’s Government of National
Accord swiftly condemned slavery in all forms and
made a commitment to investigate and hold those
responsible to account. Such an investigation should
proceed quickly and transparently. An untold number
18-01377

17/01/2018

The situation in Libya

of migrants continue to be detained in camps outside of
Government control, where their captors assault them
and deprive them of food.
This ongoing crisis shows just how urgent it is
to support Libyan efforts to stabilize the country.
The Libyan people deserve a Government able to
provide basic services, enforce the rule of law and
guarantee security, including the protection of the
most vulnerable. The United States is committed to
the humane treatment and protection of migrants and
refugees. We strongly support the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and the International Organization for Migration
(IOM) in their work to improve conditions for migrants
in Libya and to help those with claims to protection.
Since 2011, we have contributed generously to these
organizations to address this regional crisis, including
more than $150 million to ease suffering in Libya,
including support for refugees, vulnerable migrants
and the internally displaced.
But there is much more work to do. We appreciate
Libya’s cooperation with UNHCR and the IOM and
urge them to deepen this collaboration. As the Security
Council, we can look for opportunities to identify and
designate for sanctions the individuals and criminal
networks responsible for the human rights abuses
aimed at migrants. The United States will also continue
its efforts with the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) and other United Nations agencies to
strengthen Libyan police and security institutions, and
we urge others to join us.
Libya’s wealth and natural resources are also at risk.
These are resources that should be protected and used to
benefit all Libyans. But political spoilers and criminal
gangs are diverting these assets for themselves. The
United States strongly condemns these actions. We are
especially concerned about fuel-smuggling, and we will
continue to press the Security Council to sanction any
vessels involved in such criminal activities. We expect
all States Members of the United Nations to fully comply
with their obligations regarding ship designations.
Stepping up sanctions enforcement would be
another step towards disrupting the criminal networks
that contribute to the instability in Libya. While the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham has been weakened
in Libya, the threat of terrorism is very real. Libya must
not be a safe haven for terrorists to plot attacks, and

S/PV. 8159

terrorist groups must be defeated to secure a peaceful
future for the Libyan people.
The only viable solution to these security, economic
and migration challenges is a political solution to the
current crisis. The United States is committed to a
strong, unified Libya, which is why President Trump
hosted Libyan Prime Minister Faiez Mustafa Serraj
in Washington, D.C., recently. The United States
commends Prime Minister Serraj’s leadership and
the efforts of the Government of National Accord to
support a political solution.
There is no room here for political spoilers. The
United States will oppose attempts to impose a military
solution to this political crisis, which would further
undermine Libya’s stability. Those who pursue a
military solution will wind up helping terrorist groups
that thrive on instability. The only legitimate path to
power is through free and fair elections. We welcome
the recent progress with voter registration in Libya,
including significant numbers of youth and women who
have already signed up to vote.
The United States is providing assistance to
Libya’s High National Electoral Commission to help
prepare as well. To build on this progress, the House
of Representatives must uphold its commitment to pass
laws for a constitutional referendum and for elections
this year, in consultation with the High State Council.
As the Libyans prepare for elections, we support
United Nations efforts to promote more effective and
accountable governance for this transitional period.
All Libyan parties should engage constructively
with the United Nations to strengthen the Libyan
Political Agreement.
The Security Council has affirmed that the Libyan
Political Agreement must remain the framework for the
political process throughout the country’s transitional
period. The fact is that after decades of tyranny followed
by years of fighting and chaos, the Libyan people
deserve a better future. Libya’s political leaders must
set aside their personal agendas and come together for
the sake of peace. The Libyan people deserve a stable,
unified, democratic Government with institutions that
are capable of stamping out the abuses of criminal
networks and non-State militias.
The door to a more peaceful Libya is open through
engagement with the United Nations political process.

18-0137715/23

S/PV.8159

The situation in Libya

17/01/2018

The United States urges all parties in Libya to seize this
opportunity without further delay.

the country commit to this process through transparent,
frank and inclusive dialogue in good faith.

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me at the outset to express my thanks
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, and his team for their broad-ranging and
detailed report on the situation in Libya.

The Libyan Political Agreement of 2015 must
serve as the basis for all efforts at reconciliation and
should serve as a framework until the process has been
concluded and has been determined to be sufficiently
inclusive to accommodate the aspirations of the two
assemblies and lead to an end to the political crisis in
Libya. The Agreement must also make it possible to
progress in legislation with respect to the process that
should lead to transition.

I would also like to thank the Deputy Permanent
Representative of Sweden, Ambassador Irina Schoulgin
Nyoni, for her outstanding briefing in her capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
Her input helps us to better understand the situation
in the country. We would also like to thank Ms. Hajer
Sharief, co-founder of Together We Build It, for her
very illuminating briefing.
Since 2011, Equatorial Guinea has been closely
following developments in Libya, now more than ever
given that we are a member of the Security Council,
because this is a brotherly country to whose problems
we cannot be indifferent. We all are witness to the
importance of the effects and consequences of the
destabilization that has affected this previously stable
country. Equatorial Guinea wishes to express here its
full commitment to the peaceful stabilization of Libya
and a return to peace and normality there.
In 2011, His Excellency the President of Equatorial
Guinea, Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, Acting Chairman of
the African Union, invited the international community
and African Union partners to provide unreserved
support to the parties to the conflict so that they could
work together to put an end to hostilities, ensure the
effective protection of the civilian population and create
conditions favourable to a dialogue between the parties
to the conflict, thus beginning the reforms necessary
to address the causes of the current crisis. It is in this
regard that our Head of State, in his statement before
the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session, said:
“The use of force in a conflict is not a unifying
factor but rather one of division” (A/66/PV.11,
p. 35).
That is why Equatorial Guinea believes that in order
to achieve the desired stability and peace in Libya, it
is vital that the parties and the various stakeholders in
16/23

The launching, on 20 September 2017, of the United
Nations action plan for Libya aims to build upon and
strengthen the Libyan Political Agreement in order to
create the right conditions for the holding of free and
fair elections. The United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) has provided the necessary technical
support to the High National Electoral Commission
and is working assiduously to create the right political,
legislative and security conditions for the holding of
elections this year. The elections should enable the
country to return to political, institutional, economic
and social normalcy. In the same vein, UNSMIL is also
involved in the preparations for the national conference
that should bring all of Libya’s people to the table to
address, frankly and comprehensively, the myriad
problems affecting the country.
We are pleased to note that the action plan has
made some headway. The United Nations convened
meetings at UNSMIL offices in Tunis of the joint
drafting committee, composed of members from
both the House of Representatives and the High State
Council, to agree on a set of amendments to the Libyan
Political Agreement, in additon to it’s having indicated
that this framework could end the crisis. As as result,
the provisions of article 12 of the Political Agreement
were implemented. The action plan also includes a
commitment to assisting armed groups, by developing a
strategy that would enable them to gradually reintegrate
into society. The Libyan people are eager for peace and
an end to seven years of uninterrupted conflict.
Equatorial Guinea believes that the assistance and
efforts of the various international entities to bring about
peace in Libya are indispensable, since the complex
nature of the situation and the hostility of the parties to
the conflict require external mediation, which, in this
case is provided through the quartet partners — the
African Union, the League of Arab States and the
18-01377

17/01/2018

The situation in Libya

European Union — and the role played by neighbouring
countries, such as Egypt, Tunisia and Chad.
In spite of the considerable progress made
in the country, major challenges remain, such as
insecurity, impunity, the humanitarian situation and
migration-related issues. The proliferation of armed
groups operating outside the law leads to serious
violations of human rights, whose perpetrators go
unpunished. That situation results in flagrant cases of
impunity and anarchy. The humanitarian crisis is also
an important element of the crisis because the country
is still far from achieving the levels of education,
security and health care it enjoyed prior to the outbreak
of the crisis in 2011. Groups, entities or individuals in
today’s Libyan society posing a threat to Libya’s return
to normalcy must be subject to exemplary sanctions.
Immigrants remain the main targets of such issues
and become the victims of extreme violence, forced
labour, trafficking, extortion, murder and other serious
abuses and harassment, such as the odious trafficking
in migrants, both inside and outside of official
detention centres. We call upon the Government of
Libya to address such challenges through a direct and
comprehensive approach in order to find a definitive
solution that respects both the rights of immigrants and
those of the country’s host communities.
Lastly, I would like to convey our firm support
to the United Nations Support Mission in Libya for
its laudable and tireless efforts to promote peace,
security and stability in this brotherly country, despite
challenges, sacrifice and loss in an environment that is
at times exacting. We encourage UNSMIL to continue
to support the Libyan authorities and institutions in
their efforts to build peace in this brotherly country.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Let me thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, for his briefing on the situation in Libya and
to assure him that my country, Côte d’Ivoire, supports
his efforts to bring about peace in Libya. I would also
like to commend the staff of UNSMIL on their efforts
in a very challenging environment. I would like to
sincerely thank Ms. Sharief for her relevant briefing
and ongoing commitment to ensuring that the voices of
women and youth are heard in the democratic process
in her country, Libya. Finally, I would like to commend
the Deputy Permanent Representative of Sweden,

S/PV. 8159

Ambassador Irina Schoulgin Nyoni, on her briefing on
the twenty-seventh report of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
Today’s meeting gives me an opportunity to
talk about my country’s concerns surrounding the
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement and
the humanitarian and security situation in the country.
I welcome the international community’s ongoing
commitment to assisting the Libyan people in their
quest for peace and stability, in particular since the
signing of the Agreement in Skhirat, Morocco. In spite
of its constraints, that important Agreement remains
the reference framework that will lead the country
to a democratic, credible and inclusive transition
and a sustainable political solution. In that regard,
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the most recent presidential
statement of the Security Council (S/PRST/2017/26),
dated 14 December 2017, with regard to the situation
in Libya. The statement reiterated the continuity of the
Political Agreement throughout the country’s transition
and enabled the Council to dispel all uncertainty
surrounding the political process and to foster
discussion among Libyan stakeholders.
Similarly, my delegation believes that the support
of the Council for the sequencing of operations detailed
in the action plan should enable the Government and the
people of Libya to lay the foundation for a consensusbased constitutional reform, which is required for the
successful holding of future elections. In that regard,
the Ivoirian delegation welcomes the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
foster political dialogue among the Libyan parties and
to encourage them to resolve, without delay and in the
interests of the Libyan people, all outstanding issues,
in particular the reconstitution of the Presidential
Council and the establishment of a representative unity
Government and a unified army. The political process in
Libya is now at a decisive juncture. All actors involved
in efforts to build peace in this brotherly country must
therefore work together to reach a sustainable solution
to the crisis. There is no other path to peace and security
in Libya. Côte d’Ivoire therefore encourages Libya’s
neighbours, as well as France, the African Union,
the European Union and the United Nations, to work
together in order to bring peace to the Libyan people,
which, now more than ever, is within reach.
My country welcomes and pays tribute to the
efforts of the African Union and its commendable
involvement in the search for peace in Libya since the

18-0137717/23

S/PV.8159

The situation in Libya

beginning of the conflict. The Government of Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the adoption of the road map of
the African Union on Libya and the tireless efforts of
President Denis Sassou Nguesso, Chair of the Highlevel Committee of the African Union on Libya. Those
efforts led to the holding of the meeting of Lybian
tribal leaders in Brazzaville in November 2017 and to
a meeting of the main protagonists of the crisis, both
of which contributed to strengthening dialogue among
all parties.
My country calls on Africa and Europe to work
even more closely to support the Libyan people’s
determination to achieve peace. This important
political progress must be taken into account so that the
national conference planned for next February lives up
to its purpose.
With regard to the humanitarian and security
situation, my delegation remains concerned about the
numerous human rights violations brought about in
large part by the armed militias and terrorist groups,
which are preventing the State from spreading its
authority throughout the country and preventing it from
maintaining order. The security situation in Libya is a
real source of concern for the international community,
which fears that the Islamic State and other terrorist
groups could take root in the country, which has already
seen a proliferation of armed militias. In parallel to the
political process and in order to guarantee its success,
we must also address the issue of armed militias and the
consequences of the jihadists’ withdrawal to Libya and
foreign terrorist fighters who were defeated in Syria and
Iraq. The presence of those fighters is a serious threat
to stability and peace in Libya and they contribute to
the destabilization of the Sahelo-Saharan region.
There is no alternative to strongly countering
terrorists, human traffickers and smuggler networks if
we want to sustainably build peace and put an end to
the appalling practice of slavery, the selling of human
beings and the inhumane treatment of refugees, which
our countries have all condemned. In that regard, I
call on the international community to sign the joint
statement of the fifth Summit of the African Union
and the European Union, which was held from 29 to
30 November 2017 in Abidjan, in order to put an end to
this degrading situation and protect the life and dignity
of migrants and refugees.
Before concluding, I would like to express my
delegation’s vigorous condemnation of the illicit export
18/23

17/01/2018

of crude oil, which Her Excellency Ms. Irina Schoulgin
Nyoni just made us aware of in her briefing. This trade
is a source of funding for armed groups, prolongs
unnecessarily the suffering of the Libyan people and
complicates the resolution of the conflict, which is
tearing the country apart. The United Nations and the
Security Council cannot run the risk of allowing that
illicit trade to flourish. We must therefore take all the
necessary measures to put an end to it.
My delegation would like to reiterate its
congratulations to Mr. Salamé for the excellent work
he is carrying out under difficult circumstances
in order to fulfil his mandate. We call upon the
international community to provide him, as well as
Libyan institutions and in particular the High National
Electoral Commission, all the support necessary to
ensure the successful holding and outcome of the
electoral process.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like
begin by to thanking Special Representative Salamé
for his briefing to the Security Council today and for
his valuable efforts. We strongly support his work and
that of the United Nations in Libya. I would also like
to welcome the inspiring briefing from Ms. Sharief.
I thank her for bringing the essential voice of civil
society, particularly that of Libyan women, to the
Council. We commend the efforts she is undertaking in
a truly challenging environment.
We have consistently advocated for the United
Nations to play the leading role in the mediation efforts
in Libya, and we are particularly encouraged by the
recent visit of Under-Secretary-General Feltman.
Continued high-level United Nations engagement
in Libya is important for a reinvigorated, inclusive
and long-term approach in support of the Libya-led
political process.
Special Representative Salamé can be assured of
our full support as he continues to implement the United
Nations plan of action for Libya.We are encouraged by
his flexible and pragmatic approach and we remain
committed to the Libyan Political Agreement as the
only viable framework for the transitional period. After
years of conflict and violence, rebuilding trust between
communities is an essential prerequisite for rebuilding
the country. We welcome the bottom-up approach to
promoting reconciliation and unity — at local as well
as national levels. We agree with Mr. Salamé that this is
also a crucial part of laying the foundation for elections.
18-01377

17/01/2018

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8159

We are encouraged by the progress made to date
in the voter registration exercise, with almost 2 million
voters now registered by the High National Electoral
Commission. We urge all Libyan political leaders to
engage constructively in the election preparations and
to help create the necessary political, legal and security
conditions for elections in 2018. All Libyans have the
right to live in a democratic State that upholds the rule
of law and respects human rights.

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, for his instructive briefing on the situation there,
as well as the statements by the Deputy Permanent
Representative of Sweden, on behalf of the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, and by Ms. Hajer Sharief.

Ms. Sharief eloquently and forcefully communicated
the indispensable role that women are already playing
in building trust and reconciliation in Libya. Let me
join her in reiterating the importance of women’s fair
representation and full participation in each step of
the political process going forward. We welcome the
participation of women in the drafting committee
sessions in Tunis, and expect that upcoming gatherings,
as well as the national conference, will be inclusive and
will also provide opportunities for Libyan women’s
concerns to be addressed — for example, on issues of
security and mobility. Such an inclusive peace process
will open up opportunities for a more just peace, and
is more likely to be perceived as representative and
legitimate by the population at large. In Libya, we now
need to seize the momentum and place women’s full
enjoyment of their rights at the core of international
peace and security. This is not a women’s issue, it is a
peace and security issue.

In that regard, we would like to emphasize the
importance of advancing the implementation of the
Libyan Political Agreement and the United Nations
action plan in order to facilitate and mediate the
political process being conducted by the Libyan parties.
The dialogue between the High State Council and the
House of Representatives is a positive step, insofar as it
expresses mutual recognition and interest in progressing
towards a national transition based on implementation
of the Political Agreement signed in 2015. We call on
all domestic stakeholders to participate actively in that
process, which, in the words of Mr. Salamé, is Libya’s
only path to stability and unity.

We remain deeply concerned about the suffering of
migrants and refugees in Libya. Every effort must be
made to safeguard those who have fled human rights
abuses and violations in their home countries in search
of refuge or a better future. We reiterate our call for full
and unhindered humanitarian access to detention centres
and for further efforts to turn detention facilities into
open transit centres that meet international standards.
In addition, investigations into crimes committed,
including the slave trade, as well as accountability
for those responsible, is crucial. We remain open to
exploring the possibility of using sanctions to target
smuggling and trafficking in persons.
Finally, the assets of the Libyan people must
be managed properly so in the future they can be
used for the benefit of all Libyans. For that reason,
we are concerned about the management of Libya’s
frozen assets and about indications of a depletion of
those funds. In our national capacity, we are committed
to working with the United Nations and partners to
explore ways of improving the current situation.

We welcome the initiative to convene a national
conference under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral. It will be essential to establish a platform for
coordination, commitment and cooperation between
the various political actors and Libyan civil society.
We would like to highlight the importance of involving
all national actors committed to sustaining peace in
the country, especially women and young people, as
Ms. Sharief so eloquently emphasized. The national
conference should be an inclusive space for dialogue
and reconciliation, leading, as soon as possible, to
transparent, credible general elections that are accepted
by all parties. The endorsement and support of the
international community will be essential to achieving
that goal.
However, we are still concerned about the ongoing
violence and acts of terror, such as the murder of the
mayor of Misrata and the recent attack on Tripoli’s
airport. We are also worried about the serious and
reprehensible violations of human rights reported by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
including trafficking in persons and the situation of
migrant groups. According to UNICEF reports, more
than 36,000 migrant children in Libya require urgent
humanitarian assistance in Libya. Libya’s situation
as an country of international transit demands the
strengthening of appropriate measures for preventing

18-0137719/23

S/PV.8159

The situation in Libya

and addressing abuses and human rights violations. In
that regard, we think it important to pursue initiatives
aimed at establishing oversight and control mechanisms
in the country.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for
Mr. Salamé’s work, and we will continue to closely
monitor the Libyan political process with a view to
helping contributing to Libya’s efforts to achieve in
the near future the standards of good governance,
sustainable development and guaranteed respect for
and promotion of human rights that it deserves.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Salamé for his briefing. We
very much appreciate his professionalism and diligent
efforts in the work of restoring the Libyan State. We
support the steps taken by the United Nations to help
to end the conflict in Libya on the basis of the Special
Representative’s action plan. In that regard, we are
pleased to see the ongoing contacts between Libyan
parties, including the representatives of Tripoli and
Tobruk. We see progress in the discussion of issues
related to amending the Libyan Political Agreement,
which still represents the basis for a peaceful
settlement. However, it is clear that this is only the first
phase of the major job that lies ahead. We hope that
the negotiations will continue and will start to resemble
reliable agreements as soon as possible.
Once the amendments to the Skhirat agreement
agreed on by the Libyans have been incorporated into
it, its implementation should help to resolve the whole
complex of urgent tasks on Libya’s agenda, including
restoring order on the security front, seriously
combating terrorism, reviving the economic and social
sectors, rectifying the humanitarian situation and
addressing the escalating problem of illegal migration.
At the same time, we believe that it will be crucial to
have the international cooperation of the appropriate
specialized bodies in order to counter the criminal
business networks associated with human trafficking.
That challenge cannot be left up to Libya alone.
We impatiently await the day when Libyans are
launched on the road to sustainable development and can
independently dispose of their country’s rich resources,
which no one else has the right to infringe on. We are
concerned about the recent clashes around the Tripoli
airport. Such events are not uncommon in Libya,
unfortunately. Among other things, they are a sign of
inadequate control over the situation and a reminder of
20/23

17/01/2018

how vital the task of establishing a unified system for
the State administration and security apparatus is.
A broadly representative inter-Libyan dialogue is
still the only effective way to deal with the protracted
crisis and achieve national reconciliation. There should
be no attempts to unfairly exclude patriotically minded
political forces from discussing the parameters of
national reconstruction. We hope that Libyans, with the
support of the United Nations action plan, will be able
to restore unity in their country, taking the interests of
every region into account.
We have consistently emphasized the importance
of consolidating international efforts to assist Libya.
Each mediating mission should function on the basis
of the same rules, aimed at uniting the country. We
welcome constructive initiatives, undertaken in an
understanding of the importance of strengthening the
central coordinating role of the United Nations. We urge
all the parties involved to give due and careful attention
to the ideas proposed by the African Union. We must
not forget that in 2011 a disregard for the regional
dynamics expressed by that important continental
organization resulted in the wasting of a genuine
chance for a political settlement for Libya. Instead,
in violation of a resolution of the Security Council, a
military aggression was launched that led ultimately to
the destruction of the Libyan State, which the United
Nations is currently attempting to restore.
On behalf of the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni informed us about that sanctions
entity’s work in the past few months. We appreciate
the Swedish delegation’s efforts, led by Ambassador
Skoog. The problem of the illicit proliferation of arms in
Libya remains acute, affecting security in the country
itself and in the Sahara-Sahel region and demanding
the most stringent possible control over shipments
of military equipment to Libya conducted under the
current exemptions.
Russia cares deeply about the restoration of
peace and stability in Libya, which we envisage as a
united, independent State, playing a significant role
in international and regional policy. We are ready to
cooperate further in promoting the political process
in Libya, and to assist Mr. Salamé by supporting
trustworthy contacts with all Libyan stakeholders. That
is our principal doctrine.
18-01377

17/01/2018

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8159

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative Salamé and Ambassador
Schoulgin Nyoni for their briefings. China also listened
attentively to the statement made by Ms. Sharief.

international community must enhance its confidence,
maintain its patience and continue to support Special
Representative Salamé’s efforts to press ahead with the
action plan prudently.

At present, Libyans are striving to restore peace
and stability. However, the country still faces multiple
challenges, including difficulties in their political
process, a fragile security environment and rampant
terrorist activity, as well as the large-scale movements
of refugees and migrants. All Libyan parties should
place the overall interests of the country and the vital
interests of its people above all else and jointly take
active measures to promote the peace process. The
international community should continue to provide
concrete support to that end.

We hope that Libya’s neighbouring countries,
the African Union, the League of Arab States and
the European Union will increase their support to
the Libyan political process. China will continue to
follow developments closely and support all efforts
to stabilize the situation on the ground, promote the
political process for settling the Libyan question and
help all parties to unite in combating terrorism. China
stands ready to enhance its contribution to the early
restoration of peace, stability and prosperity in Libya.

First, all actors should remain committed to
the overarching objective of seeking a political
settlement to Libyan issue. The future of Libya should
be determined by the Libyan people themselves.
The international community should respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Libya, and continue to promote a Libyan-led and
-owned political process. All Libyan parties should
resolve their differences through inclusive dialogue and
find a solution that accommodates all interests through
political means. The Libyan Political Agreement is a
fundamental framework for ending the Libyan crisis
and contributes to national reconciliation and the
restoration of national governance.
Secondly, the international community must
create favourable security conditions for Libyan
political dialogue. China supports Libya’s efforts
towards safeguarding national security and stability.
We hope that all actors in Libya will bolster dialogue,
continuously build mutual trust, work towards building
unified national armed forces and take united and
concerted counter-terrorism action so as to effectively
reduce the threat of terrorism.
Thirdly, the United Nations role as the main
channel of mediations should be preserved. Special
Representative Salamé has led the phased return of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya to Libya. In
line with the United Nations action plan of promoting
the Libyan political process, he has facilitated extensive
dialogue among all Libyan stakeholders, conducted
in-depth discussions on such issue as drafting a
constitution and made headway in the electoral
process. Some progress has been achieved. The

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Kazakhstan.
We thank Special Representative Salamé,
Ambassador Irina Schoulgin Nyoni and Ms. Sharief
for their comprehensive briefings. We fully support
the view that the solution to the situation in Libya
must be primarily and solely peaceful and that the
ownership of the political process must belong to the
Libyans themselves.
The Libyan Political Agreement should remain
the only viable framework throughout the transitional
period. The adoption of the new Libyan constitution,
the adoption of the electoral law by the House of
Representatives and the holding of national elections
will facilitate overcoming political division and help to
bring about permanent stability.
International efforts to advance political
reconciliation in Libya should be consolidated under
the leadership of the United Nations-led action plan. It
is important that the Security Council maintain unity
and support the work of Special Representative Salamé.
At the same time, we must attach great importance
to the development agenda, and it is vital that Libya’s oil
resources be used for the benefit of the Libyan people.
Issues of impunity and violations of human rights,
the grave humanitarian plight and the dire situation of
migrants should be addressed urgently.
Strict compliance with the embargo on the supply
of arms to Libya must be enforced.
Finally, Kazakhstan stands ready to support the
Council’s endeavour to bring about lasting peace and
prosperity in Libya.

18-0137721/23

S/PV.8159

The situation in Libya

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
pleasure for me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would also like to thank
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, for his important briefing,
wherein he underscored the intensive efforts being
undertaken to engage in dialogue with all Libyan
stakeholders so as to bring together the viewpoints
of the political parties. We wish him every success in
this undertaking.
We would also like to thank Ms. Irina Schoulgin
Nyoni, Deputy Permanent Representative of Sweden,
for her briefing, which covered recent developments
with regard to the sanctions imposed against Libya.
I also thank Ms. Sharief, who spoke about Libyan
civil society, especially with regard to the situation of
women and young people. I reiterate the commitment
of the Government of National Accord to support the
road map, to resolve the Libyan crisis and to achieve
security and stability in Libya.
Last December marked the second anniversary
of the Libyan Political Agreement, which remains
the sole framework for the political process in Libya,
as reaffirmed by the international community in its
statements and resolutions — the most recent of which
was adopted in 2017 (S/PRST/2017/26). Despite the
lack of means, the challenges of recent years have led
us to work tirelessly to surmount the obstacles that have
emerged at all levels, which continue to weigh heavily
on the daily lives of the Libyan people.
Members should be aware that positive developments
have taken place, specifically at the security level in
combating terrorism, as well as the with regard to
Government oversight of State institutions. However,
a number of commitments have not been met due
to political divisions and the existence of parallel
institutions, despite the fact that the international
community has confirmed their illegal nature and
called for such entities to not be cooperated with.
Certain States nevertheless continue to cooperate with
the parallel governments — contrary to the Council’s
relevant international and regional resolutions. We
once again call upon all Libyan stakeholders to allow
national interests to prevail over narrow ones, to put
22/23

17/01/2018

an end to the deteriorating situation in the country and
to work together to build a strong, robust, civil and
democratic State.
Events in Libya in recent have showed that there is no
military solution to the Libyan crisis. The only solution
is a comprehensive, consensus-based political solution
that brings together all stakeholders participating in
political dialogue, without any exception.
With regard to the United Nations road map,
we highlight the forthcoming general elections in
Libya — an initiative broadly supported by the
Libyan people. The number of voting registrations has
increased in various regions in Libya. Most political
leaders have voiced their support for that increase,
and the Government of National Accord has lent its
support for the High National Electoral Commission to
facilitate the electoral process.
Against that backdrop, all positive indicators are
rekindling hope for the success of the process. We call
upon the Libyan Parliament to expedite the adoption
of an electoral law. We will have to take into account
numerous challenges, including encouraging the Libyan
people to participate in the elections, ensure that all
parties accept the the outcome and guarantee a safe and
conducive environment for the holding of the elections,
to take place under robust United Nations oversight and
with the participation of regional organizations. That
will ensure the integrity of the elections and prevent
any flaws that could lead to future disputes. With
respect to the participation of civil society, women
and young people in the political process, and finding
solutions for the issues plaguing the Libyan people,
our Government is working with civil society through
Libyan non-governmental organizations in all regions
of Libya to establish dialogue and address the many
concerns of the Libyan people.
I turn now to the cargo vessel Andromeda, which was
seized by the Greek Coast Guard en route from Turkey
to the city of Misrata in Libya. According to the Greek
authorities, it contained tons of dangerous materials
used to manufacture explosives. The Government
of National Accord reiterates its condemnation of
all acts that threaten the security of the State and its
citizens, and reaffirms its commitment to international
resolutions related to the arms embargo imposed
against Libya. It hopes that the Greek and Turkish
Governments will convey to it the results of their
investigations into these matters, and calls upon the
18-01377

17/01/2018

The situation in Libya

Panel of Experts of the committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) to launch investigations
in order to shed light on the circumstances. The
Government of National Accord reiterates its rejection
and condemnation of all violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, and the assassinations
that take place in Libya, regardless of the perpetrators.
It reaffirms that it stands strongly against whoever tries
to destabilize the security and stability situation and
endanger the lives of civilians in Libya.
The Government of National Accord condemns all
violations targeting refugees crossing Libyan territory
in an illegal manner. It is monitoring the conditions
endured by illegal migrants in detention centres so as
to ensure that they are provided with adequate services
in secure and safe conditions, in order to establish
conditions conducive to their repatriation in cooperation
with the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and
the International Organization for Migration.
With respect to allegations of human trafficking,
our Government rejects such criminal acts, be they in
Libya or elsewhere in the world. Such acts are against
the traditions of the Libyan people, the values of the
Muslim religion, applicable Libyan law and international
laws and norms. The Prosecutor-General of Libya has
launched an investigation into these allegations so as
to ensure accountability where proof is provided. We
welcome the participation of States and international
and regional organizations seeking to assist the
investigation into these allegations. In that regard, we
commend the efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union, the European Union and neighbouring States to

S/PV. 8159

resolve the question of illegal refugees in Libya and to
ensure their repatriation.
We reiterate our call on the Security Council to find
adequate means to protect frozen Libyan assets through
the better management of said assets and to assist the
Government in stanching the losses accruing from their
status. Such losses are considerable because the Libyan
State is prohibited from managing them appropriately.
Foreign banks are imposing negative, high-interest
rates on Libya’s frozen assets, which has eroded our
capital and assets alike. This grave situation — as we
have repeatedly said — has entailed losses and waste in
Libya’s frozen funds, which are intended for the Libyan
people and future generations.
Pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), it is important
that these assets be protected and not used in any way
against the interests of the Libyan State. However, the
present situation runs counter to that aim and is leading
to the loss of assets. We have asked not for the freeze
to be lifted, but for a solution to be found that would
manage and protect the funds and investments while
keeping them frozen.
In conclusion, the Libyan people have been badly
affected by the deterioration of their living standards
at all levels, particularly at the economic level, due
to political divisions. We hope that the international
community will assist the Libyan people in restoring
stability and building a democratic State. Once again, I
wish Mr. Salamé every success in his mission. We are
confident that his efforts will lead to better results.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

18-0137723/23
