A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/93
17 December 1999

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 101 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/54/L.51)]
54/93.

Special session of the General Assembly in 2001 for follow-up to the World
Summit for Children

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 51/186 of 16 December 1996, in which it decided to convene in 2001 a special
session to review the achievement of the goals of the World Summit for Children, and its resolution 53/193 of
15 December 1998,
Recalling also the report of the Secretary-General on progress on the implementation of the World
Declaration and the Plan of Action of the World Summit for Children,1
Recognizing the importance of achieving universal ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child,2
1. Decides to convene the special session of the General Assembly to review the achievement of the
goals of the World Summit for Children at the highest possible level;
2.

Invites the participation of heads of State and Government in the special session;

1

A/53/186.

2

Resolution 44/25, annex.
/...

A/RES/54/93
Page 2

3.

Decides that the special session shall be convened in the month of September 2001;

4. Also decides that the special session, while reviewing the achievements in the implementation and
results of the World Declaratation on the Survival, Protection and Development of Children and Plan of Action
for Implementing the World Declaration on the Survival, Protection and Development of Children in the
1990s,3 will undertake a renewed commitment and consider future action for children in the next decade;
5. Recognizes the importance of a participatory process at the national, regional and international levels
with a view, inter alia, to establishing partnerships between a broad range of actors, including children and
youth, in order to raise momentum for children’s rights and needs;
6. Decides to establish an open-ended preparatory committee, also open to States members of the
specialized agencies, to address organizational issues, including the form, the participation of a broad range
of relevant actors and the agenda, and to prepare for the outcome of the special session;
7. Strongly encourages the full and effective participation of Member States, and invites the heads of
State and Government to consider assigning personal representatives to the preparatory committee;
8. Requests the preparatory committee to convene one organizational session on 7 and 8 February 2000
and one substantive session from 30 May to 2 June 2000 and to propose to the General Assembly its
requirements for further meetings in 2001;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, with the support of the United Nations Children’s Fund, to assist
the preparatory committee in providing substantive input to the preparatory process and at the special session,
including a report on emerging issues to be considered at the substantive session of the preparatory committee
in 2000;
10. Invites all other relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, including the funds
and programmes, specialized agencies and the international financial institutions, actively to participate in the
preparations for the special session;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure an effective and coordinated system-wide response to the
preparations for the special session;
12. Invites the Committee on the Rights of the Child to provide its input to the preparatory process and
at the special session;
13. Invites all relevant experts, including the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the sale of
children, child prostitution and child pornography, to participate in the preparatory process and the special
session in accordance with the established practice;
14. Recognizes the important role of all relevant actors, including non-governmental organizations, in
implementing the Plan of Action, and stresses the need for their active involvement in the preparatory process,
3

A/45/625, annex.
/...

A/RES/54/93
Page 3

including in the preparatory committee, and at the special session, modalities for which will be addressed by
the preparatory committee;
15. Invites Governments and relevant organizations, in particular the United Nations Children’s Fund,
as well as regional and subregional organizations, to undertake reviews of progress achieved since the World
Summit for Children, and encourages appropriate national, regional and international preparatory activities
with a view to contributing to the preparations for the special session and building partnerships for and with
children;
16. Reaffirms its requests to the Secretary-General to submit to the special session, through the
preparatory committee, a review of the implementation and results of the World Declaration and Plan of
Action, including appropriate recommendations for further action, which also elaborates on the best practices
noted and obstacles encountered in the implementation as well as on measures to overcome those obstacles;
17. Decides to invite States members of the specialized agencies that are not Members of the United
Nations to participate in the work of the special session in the capacity of observers;
18. Stresses the importance of the full participation of the least developed countries in the special session
and the preparations for the session, and invites Governments to make appropriate contributions to a trust fund
to be established by the Secretary-General for that purpose;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to assist national Governments, at their request, in their assessment
of and reporting on the implementation of the Plan of Action;
20. Also requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the United Nations Children’s Fund,
to mount a public information programme to raise awareness of children’s needs and rights and of the special
session, its objectives and significance, and encourages Governments to do the same on a national basis;
21. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit a report during the main part of the fifty-fifth
session on the state of the preparations for the special session;
22. Decides to include an item in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session entitled “Special
session of the General Assembly in 2001 for follow-up to the World Summit for Children”.
72nd plenary meeting
7 December 1999

/...
