S/2020/452

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 May 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 27 May 2020 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
In accordance with Security Council resolution 2472 (2019), in which the
Council requested the African Union to report regularly on the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), I have the honour to transmit to you a letter from the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission (see annex) and his report on the
situation in Somalia and the renewal of the mandate of AMISOM (see enclosure 1),
as well as a communiqué of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union at
its 923rd meeting, held on 7 May 2020, on the situation in Somalia and the renewal
of the mandate of AMISOM (see enclosure 2).
I should be grateful if you would bring the letter and its annex to the attention
of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

20-07155 (E)

050620

*2007155*

S/2020/452

Annex
[Original: English]
I am writing to you within the context of our sustained strategic partnership and
cooperation in addressing the situation in Somalia to enable the country to
expeditiously exit from the current crisis. In this regard, the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union held its 923rd meeting on 7 May 2020 and considered
my report on the situation in Somalia and the renewal of the mandate of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) (see enclosure 1).
The Peace and Security Council endorsed the report and decided to renew the
mandate of AMISOM for a further 12 months in order to enable AMISOM to continue
supporting the completion of phase two of the Somali transition plan and to al so
facilitate the implementation of phase three of the plan, within the context of our
overall coordinated peace efforts in Somalia.
In line with paragraph 32 of Security Council resolution 2472 (2019), and within
the framework of the strategic partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations in the area of peace and security in Africa, I am therefore transmitting to you
herewith the communiqué of the above-mentioned 923rd meeting of the Peace and
Security Council (see enclosure 2), together with my report on the situation in
Somalia and the renewal of the mandate of AMISOM, for your kind circulation to the
members of the Security Council as a working document.
I look forward to the continuation and intensification of our strategic partnership
and cooperation in Somalia, particularly at this critical juncture of the country’s
history.
I would be most grateful if the present letter and its enclosures could be
transmitted to the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Moussa Faki Mahamat

2/11

20-07155

S/2020/452

Enclosure 1
Report of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission on
the situation in Somalia and renewal of the mandate of the African
Union Mission in Somalia
[Original: English and French]

I. Introduction
1.
This fourth report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 11 of the Communiqué of
the African Union Peace and Security Council (AUPSC), adopted at its 848th meeting
held on 9 May 2019, in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. In this Communiqué, the AUPSC
requested the Commission to work closely with the United Nations (UN) and to
ensure timely quarterly reports to the AUPSC on the situation in Somalia. The United
Nations Security Council (UNSC) in paragraph 32 of its Resolution 2472 (2019),
adopted at its 8537th meeting held on 31 May 2019, also requested the African Union
to keep it informed every 90 days, through the UN Secretary -General, on the
implementation of AMISOM’s mandate.
2.
Thus, the present report outlines progress achieved since the 911th meeting of
the AUPSC held on 24 February 2020 in the following areas: (a) political and related
developments, including update on the National Elections and enactment of the
National Electoral Bill (b) security situation and joint operations in support of the
Somali Transition Plan, performance issues, including command and control
(c) Implication of the AMISOM drawdown and overall implications on the Mission
(d) Progress in ensuring protection of civilians and compliance wit h applicable IHL,
IHRL principles as well as conduct and discipline standards (e) stabilization and
humanitarian situation, including support of AMISOM and its Civilian Sector teams
in facilitating increased engagements with the Federal Member States and
communities (f) Engagement with AMISOM Troop and Police Contributing
Countries (TCCs) and key international stakeholders on Somalia; and (g) key issues
for consideration of the AU PSC for the renewal of AMISOM’s Mandate .

II. Political and related developments and update on
national elections
3.
Progress continues to be recorded on Somalia’s preparation towards its proposed
27 November 2020 election – the first direct elections that will be conducted since
1969. These include the establishment of a Joint Parliamentary Committee for the
completion of the Electoral Law, following the National Elections Bill (NEB) signed
into law on 21 February 2020 as well as the activities of the National Electoral
Security Taskforce (NESTF). With the Joint Parliamentary Committee beginning its
work in early March 2020, the Committee has drafted its workplan, elected key
officials, and completed an election retreat with the National Independent Electoral
Committee (NIEC) in April 2020, with a view to holding regional consultations in the
near future. Additional to completing the electoral law, the NESTF has also stepped
up preparations for the elections, with the adoption of its Terms of Reference (ToRs),
as well as its concept of operations (CONOPs) for election secu rity, and for voter’s
registration.

20-07155

3/11

S/2020/452

III. Security situation and joint operations in support of the
Somalia transition plan
4.
Somalia continues to contend with a broad range of security risks, threats and
vulnerabilities, including increasing mortar shelling of AMISOM base camp, illicit
proliferation and flow of arms as well as Improvised Explosive Devises (IED) and its
materials which are used more extensively by Al Shabaab and other Armed
Opposition Groups (AOG). Experiences and lessons in Somalia an d other similar
conflict areas have pointed to the fact that Al-Shabaab and AOG cannot be defeated
by military means alone. In this regard, AMISOM continues to engage all
stakeholders, including Somalia Security Forces (SSF) and relevant partners to
discuss the possibility of strengthening SSF, as well as to enable stabilization and
governance efforts and processes to consolidate military gains. This is why AMISOM
and the SSF continues to conduct Joint Operations to disrupt and degrade Al Shabaab
and AOG to further deny them freedom of movement and action in AMISOM’s Area
of Responsibility (AoR).
5.
Among the Joint Operations conducted, the capture of Janaale Town, which was
an Al Shabaab stronghold, situated approximately 90 kilometers South West of
Somalia was critical. This operation also led to the capture of several key Al Shahaab
Commanders in Lower Shabelle by the Somali National Army (SNA). This marks an
important step towards the reduction of Al Shabaab’s capability to collect revenue as
well as plan and conduct terrorist operations and activities in Lower Shabelle. To
achieve more success, AMISOM notes the need to ensure enhanced coordination with
SSF and relevant partners. In this regard, AMISOM continues to hold several
coordination meetings. These include: (a) the Weekly Senior Leadership Military
Coordination (SLMC) meetings, attended by AMISOM Military Command, SSF
leadership and Partners; (b) the Weekly Joint Intelligence and Information sharing
meetings; (c) the Sector Commanders Joint Security Meetings with their SSF
counterparts and other stakeholders in the respective AoR; and (d) the Military
Coordination Group (MCG) weekly meeting with SNA and International Partners (IP)
under Strand 2A of the Comprehensive Approach to Security (CAS).
6.
Furthermore, AMISOM continues to support the Somali Police Force (SPF) in
the conduct of operational activities in Mogadishu, Baidoa, Beletweyne, Dhobley,
Jowhar and Kismayo. In Mogadishu, these operational activities include special
duties, joint day and night foot and vehicular patrols within designated areas. These
areas include the SPF Headquarter, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Old Parliament,
General Kaahiye Police Academy, JOCC/NISA Headquarters, Banadir Regional
Administration, Lido beach, as well as periodic snap checks at X-Control in Afgooye.
As has been noted, these AMISOM operational supports play a key role in enhancing
public confidence in the SPF, deterring criminal activities, improving safety and
security and enabling the public and government officials to undertake their activities
without fear and disruptions.

IV. Implications of the AMISOM troop drawdown
7.
The drawdown of 1000 AMISOM troops in February 2020 pursuant to
paragraph 7 of UNSCR 2472 (2019) has sent negative signals to Al-Shabaab
concerning AMISOM’s security posture currently and post 2021. Th e thinking within
Al Shabaab circles suggest that the insurgents are counting on AMISOM’s further
drawdown of troops and eventual exit from Somalia. This situation has emboldened
the insurgents as demonstrated in recent escalation of mortar attacks on AMIS OM
base camp as well as other direct attacks in other AMISOM locations.

4/11

20-07155

S/2020/452

Notwithstanding, AMISOM’s security responsibilities remain at all-time high whilst
drawdowns continue to stretch security personnel due to the absence of significant
force generation from the FGS. As such, AMISOM troops are now engaged in holding
areas recovered from Al-Shabaab with limited ability to intensify its operations across
its AoR. An example of this relates to the stalled deployment of the Ghana Formed
Police Unit (FPU) which requires a Super Convoy Operation across areas currently
controlled by Al Shabaab to transport the personnel and equipment to their designated
AoR. The situation further allows Al-Shabaab to gain momentum, regroup, and train
for more attacks on AMISOM, SSF as well as innocent civilians.
8.
Taking note of the dire implications of the drawdown, AMISOM TCCs made
additional sacrifices to sustain non-AMISOM troops in Somalia as a stop gap measure
to preserve the gains made by AMISOM. However, and whilst this support of TCCs
are really commendable, it is not sustainable in the long run. In this regard, there is
need for a halt in reductions of AMISOM uniformed personnel taking note of the
consequences of any further drawdown – taking note of the planning for the election
and successful implementation of the Somali Transition Plan leading to 2021.

V. Progress in ensuring protection of civilians and compliance
with IHL and IHRL principles as well as conduct and
discipline standards
9.
AMISOM continue to ensure compliance with its obligations under applicable
International Humanitarian Law (IHL) and International Human Rights Law (IHRL)
principles as well as Conduct and Discipline standards. As part of these efforts and
commitment, AMISOM also investigates allegations of civilian casualties through its
Civilian Causality Tracking Analysis and Response Cell (CCTARC) and its Board of
Inquiry (BOI) regimes. As AMISOM awaits endorsement of its amendments to the
Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) on Ex Gratia Payments for civilian casualty
amends, it is already working on a number of cases to determine those that meet the
criteria for ex gratia payments. In addition, some allegations of human rights
violations are currently at preliminary stages of investigation , the outcome of which
will determine whether BoI will need to be convened as part of response measures.
10. In enhancing its mitigation measures, AMISOM monitored several Pre Deployment Training (PDT) on IHRL, IHL, Child Protection, Women Protection,
CCTARC, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA), Conduct and Discipline, Sexual and
Gender-Based Violence (SGBV) and Conflict Related Sexual Violence (CRSV) for
its uniformed personnel. In the period under review, 453 AMISOM Police and
military personnel undertook PDT whilst various Induction and other In-Mission
training programmes were also conducted by AMISOM. Through these training
programmes, AMISOM underlined the obligations of its personnel in respecting and
protecting human rights and emphasized the need to uphold the highest standards of
transparency, conduct and discipline and strict adherence to relevant international
norms and standards in the implementation of their mandated tasks.

VI. Stabilisation and humanitarian situation/engagement of
civilian sector teams with federal member states
11. The humanitarian situation in parts of Somalia remains dire, with persistent
protection concerns. Within the context of COVID-19 pandemic and its effects in
Somalia, refugee settlements and dense urban settings are at particularly high risk. In
this regard, there is need for vigilant approaches to facilitate case identification and

20-07155

5/11

S/2020/452

treatment. With 2.6 million people currently displaced, these populations face the
imminent threat of an epidemic that could claim th ousands of lives.
12. Within its capacities, AMISOM, in coordination with relevant humanitarian
actors and, as part of the international response to the humanitarian crisis, continues
to facilitate delivery of humanitarian assistance in Somalia. To this en d, AMISOM
provided daily clean water to Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) located near its
FOBs. Additionally, AMISOM convened meetings to discuss COVID -19 concerns
and implications within the Somali IDP community living near AMISOM Forward
Operating Basis (FOBs) and bases as part of efforts to raise awareness about the virus
to enhance prevention.

VII. Engagement with AMISOM troop and police contributing
countries (TCCS) and key international stakeholders on
Somalia on Somalia
13. Taking note of the effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic, and in view of current
developments in Somalia, the Commission engaged virtually with AMISOM TCCs
who agreed to continue supporting the efforts of the FGS/SNA, including in
generating Somali security forces and training (whenever requested by FGS), combat
mentoring and joint operations. Among the key issues discussed was the need to
continuously strengthen Command and Control within the Military Component,
creation and operationalisation of mobile forces within each AMISOM operational
sector and judicious use of the force multipliers and enablers including the incoming
Helicopters from Uganda, in offensive operations against Al Shabaab.
14. The Commission also conveyed a virtual High level meeting with key strategic
partners co-chaired by the AU Commissioner for Peace and Security and the Prime
Minister of the Federal Government of Somalia on 29th April 2020. The High Level
meeting, amongst others, discussed Security in Somalia from now up to beyond 2021;
Measures that should be taken to ensure that the gains achieved by FGS and AMISOM
are not reversed; Mechanisms that can be established and or utilised to consolidate
Regional coordination and consensus, especially involving neighbours and TCC
actions in Somalia and Resource mobilisation for AMISOM including the
replenishment of AMISOM Trust Fund.
15. The meeting took note and appreciated the tremendous success of AMISOM
(including its T/PCCs) and FGS, operating in a very difficult environment and
constraints, in implementing their mandates and responsibilities, and called on the
AU, including the PSC, IGAD and the A3 to ensure that these successes and sacrifices
are not reversed, but rather supported and consolidated. While addressing itself to the
long term support to the security sector in support of state building processes in
Somalia, the High level meeting noted the need for a comprehensive political and
stabilization approach to Somalia’s future, closer cooperation between the FGS and
FMS’ to facilitate force generation, and that terrorists, not political rivals, must be the
focus of security operations.
16. While commending the FGS and FMS on the progress attained in inclusive
politics and the adoption of the National Electoral Bill into Law, the meeting urged
the FGS to ensure that the Joint Parliamentary Committee (JPC) working on the
finalization of the Electoral Law, to speedily conclude its consultation processes and
ascertain the roll-out of all State elections mechanism at Federal and Regional leve ls.
This was highlighted as critical noting the proposed election date of 27 November,
2020 which is fast approaching. In this regard, there were calls for commencement of
the elections engagements, dialogue and security related provisions at all levels to

6/11

20-07155

S/2020/452

enable a peaceful, transparent and fair elections in Somalia. In the same vein, the FGS
was also requested to further engage with relevant actors on the Constitutional
Review Process (CRP), as well as discussions on the special procedures for adopting
the amended the Federal Constitution by the two Houses of Parliament. This was said
will ensure that the major normative frameworks of the state are finalized and set for
implementation accordingly.
17. The meeting agreed that sustaining the hard won gains require sufficient security
presence, and effective stabilization efforts. Therefore, the need for the STP revision
was welcomed and expected to outline a realistic plan with timelines to meet
benchmarks for force generation, security sector reform, and civi lian security.
Security transition in Somalia will require international security presence beyond
2021 with stronger and renewed regional political consensus in Somalia, similar to
what existed when AMISOM was launched in 2007, with the AU playing a key ro le
in enhancing the enabling environment for political processes as well as formulation
of international security presence in Somalia, with a multidimensional AMISOM or
AMISOM like operation with regional support.

VIII. Key issues for the consideration of AUPSC for the renewal
of AMISOM’s mandate
18.

Cognizant of the above, PSC may wish to consider:

19. Renewing AMISOM’s mandate for a period of 12 months in order for AMISOM
to support complementation of Phase Two and implementation of Phase Three of the
Somali Transition Plan which ends on 31 December 2020.
20. Acknowledging and appreciating the additional sacrifices being made by some
of the TCCs to sustain non-AMISOM troops in Somalia (following the recent
drawdown of 1000 troops) as a stop gap measure, noting that this is not sustainable
in the long run. Council may also wish to reiterate the need for the UN Security
Council to halt reductions of AMISOM uniformed personnel numbers to enable
AMISOM to continue to effectively support implementation of the Somali Transition
Plan, whilst force generation, integration of regional forces and enhancement of the
capabilities of the SSF are being facilitated.
21. Taking note of the negative effects of Novel Corona Virus Pandemic
(COVID-19) on the implementation of the STP, especially restrictions of movements
as well as actions taken by FGS, AMISOM leadership and UN/UNSOS to contain the
spread of COVID – 19 and treating those infected by the virus. In this regard, call on
partners and the broader international community to further enhance support to
Somalia in containing the virus, taking note of the incoming equipment donated by
the Governments of China and Korea to support the efforts to contain COVID -19 in
Somalia.
22. Requesting international support to the recent floods and locust invasion of
Somalia and across East Africa which have negatively impacted local community
settlement and the agri-business chain, particularly within the context of COVID -19.
23. Reiterating the call on the FGS to continually work closely with the Federal
Member States to resolve political issues and differences as this has direct
implications on the security operations of AMISOM, including in the FMS and with
the FMS forces as well as on good governance and sustainable peace acros s Somalia.
24. Appreciating AU Member States, UN, EU and bilateral partners in providing
resources for AMISOM, including funding and logistic support and Calling for high
level AU consultations, including possibly at Summit level, as well as high level
20-07155

7/11

S/2020/452

engagement with multilateral and bilateral partners to consider other supplementary
options for the mobilization and provision of required resources to support AMISOM,
including the replenishment of AMISOM Trust Fund, leading up to December 2021
and possibly beyond.
25. Calling on AMISOM, within its existing civilian capability and utilising its
Civilian Sector Teams, to assist the Federal Government of Somalia and its Member
States, in collaboration with the United Nations, to extend state authority, includin g
ensuring full compliance with international humanitarian law and human rights law
and standards as well as support to local governance, humanitarian and stabilization
processes in areas recovered from Al-Shabaab. Also requesting the SRCC to use good
offices to facilitate peace initiatives in support of Somali efforts in building the
capacity of traditional leaders in the mediation of local disputes as well as
administration of humanitarian services.
26. Requesting AMISOM, within its capabilities, and in coordination with other
parties, to assist with implementation of the Somali national security plans, through
training and mentoring of the Security Forces of the Federal Government of Somalia,
including through joint operations;
27. Requesting the Commission working closely with AMISOM to review the
AMISOM CONOPS, by September 2020 to align it with the priorities for the
consolidation of the implementation of the STP leading to 2021. Council may also
wish to consider calling for a review of progress achieve d in the implementation of
the Somali Transition Plan, including the contribution of AMISOM, EU, UN and
bilateral partners as this will provide a good basis for the reprioritization of critical
elements in the plan leading to 2021 as well as guide the confirmation of Somali
priority initiatives for post-2021 and support by the international community in this
regard.

8/11

20-07155

S/2020/452

Enclosure 2
Communiqué of the 923rd meeting of the Peace and Security
Council, held in Addis Ababa on 7 May 2020
[Original: English]

COMMUNIQUÉ
Adopted by the Peace and Security Council (PSC) of the African Union (AU) at
its 923rd meeting held on 7 May 2020, on the Situation in Somalia and Renewal of
the Mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM):
The Peace and Security Council,
Noting the remarks made by the Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of
Lesotho to the AU and Chairperson of the PSC for May 2020, H.E, Ambassador
Professor Mafa Sejanamane, as well as the statement made by the Commissioner for
Peace and Security, Ambassador Smail Chergui, the briefing provided by Ambassador
Francisco Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson of the AU Commission
for Somalia and Head of AMISOM, and the statements made by the representatives
of the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) an d the United Nations Office to the
African Union (UNOAU);
Further noting the Report of the Chairperson of the Commission on the situation
in Somalia and renewal of AMISOM mandate;
Recalling its previous decisions and pronouncements on the situation in So malia
and AMISOM, particularly Communique [PSC/PR/COMM(CMXI)], adopted at is
911th meeting held on 24 February 2020; Communique [PSC/PR/COMM.1(CMI)]
adopted at its 901st meeting held on 13 December 2019; Communiqué
[PSC/PR/COMM.(DCCCLXV)] adopted at its 865th meeting held on 7 August 2019;
and Communiqué [PSC/PR/COMM.1(DCCCXLVIII)] adopted at its 848th meeting
held on 9 May 2019, as well as UN Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 2472
(2019) of 31 May 2019.
Acting under Article 7 of its Protocol, the Peace and Security Council:
1.
Welcomes the fourth Report of the Chairperson of the Commission
submitted pursuant to paragraph 11 of the PSC Communiqué [PSC/PR/COMM.1
(DCCCXLVIII)] adopted at its 848th meeting, held on 9 May 2019, in Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia, in which, among others, Council requested the Commission to work closely
with the UN and to ensure timely quarterly reports to the PSC on the situation in
Somalia including issues relating to AMISOM;
2.
Commends all efforts deployed by the Federal Government of Somalia
(FGS), the Federal Member States (FMS) of Somalia, as well as AMISOM towards
the promotion of inclusive political participation and dialogue to further enhance
national cohesion, and requests the AMISOM to continue its engagement with the
FGS and all other relevant stakeholders, with a view to assisting Somalia in
addressing the current challenges;
3.
Encourages additional efforts in building greater coordination and
cooperation between the FGS and FMS to promote collective governance and socio economic development of Somalia;
4.
Welcomes the progress made in Somalia’s preparation for elections
scheduled for November 2020, including the establishment of a Joint Parliamentary
20-07155

9/11

S/2020/452

Committee for the completion of the Electoral Law; following the National Elections
Bill (NEB) signed into law on 21 February 2020; as well as the activities of the
National Electoral Security Taskforce (NESTF); applauds the Joint Parliamentary
Committee for drafting the work plan, electing key officials, and successfully
organizing a retreat on elections with the National Independent Electoral Committee
(NIEC) in April 2020, with a view to creating conducive conditions for the holding
of regional consultations as soon as possible;
5.
Expresses deep concern over the security threats, including increasing
mortar shelling of AMISOM base camp, illicit proliferation and flow of arms, as well
as Improvised Explosive Devises (IED) and its materials which are used more
extensively by the Al Shabaab terrorist group and other armed opposition groups
(AOG) operating in the country; in this regard, Council encourages AMISOM to
continue providing support to the Somali National Forces in degrading the activities
of Al Shabaab; commends the Republic of Uganda for its initiative to deploy
helicopters for AMISOM, and calls for adequate force enablers and multipliers that
the Mission desperately needs, in order to enable it to more effectively discharge its
mandate and to consolidate peace in Somalia;
6.
Condemns, in strongest terms possible, the continuous and indiscriminate
attacks by Al-Shabaab against civilian population and facilities, as well as targeted
assassinations of Government personnel and prominent politicians; expresses deep
condolences to the families of those who lost their lives and wishes quick recovery to
those injured during those cowardly attacks; pays tribute to the AMISOM Troop and
Police Contributing Countries (T/PCCs), and their nationals, especially those that
have paid the ultimate sacrifice in the promotion of peace, security, stability and
reconciliation in Somalia;
7.
Expresses concern over the security implications of AMISOM drawdown
and stresses the imperative need for a halt in further reduction of AMISOM uniformed
personnel, with regard to the planning for the safe holding of elections and the
successful implementation of the Somali Transition Plan leading to 2021, with a view
to preserving the gains made so far, and also taking into consideration the impacts of
COVID-19 on the entire Mission;
8.
Recalls UN Security Council Resolution 1863(2009) establishing a Trust
Fund to provide support to AMISOM and calls for urgent contributions to address
additional challenges, including COVID-19 and supporting and securing
humanitarian activities in Somalia;
9.
Urges the AU Commission to further strengthen its oversight over
AMISOM and ensure Mission unified command and control between FHQs and
Sector Units operational coordination among AMISOM contingents, strengthen
command, control and accountability of the operationalization of the mission
enabling units, including mission air assets, enabling the creation and
operationalization of mobile military forces in the sectors, and promot e coordinated
operational decision making under the Force Commander, and ensure that all Mission
force enablers and multipliers operate under the Force Commander.
10. Appeals to all relevant stakeholders to continue working together to
expedite the deployment of the Ghana and Djibouti Formed Police Unit (FPU) and
equipment, including utilization of air assets of other UN Missions in Africa, if such
capabilities are not currently available within Somalia;
11. Expresses concern over the effects of the desert locust invasion, as well as
the floods and the attendant humanitarian situation in Somalia which has displaced
many people and in this context, appeals to all Member States and the international
community to provide humanitarian assistance to the a ffected population, as well as
10/11

20-07155

S/2020/452

for provision of security and rebuilding of infrastructure to facilitate humanitarian
access and movement of goods and people;
12. Requests the AU Commission, through Africa Centres for Disease Control
and Prevention (Africa CDC) to continue providing necessary support to the FGS in
the fight against COVID-19 pandemic, with a view to ensuring preservation of the
gains made in political and socio-economic sectors in the country, as well as in the
preparation of the planned elections;
13. Calls for a comprehensive review of the Somali Transition Plan and its
implementation modalities, led by the FGS, with full participation of the AU, UN, EU
and key FGS bilateral partners by July 2020, in order to provide a solid basis for the
reprioritization of critical elements in the Transition Plan leading to 2021, which
would also inform AMISOM’s CONOPs review and guide the confirmation of Somali
priority initiatives for post-2021, as well as support by the international community;
14. Also calls for enhanced coordination between FGS, AU, UN and other
strategic partners in supporting the STP, including in the training and equipping of
the SSF which are instrumental to achieving effective force generation to enable the
SSF to gradually take over security responsibilities in Somalia. Council requests
AMISOM, within its existing civilian capability and utilizing its Civilian Sector
Teams, to assist the FGS and FMS, in collaboration with the UNSOM, to support the
extension of state authority, including ensuring full compliance with international
humanitarian law, human rights law and standards, as well as support to local
governance, humanitarian efforts and stabilization processes in areas recovered from
Al-Shabaab. Further requests AMISOM to continue facilitating peace initiatives in
support of Somali efforts in building the capacity of traditional leaders in the
mediation of local disputes;
15. Recalls communiques adopted at its 901st (paragraph 17) and 911th
(paragraph 13) meeting and calls on the AU Commission, working closely with
UNSG, and the Government of Somalia, to conduct, by 15 November 2020, an
independent comprehensive assessment of the security environment giving due
attention to broader and comprehensive stabilization and security requirements, with
a view to presenting options for consideration to the PSC and UN Security Council
on the role of the AU, UN and international partners in Somalia post-2021;
16. Decides to renew the mandate of AMISOM for 12 months, from 27 May
2020, in order for AMISOM to continue supporting the completion of Phase Two and
implementation of Phase Three of the Somali Transition Plan and, in this regard,
requests the Commission to review the AMISOM CONOPS, by September 2020, in
order to align it with urgent priorities;
17. Also decides to adopt the Report of the Chairperson of the Commission on
the situation in Somalia and requests the Chairperson of the Commission to transmit
this Communiqué to the African Members of the UN Security Council (A3), and to
the UN Secretary General for circulation to the members of the UN Security Council
as working document, pursuant to paragraph 32 of UNSCR 2472 (2019); and
18.

20-07155

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

11/11
