S/PV.8080

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8080

th meeting
Monday, 30 October 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Le Drian/Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ali
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Ms. Wallström
Mr. Kyslytsya
Baron Ahmad
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (S/2017/869)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-35058 (E)
*1735058*

S/PV.8080

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

colleagues. I commend their courage and dedication
to restoring peace and security to Mali. Their sense
of sacrifice compels us to urgently find solutions to
help us combat terrorism in Mali, while ensuring the
security and safety of MINUSMA contingents.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(S/2017/869)
The President (spoke in French): I wish to
warmly welcome the Secretary-General, Ministers and
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, and Mr. Angel Losada Fernández,
European Union Special Representative for the Sahel.
Mr. Mahamat will be joining us via videoteleconference from Pretoria.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item of the agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/869, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I thank
the French Government for initiating today’s debate,
which follows the Security Council’s visit to the Sahel.
I also thank the Ministers of the States members of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) for their
presence today.
Allow me to pay tribute to the three Chadian
Blue Helmets of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
who died on Thursday, as well as to their wounded
2/32

30/10/2017

The situation in the Sahel challenges us all. Poverty,
underdevelopment and climate change have contributed
to the humanitarian and security crises. The weakness
of institutions and the exclusion and marginalization of
some groups are exploited by extremists and terrorists.
Porous borders facilitate trafficking in human beings,
drug and arms trafficking and other criminal activities.
The recent deadly attacks on Nigerian gendarmes and
American soldiers, as well as the unremitting attacks
on the Malian defence and security forces, MINUSMA
peacekeepers and Force Barkhane soldiers, illustrate
the scale of the security threat.
The humanitarian crisis is deteriorating. Nearly
5 million people have been displaced and 24 million
need humanitarian aid. Birth rates are among the
highest in the world, yet millions of Sahelian children
do not have access to health care and do not go to school.
Given the urgency of the situation, we must come
up with innovative actions in support of the G-5 Sahel’s
efforts not only in the security field, but also in the
areas of development and governance. Time is not on
our side. We must urgently align our efforts in order to
remedy the root causes of instability in the region. The
creation of the Joint Force demonstrates the willingness
of the countries of the G-5 Sahel to cooperate closely in
order to jointly address the threat.
Today, we have the opportunity to support them
and, together, reverse the course of events. We owe it
to the people of the Sahel. We also owe it to the States
of the G-5 Sahel, which have taken that courageous
initiative. At the time of their appeal, I supported the
creation of a force with long-term financing and a
mandate commensurate with the threats it would face.
We owe it to all those who have paid with their lives.
Their selfless commitment against the terrorist threat
and peace in the Sahel compel us.
Given the rapid evolution of the situation and
the risks of widespread spillover, failure to act could
have serious consequences for the region and beyond.
Therefore, I invite the Council to be ambitious in the
choices it has to make. Strong political support for
the G-5 Sahel and material and operational support
commensurate with the current challenges are essential.
17-35058

30/10/2017

Peace and security in Africa

The Security Council has four options, as set out
in my report (S/2017/869). The United Nations could
quickly mobilize essential support, complementing
the work of bilateral partners. Such support would
not only serve to reinforce the Joint Force of the G-5
Sahel, but would also help to mitigate the threats that
directly affect MINUSMA. Like MINUSMA, the Joint
Force will operate in support of the Malian peace
process. The two forces are deeply complementary
and mutually reinforcing. But only the comprehensive
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali could restore the State’s authority
and stability. I renew my appeal to the signatory parties
to accelerate the implementation of the Agreement and
its key institutional reforms.
During my last informal meeting with the Council,
I had the opportunity to share my opinions and
preferences. Naturally, whatever the Council decides
to do, the Secretariat will do its best to support the G-5
Sahel within the framework defined by the Council.
That support to the Joint Force would also be part of the
strategic partnership to strengthen African responses
to crises on the continent. When we talk about strategic
partnership, it must ensure mutual commitment
accompanied by guarantees, criteria and indicators of
success agreed by the countries of the G-5 Sahel and
international partners.
The countries of the G-5 Sahel have set specific
goals and made remarkable progress towards
achieving them over the past few months, be it in the
elaboration of a concept of operations, bringing certain
domestic instruments and normative frameworks into
conformity, or the provision of national resources and
the mobilization of regional and international partners.
All of those efforts demonstrate the political resolve
to define a strategy and take the steps necessary to
implement it. However, certain aspects should be
further clarified and consolidated.
With that in mind, I have presented recommendations
to strengthen the political leadership of the Joint
Force and its integration into the African peace and
security architecture. I have also suggested introducing
transparent and credible monitoring and follow-up
mechanisms that could strengthen the legitimacy and
the political framework of the Joint Force, as well as
the support of the region and its partners. In particular,
it is essential to establish control mechanisms to ensure
respect for human rights and international humanitarian
law in the context of military operations. The African

S/PV. 8080

Union and the United Nations can support the G-5 Sahel
in establishing adequate monitoring systems, with the
support of partners, including the European Union.
In that regard, it is urgent to define the modalities of
cross-border prosecutions, arrests, detentions, legal
proceedings, risk reduction and the broader protection
of civilians. I encourage States members of the G-5
Sahel to work to finalize the concept of operations
and to clarify the objectives and timing of the force
generation of the Joint Force.
Security cooperation in the Sahel is essential, but
only a multidimensional response can end instability.
I have instructed the Deputy Secretary-General to
coordinate and revitalize the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. We must together strengthen
our efforts in favour of governance, development and
resilience. To that end, at the Brussels Conference
in December, we will present an investment strategy
for the region, and I hope to be able to count on the
support of all our partners. I would also like to call
for greater coherence among the various national,
regional and international initiatives in place. Only
an effective presence and a strengthening of the rule
of law will make it possible to ensure the continuity
of these initiatives. In such a difficult and complex
context, it is also important to support the efforts of
humanitarian staff and agencies working to promote
sustainable development.
Since I took office, prevention has been my
absolute priority. In the Sahel, this means preventing
the region from falling into a state of chaos, which
could have dangerous consequences for the continent
and the world as a whole. I therefore call for a win-win
partnership and a framework of shared responsibility
that will formalizes our mutual obligations so as to
address the root causes of the crisis.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
affairs, International Cooperation and African
Integration of Mali.
Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): In my capacity
as Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), and on behalf of my
colleagues from Burkina Faso, Mauritania, the Niger
and Chad who are present here today, I am particularly
pleased to address our sincere gratitude to the President
of the Council for the generous invitation to participate

17-350583/32

S/PV.8080

Peace and security in Africa

in this morning’s meeting and to say how delighted we
are to see France presiding over this important meeting
to discuss the situation in the Sahel.
At the outset, I would like to thank France for
having made the Sahel the priority of its presidency of
the Security Council, and I would like particularly to
commend the French delegation, under the leadership
of Ambassador François Delattre, for the very able way
in which it has steered the work of the Security Council
throughout this month of October. I would also like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to the outstanding
work of Ambassador Tekeda Alemu of Ethiopia and
his delegation during their presidency of the Council
last month. We eagerly look forward to the Italian
presidency of the Council that will begin in the next
few days.
As I was leaving Bamako, the Secretary-General’s
friend, President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, asked me to
convey to him his boundless gratitude, and to do so
also on behalf of his fellow Presidents of Burkina Faso,
Mauritania, the Niger and Chad, for both his personal
commitment and that of the United Nations in seeking
to advance stability and development in the countries
of the Sahel. The Secretary-General’s presence at this
morning’s meeting, along with the apposite report he
has submitted on the operationalization and activities
of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(S/2017/869) reflect his unflagging dedication. The
States members of the G-5 Sahel welcome the analysis
and recommendations contained in the report before us.
There can be no doubt that this meeting is taking
place at the perfect time, given that the current
situation in the Sahel remains volatile, as the region is
sadly dominated by terrorist attacks and various forms
of organized crime that regularly plague our people as
well as foreign and national security forces, and, in so
doing, undermine all our development efforts. I would
like to thank all the members of the Security Council
for their visit to three of the five countries of the Sahel.
This visit was designed to allow them to assess with
us the situation on the ground and evaluate the ways
and means of supporting the decisions taken by our
Heads of State to ward off the multiple threats in our
common area.
The visit of the Security Council, as well as the visit
that took place in Niger and Chad previously — from 1 to
7 March — fulfilled our expectations, because through
the meetings it had with Heads of State, Governments,
4/32

30/10/2017

military authorities and members of civil society of
our respective countries, the delegation of the Security
Council had an opportunity to better understand the
urgent need to support the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel
so as to alleviate the suffering of our populations and
to contribute to the stability and development in the
Sahel. Indeed, the security threat looming over our
States is a challenge that we share with the rest of
the world, given its causes, manifestations and direct
impact on international peace and security. As such,
it requires a collective response of the international
community, and we are pleased to note that the Security
Council and the Secretary-General share this sense of
collective responsibility.
As far as we are concerned, the establishment of
the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel represents a collective
response by our countries to address the common
threats of terrorism, violent extremism and trafficking
in all its forms, including migrant smuggling. I recall
in this regard that the Joint Force has been endorsed by
the African Union and is fully compliant and aligned
with the African architecture of peace and security, and
that it also enjoys the support of the Security Council,
specifically through its resolution 2359 (2017).
At this stage, I would like to emphasize that the
actions of the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel are intended
to and do complement those of other forces already
operating in the region, namely, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) and the French Operation
Barkhane. Force generation for the Joint Force of the
G-5 Sahel will create the conditions and an environment
favourable for MINUSMA’s implementation of its
mandate. In addition, the Joint Force’s strategic concept
of operations provides for coordination and articulation
mechanisms between the United Nations peacekeeping
mission and this African peacekeeping operation.
Today more than ever, we are determined to make
the Joint Force fully operational. Considerable progress
has already been made by the G-5 Sahel States in the
process of deploying the Joint Force, with the welcome
support of the African Union and our partners. And
we have made this progress, despite the challenges on
several fronts that remain to be met.
One step forward that has been taken in setting up
the Joint Force was the inauguration, on 9 September,
by His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita,
President-in-Office of the G-5 Sahel, of the Joint Force
17-35058

30/10/2017

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8080

headquarters in Sevaré, Mali. The visit of the Security
Council delegation on 22 October gave Council
members an opportunity to witness first hand that the
Headquarters are fully functional. Headquarters for
the Joint Force’s central sector are also up and running
in Niamey, and steps are being taken for establishing
headquarters for the eastern sector in Wour, Chad,
and for the western sector in Nbeiket el-Ahouach,
Mauritania. I would also draw attention to the fact
that the mobilization of troops needed for the battalion
strength we have set for ourselves and their equipment
has been carried out on the basis of funds provided
by Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger. The first joint
cross-border operations in the central sector will soon
be launched.

because we believe that those options, in particular the
first option, provide a good basis for addressing the
current and pressing needs of the Force. I welcome
the commitment of the Secretary-General to helping
to provide the necessary resources and support for the
Joint Force, and I call on the Security Council to do the
same as soon as possible, in particular at the multilateral
level. We favour the establishment of a mechanism to
oversee the transparent management of resources used
by the Force. Similarly, we remain open to all proposals
aimed at strengthening the institutional architecture
and planning and coordination capacities of the Joint
Force, including the deployment of experts from the
United Nations and other partner organizations to the
permanent secretariat of the G-5 Sahel.

However, in order to achieve full operational
capability by March 2018, the Joint Force will need
substantial bilateral and multilateral support so as
to mobilize sustainable and predictable resources.
This is the purpose of our request for multilateral
support, including through the United Nations,
because this remains the only option that will ensure
the predictability and sustainability of resources and
the operational support needed for the Joint Force on
the ground.

I also welcome the Secretary-General’s support
for the establishment of a G-5 Sahel support group to
promote the coordination of international support, in
line with the Force’s strategic concept of operations.
The States members of the G-5 Sahel fully align
themselves with the Secretary-General’s call on the
Security Council to adopt

I recall that the €423 million budget was arrived at
on the basis of a realistic and objective assessment of
the Force’s needs. I take this opportunity to appeal to
all our bilateral and multilateral partners to participate
in the international conference on security and
development in the Sahel, scheduled for 14 December,
which is being organized jointly with the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union.
I thank the European institutions for agreeing to host
this important meeting. I welcome the contributions
that have already been pledged by the European Union,
France, Germany and Denmark, and I encourage other
countries to do the same.
In addition to the issue of financing, the Joint
Force will also require support in such areas as
infrastructure
development,
information
and
communication
technology,
anti-improvisedexplosive-ordnance equipment, training, medical
training and medical-evacuation capacity as well as air
and land transport.
The G-5 Sahel countries welcome the options
proposed by the Secretary-General within the
framework of United Nations support for the Joint Force

“a robust mandate commensurate with the serious
threats that the Joint Force will need to address”
(S/2017/869, para. 83)
with a view to strengthening the latter’s capacity so
that it can fully achieve its goals. In that regard, I would
like to give my assurance that that the Joint Force’s
operations are being carried out in strict compliance
with international humanitarian law and human rights
law. That is a matter of the utmost importance for our
Heads of State, our peoples and all of us, as the success
of the Joint Force will require the full support of our
populace. We have therefore planned establishing a
civilian component within the Joint Force that will be
dedicated to human rights compliance, as the Security
Council mission was able to see for itself at the field
headquarters meeting. We remain open to all forms of
support in the area of human rights.
I would like to firmly stress that the G-5 Sahel is not
focused solely on the security dimension. In parallel
with the security aspect, which I have just mentioned,
the G-5 Sahel also accords a high level of importance
to development issues and good governance, as well as
the resilience of its people. The deployment of the Joint
Force is simply aimed at establishing the conditions
necessary for development, security and peace in our
region because we know that there can be no lasting

17-350585/32

S/PV.8080

Peace and security in Africa

peace without development, and vice versa. We
therefore fully agree with the Secretary-General that the
security role of the Joint Force must be complemented
by initiatives in the area of development. That is the
raison d’être of the Priority Investment Programme, as
well as that of Alliance for the Sahel, which is aimed at
promoting economic, social and cultural development,
as well as deradicalization.
In keeping with the Secretary-General’s statement,
in my national capacity and on behalf of President
Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, I reiterate the commitment
of the Government of Mali to expediting the full
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers
process, and in that regard I welcome the adoption of
resolution 2374 (2017), which established a sanctions
regime in Mali.
In conclusion, I underscore once again that the
deteriorating security situation in the Sahel is of great
concern. Our people are undergoing severe hardships
in their daily lives because of increasing insecurity,
and the very foundations of our States are threatened.
The very survival of our States is at stake. The stability
of the region is in the balance, and international peace
and security are also threatened. The resolve of the
international community aimed at containing the
regional and international threat is urgently needed. Our
five Heads of State have played their part in providing
the Joint Force with the resources at their disposal in a
regional response to those transnational threats.
We must not allow this opportunity to elude us. We
hope that the Security Council will also carry out
its primary responsibility by following the relevant
recommendations of the Secretary-General’s report
before it. I thank the members of the Security Council
for the urgent attention that they will give to this urgent
request from our leaders and people.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Mahamat.
Mr. Mahamat (spoke in French): To begin, I
welcome the holding of this ministerial-level meeting
of the Security Council on the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). I want to thank the
French presidency of the Council for having taken the
initiative, and the members of the Council for their
commitment not only to the issue before it today, but
to other important issues involving peace and security
in Africa.
6/32

30/10/2017

Since I assumed my functions as Chairperson of
the African Union Commission, I have sought, together
with my colleagues, Mr. Smaїl Chergui, Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union (AU),
and Cessouma Minata Samate, AU Commissioner for
Political Affairs, to visit the G-5 countries. The idea
was not only to show the solidarity of the African
Union with the region in its fight against the scourge
of terrorism and organized transnational crime, but
also to contribute to promoting greater international
awareness of the challenges facing us.
Today’s meeting is extremely timely. It attests to
the increasing focus of the international community
on the current situation in the Sahel-Saharan region.
Despite their limited resources and the complex
problems facing them, the countries of the G-5 Sahel
have clearly demonstrated their willingness to meet
those challenges. I commend the Heads of State of
the G-5 Sahel countries for their determination and
perseverance. It is incumbent upon the international
community to support them by virtue of the solidarity
that binds its members together. In so doing, of course,
the international community will also be acting in its
own interest.
Let us make no mistake — what is at stake is not
only the security of the countries of the Sahel, but also
the security of countries of the many regions throughout
the world, because the scourges at hand truly know no
borders. They must be combated vigorously and with
the urgency that the situation calls for. That underlines
the critical nature of the contribution of the entire
international community. The United Nations — our
shared home — is an ideal setting to address those
issues in a spirit of solidarity. Indeed, this forum
endows regional efforts with the legitimacy that we all
recognize as essential.
It will also be a guarantee of effectiveness, making
it possible to combine judiciously the efforts of the
countries of the G-5 Sahel and those of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the personnel of which
pays a heavy price every day in service to peace in
Mali. It is the ideal complement to multilateral and
bilateral assistance, allowing for coherent and effective
international assistance. I pay tribute to the multilateral
and bilateral partners, including the European Union,
which has already provided assistance to the countries
of the G-5.
17-35058

30/10/2017

Peace and security in Africa

The African Union welcomed the adoption on
21 June of resolution 2359 (2017), in which the Security
Council welcomes the deployment of the Joint Force of
the G-5 Sahel. We also welcome the powerful signal
sent through the visit by the Security Council to the
Sahel countries and the spirit of commitment and
solidarity at its heart. The hopes that have been raised
must not be disappointed. I am convinced that Council
members are committed and have heard the message
addressed to them from the region. I address Council
members, certain that they will demonstrate once again
their determination to assume their responsibility to
maintain international peace and security. I address
members in the hope that they will concretize the idea
of prevention; in truth, we are dealing with a threat that
could become much greater if it is not dealt with here
and now.
Through its Peace and Security Council, in April
the African Union endorsed the strategic concept
of operations of the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel and
authorized its deployment for an initial, renewable period
of 12 months. At the same time, we clearly expressed
our expectations regarding the contribution of the
United Nations through the establishment of a financial
support module through statutory contributions to the
operating budget of the Joint Force. I reiterate that
request because, in the face of the terrorist threat and
the threat it poses to the stability of the region as a
whole, half measures will not be sufficient. I note with
satisfaction that this option is included in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2017/869) that members have
before them.
The African Union fully endorses the appeal of
the Secretary-General to the Council to be ambitious,
bearing in mind that only predictable and sustainable
financial support will allow the Joint Force to
contribute sustainably to the stability of the region. We
also note with satisfaction the measures envisioned by
the United Nations to support the secretariat of the G-5.
The African Union will continue to work closely with
the G-5 in order to support the technical efforts already
provided through a series of measures, including by
sharing our experience in combating insurrections in
Somalia, galvanizing the Nouakchott process, which
brings together all the countries of the region, actively
participating in the support groups provided for in
the strategic concept of operations of the Joint Force,
and through sustained advocacy efforts to raise the
required funds.

S/PV. 8080

The operationalization of the Joint Force must
go hand in hand with accelerated implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
Significant progress has been achieved, and the
Malian stakeholders must be given credit for that;
however, much remains to be done. The completion
of the implementation of the Agreement will make
it possible to further isolate terrorist and criminal
groups. The Malian parties must further step up their
efforts. The African Union, including through its High
Representative for Mali and the Sahel, Mr. Pierre
Buyoya, will continue to work alongside them in
that task.
Putting a decisive end to criminal and terrorist
groups in the Sahelo-Saharan region will also
require sustained efforts in the areas of development
and governance. We commend the efforts of the
G-5 countries in that regard and encourage them to
persevere in their efforts. We welcome the decision of
the Secretary-General to revitalize the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, under the leadership of
the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohamed.
We are convinced that, thanks to her commitment, no
effort will be spared to ensure that the Strategy fully
meets the expectations of the countries of the region.
The African Union will take the steps necessary to
give new momentum to its strategy for the Sahel and
to strengthen the implementation in the region of the
various instruments that it has adopted in the areas of
governance, democracy and respect for human rights.
I cannot conclude my statement without
paying strong tribute once again to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres. His report and the
recommendations contained therein, as well as his
support for the G-5 are further evidence of the vision
that guides him and his determination to spare no
effort to adapt the United Nations to the security
challenges we face. We fully share that vision and will
do everything in our power to help him shoulder the
crushing weight of his responsibility.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Mahamat for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Losada Fernández.
Mr. Losada Fernández (spoke in French): Allow
me first of all, Mr. President, to thank you for the
opportunity given to the European Union to participate
in Security Council discussions on the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). This is

17-350587/32

S/PV.8080

Peace and security in Africa

without a doubt the most appropriate forum to provide
long-term support to our brothers in the G-5 Sahel.
This meeting is doubly important. On the one hand,
it helps to keep the Sahel at the top of the international
agenda; on the other, it is an important step in the rise
of that African force, which, as the Secretary-General
emphasizes in his report (S/2017/869) and reiterated this
morning, urgently needs our support. Security in the
Sahel is the security of all. Accordingly, there can be no
lasting stability in the Sahel without the full, effective
and inclusive implementation of the provisions of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Allow
me to raise three points.
First, I must pay tribute to the Heads of State of
the G-5 Sahel, the United Nations and the security
actors on the ground, whose remarkable work has been
carried out often under very difficult circumstances.
The recent attacks in northern and central Mali, as
well as on the Nigerian border, demonstrate that
very clearly. I would also like to pay tribute to all the
Blue Helmets of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, Operation
Barkhane troops, European and American soldiers and
soldiers of the Group of Five for the Sahel, including
recently our Chadian friends, who made the ultimate
sacrifice for security in the Sahel, Mali and the
neighbouring countries.
I would also like to underscore the outstanding
work that has been done by the military staffs of the G-5
Sahel countries since the summit of the Heads of State
of the G-5 Sahel in February 2017, held in Bamako. In
just a few months, a concept of operations was validated
by the African Union, and then incorporated into
resolution 2359 (2017) to achieve an initial operational
capability and also, according to the information
provided, to conduct the first joint operation, which was
conducted in the past few days in the central strategic
corridor. There are of course still challenges in terms
of equipment, but also financially, for this force to
become fully operational. I understand that work on the
civilian and judicial component, on respect for human
rights, gender and on the link between the Joint Force
and the local populations, including by explaining the
mandate of the force, are also under way. We actively
encourage those efforts.
The second point is that I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his excellent report on
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force and his commendable
8/32

30/10/2017

personal commitment. We fully share his analysis
of the situation in the region and the challenges that
we will all need to face together. We also welcome
the options that have been proposed that will have to
be implemented gradually to eradicate the terrorist
threat; to deal with the Libyan crisis; to prevent and
contain the violence around the Lake Chad basin and
northern Mali; to cope with the growing expenditures
of the G-5 Sahel States on security; to ensure better
border control in order to avoid exploitation of human
beings and the trafficking in drugs and weapons that
finance terrorism; and, finally, to contribute to the
socioeconomic development of a region with a high
proportion of youth who legitimately have ambitions
for their future and better opportunities. All those are
challenges that we face today and will face in the years
to come.
With regard to this analysis of the situation, from the
very start, the Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel reached
similar conclusions. From the outset, they committed
to providing a response, such as the establishment
of the Force, whose goals, let us recall, range from
combating terrorism and organized crime to supporting
development efforts, including the re-establishment
of the authority of the State in the areas that are most
fragile and isolated, as well as facilitating humanitarian
operations. Early on, G-5 Sahel countries shared their
concerns with us. Immediately, Federica Mogherini,
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the
European Commission, responded to them by offering
support to their efforts during the announcement of the
Joint Force in N’Djamena in November 2015.
On the third point, the European Union and its
member States, the top donors in Africa, have already
provided support to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. They
will continue to extend that support. They are already
involved in a large number of projects that can provide
support and facilitate the deployment of the Force,
including to facilitate contacts with local populations.
That comprehensive approach was embodied 2011
European Union strategy for security and development
in the Sahel, which underscores the securitydevelopment nexus that is essential to guarantee
stability in the region.
During the third ministerial meeting of the
European Union and the G-5 Sahel, held on 5 June
2017, Ms. Mogherini announced the European Union’s
support to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force through an initial
17-35058

30/10/2017

Peace and security in Africa

contribution of €50 million from the European Union
African Peace Facility, including as well by mobilizing
support from the European Union Common Security
and Defence Policy missions that are deployed in
the region.
With the support of the European Union Training
Mission in Mali (EUTM Mali), the initial requests
of the G-5 Sahel General Staff are being processed.
The question of respect for human rights, including
the protection of children serving in armed groups as
well as gender issues, are key points in our continuing
commitment to the Force. The training of the Malian
armed forces provided by EUTM Mali are conducted, I
would just remind Council members, in the framework
of international standards for human rights.
In Brussels, and following the meetings in Paris
and Berlin over the past few months, we are also
working on the issue of mobilizing and coordinating the
efforts of the international community for the benefit
of the Joint Force. To that end, and in the wake of the
announcements made on the sidelines of the General
Assembly last September, in which Ms. Mogherini
participated, on 14 December we will organize in
Brussels, together with Mali’s chairmanship of the G-5
Sahel, a conference of Heads of State and Government
on security and development in the Sahel. The meeting,
which will bring together a large part of the international
community, will be an opportunity to raise additional
funding to scale up the Joint Force and to make it
fully operational, including its civilian component, in
response to the commitment undertaken by the G-5
Sahel countries and in line with resolution 2359 (2017).
The European Union has taken steps to provide direct
support for requests of the Joint Force. That mechanism
is operational and open to contributions from the
international community. Also, the conference will
be an opportunity to address the issue of development
and take into account the work that has been done in
the past few months in the framework of the alliance
that is now called “Alliance With the Sahel”, instead of
“Alliance for the Sahel.”
I therefore welcome this meeting in New York
today. I trust in our spirit of solidarity, which I have no
doubt will make ensure that we are on the same track
to take up the challenges that we face. Along the same
lines, I am sure that the Brussels conference will be
a success.

S/PV. 8080

I will conclude by quoting Ms. Mogherini, who
summarizes our willingness and approach, both in
security and development terms: “we do not work for
Africa, we work with Africa”.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Losada Fernández for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.
At the outset, allow me to thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Mali, the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and the observer of the European
Commission for their respective briefings. I also thank
the Secretary-General for the submission of his report
(S/2017/869) on how we can ramp up force generation
for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel). Following the Security Council’s 10-day
visit to the Sahel, his report provides us with a very
solid basis for discussion as we pursue talks on how we
can support this exemplary initiative.
The situation today is unambiguous: terrorist
groups in the Sahel today represent a global threat, both
for the stability of the region but also to international
security. Terrorists take advantage our weaknesses and
our divisions. They are financed by drug trafficking
and human trafficking. On repeated occasions, they
have demonstrated their ability to strike in Mali, the
Niger and Burkina Faso, as well as their determination
to expand to neighbouring countries. The threat has not
spared our nationals and our forces, who are waging
the war by the sides of our Sahel partners in the region.
This situation has a direct impact on the security of
many other countries beyond the Sahel — in Africa,
Europe and in the world as a whole. It therefore requires
a clear, strong and coordinated response by the United
Nations, and indeed by all of us.
The G-5 Sahel Joint Force is a proper response to
the challenge. When faced with a threat that makes a
mockery of borders, the response must be organized
among neighbouring States on a cross-border basis.
This is what makes the Joint Force such an exemplary
initiative. It deserves our support as it seeks to expand
its operational capacity in order to respond to the
regional terrorist threat. By combining their forces with
the explicit goal of securing their borders and equipping
themselves with the means to succeed, Burkina Faso,
Mali, Mauritania, the Niger and Chad are clearly
seeking to complement efforts already under way by

17-350589/32

S/PV.8080

Peace and security in Africa

the international community in the region. In that
regard, I refer to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the European Union capacity-building and training
missions, which have made it possible to rebuild Mali’s
military and security forces. I would of course also
mention the 4,000 soldiers of Operation Barkhane.
The G-5 Sahel Joint Force should enable
MINUSMA and Operation Barkhane to focus on the
core areas of their respective mandates, as requested by
the Government of Mali, in order to gain even greater
efficiency. That is why the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
must gradually improve its ability to tackle terrorism
and trafficking.
The Security Council’s recent visit to the Sahel
revealed the current status of the Joint Force, which is
now operational in the region’s central zone where it is
undertaking its first operation. The visit assessed the
Force’s need and potential, with armed forces rapidly
increasing their interoperability, and also verified the
seriousness and determination of the G-5 Sahel States
in implementing the Joint Force initiative. I would
like to commend the representatives of each of those
five States. Their commitment is the key to success. I
want to say once again that they have the full support
of France.
The initiative is still young. There are a number
of remaining challenges that must be overcome before
it becomes fully active in all three of the region’s
time zones. It must also respond to the challenges
posed in terms of respect for human rights, without
which the fight against terrorism cannot be effective.
Nevertheless, it is clear that today, eight months after
the initial announcement, the Joint Force is a reality. It
is beginning its operations in the central zone, which is
where it must play its first major role.
The question is no longer whether the international
community should support the response of the G-5
Sahel States. I think I can safely say that we are now
all firmly convinced. We must now ask ourselves how
we can help, without taking away from the G-5 Sahel
States their primary responsibility for securing their
borders. Bilateral support, as pointed out in the report
of the Secretary-General, remains crucial in helping
the Joint Force to reach its full potential. In that regard,
France is playing its full part in contributing to that
effort, which must be collective, through the material
and technical support provided by Operation Barkhane
10/32

30/10/2017

and its security and defence cooperation framework.
The European Union has also mobilized support by
immediately deciding to provide substantial aid of
€50 million to support the launch of the Joint Force.
I call on our partners to play their full part in
supporting this vital effort, especially in view of
the planning conference to be held in Brussels on
14 December. At that conference, announcements that
are as significant and concrete as possible are expected
to be made. However, we must also develop multilateral
aid. That would provide long-term operational and
logistical support to the Joint Force and would represent
an important signal of the international community’s
support for the G-5 Sahel countries in their struggle
against terrorist groups.
The report of the Secretary-General offers us well
defined options for possible support. It is an ambitious
report, and for that I want to thank the SecretaryGeneral. It will be up to us, over the coming days, to
put the report to good use and render it operationally
applicable. The Security Council, and through it the
international community, must rise to the challenges
faced by the States of the region in order to fight
terrorism together.
The Security Council must support the increasing
operational capacity of the Joint Force. First, it must
do so by playing its full role in the mobilization of the
international community to support the initiative, but
also by thinking about forms of multilateral support as
proposed by the Secretary-General. The Joint Force’s
logistical support options, as currently conceived by
MINUSMA, must be studied as quickly as possible,
as proposed in the Secretary-General’s report. I am
convinced that that support can be implemented without
altering the capacity of MINUSMA’s peacekeeping
operation. I would therefore like to invite participants
to consider the options openly.
Let us be ambitious, but also pragmatic and
realistic, as is the approach of the Secretary-General’s
report. The key is to get off to a good start and sustain
the initial build-up of the Joint Force. It will be up to
us to then make a progress report with the G-5 Sahel
countries and decide how to develop support based on
the results obtained by our partners on the ground.
However, we must not be found wanting during these
initial stages, which is why we are meeting today to
chart the path we take with the G-5 Sahel countries.
We will have to support the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
17-35058

30/10/2017

Peace and security in Africa

by supporting the planning conference to be held
in Brussels.
Of course, given the threats facing the Sahel, the
answer is not only of a security nature. There can be
no lasting peace without sustainable development.
An additional effort in that area must therefore be
undertaken to stabilize the region. France is fully aware
of that, which is why it is spearheading the Alliance With
the Sahel project, together with Germany, the European
Union, the World Bank, the African Development Bank
and the United Nations Development Programme. The
project aims to achieve significant and swift results in
key development areas, such as youth employability,
agriculture, energy, governance and security. Without a
guarantee of access to education and a brighter future,
we will not be able to prevent many young people
from falling into desperation and into the clutches of
terrorist groups.
Finally, all those efforts require us to fully
implement the peace process in Mali. I appeal again
today to the responsibility of all those concerned. I also
call for the necessary efforts of governance and dialogue
with the communities concerned in the area where the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force will be deployed, especially on
the borders of Mali, the Niger and Burkina Faso.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Sweden.
Ms. Wallström (Sweden): The situation in the Sahel
is a source of increasing concern, as has been stated by
all prior speakers. It has implications not only for the
millions of people facing insecurity and hunger, but
also for the wider region and globally. The root causes
are complex and transboundary. The effects of the
spread of violent extremism, organized crime, climate
change, a worsening human rights situation and weak
institutions are mutually reinforcing. They are having
devastating consequences for the people of the Sahel
and show the limits of traditional peacekeeping. In
response, a combination of short- and long-term efforts
must be applied. Sweden is heavily engaged with its
development cooperation and humanitarian assistance,
as well as its contribution to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and the European Union missions.

S/PV. 8080

Stability in Mali is critical for the Sahel as a
whole. Supporting the full, inclusive and effective
implementation of the peace agreement must remain a
priority, particularly in view of the upcoming elections.
It is our best chance to build sustained peace and
prevent the further spread of instability. The sanctions
regime established pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017)
should be an active tool in our endeavours to achieve
peace and stability in Mali. However, sanctions are not
an end in themselves; they are a means of encouraging
political momentum.
Allow me to dwell for a moment on the issue of
inclusivity. During their recent visit to Mali, members
of the Security Council met with women civil society
representatives. When they were asked whether
they had access to the political leadership in their
country, they responded that they did not only want
access to politicians; rather, they wanted to become
decision-makers in their own right, represented on
equal terms with men. As we discussed on Friday
(see S/PV.8079), women’s representation is not just a
question of fairness; it is a matter of effectiveness and of
increasing the probability of a lasting peace agreement.
However, when you fear leaving your house to fetch
water a few kilometres away, or when your children
are prevented from going to school for years, political
representation seems an abstract goal. That is the reality
in central Mali, as it is in many other places throughout
the Sahel. For me, the interlinkage between security,
human rights and development is evident. Without
security, there can be no development. Without full
respect for human rights, any security effort is doomed
to fail, further alienating the population from the State.
The collective efforts of the countries of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to step up development
efforts and move towards the full operationalization
of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force are therefore truly
commendable. They have our wholehearted support.
Let me to highlight three areas that should guide our
continued engagement with the G-5 Sahel Joint force.
First, the Joint Force is one of many instruments
that make up an integrated, sustainable and regional
approach to the situation in the Sahel. The primacy of
politics should guide that work, and it is essential to
ensure that an overarching political framework for the
Sahel be put in place. We encourage strong engagement
by the African Union, not least in ensuring coordination
with other regional initiatives and frameworks and

17-3505811/32

S/PV.8080

Peace and security in Africa

in ensuring further integration within the African
Union Peace and Security Architecture. This is an
opportunity for the United Nations, the African Union
and the subregion to work as one, together with other
partners such as the European Union.
Secondly, the success of the Joint Force will
depend upon the support of the population. That is
particularly true where terrorist groups are entrenched
within the population, exploiting the absence of State
authority. A solid human rights compliance framework
will therefore be of the utmost importance, not least to
restore trust in State institutions and prevent fuelling
further radicalization and destabilization. The G-5
Sahel countries recognized that need in the concept
of operations for the Joint Force; we must now move
towards the establishment of mechanisms to prevent
and address international human rights law and
international humanitarian law violations and abuses.
It is essential that the activities of the Joint Force
include a gender perspective in planning as well as
in specific protection actions. The Joint Force might
also encounter children associated with armed groups.
Therefore, clear procedures on how to tackle the issue
are needed, including through cooperation with child
protection advisers.
Finally, peace is best pursued in partnership. We
need to ensure that our repeated calls for regional
ownership, expectations from the Force and our
demands for accountability are matched with adequate
resources and support. The suggested options for
support put forward by the Secretary-General illustrate
that many possibilities exist. Predictable and sustainable
United Nations support is vital for the Force to be
able to deliver on its objectives. Sweden stands ready
to explore all models, including those that are most
ambitious. A supportive role from the United Nations
can underpin a stronger political framework, including
through the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel and mutual accountability.
The success of our efforts in the Sahel will be
judged by how we improve the lives of the people who
live there. The G-5 Sahel Joint Force is a welcome
initiative to increase security, complement the
activities of MINUSMA and end the terrorist threat.
It deserves our full support. Accompanied by robust
and meaningful development efforts to address the root
causes of conflict and instability, it offers a chance to
set the region on the path to sustainable peace.
12/32

30/10/2017

Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Secretary-General Guterres and the other briefers for
being here today. I also thank France for its leadership
on the issue and for organizing today’s discussion.
Violent extremism in the Sahel is a growing
problem, and responding to this violence is more
dangerous than ever. We applaud the men and women
of the armed forces of the countries of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We also salute the region’s
partners, particularly France with its long-standing
counter-terror operation. And we thank the brave men
and women serving in the world’s most dangerous
peacekeeping mission, in Mali. All those forces and
missions have lost personnel. Civilians have also been
the victims of violence across the region, including
the tragic attack in Burkina Faso in August. Many
families have lost loved ones — earlier this month,
four members of our special forces and five members
of the Niger army were killed on the Mali-Niger border
while working together as partners to ensure peace in
a threatened region.
But it is not just violent extremism that plagues the
people of the Sahel; crime is also a growing problem.
Historical trade routes across the region provide
an opportunity for some of the worst actors in the
continent. Criminals who traffic in drugs and human
beings seek to profit from the chaos in the Sahel and are
succeeding, to the detriment of human security in West
Africa. During the Security Council’s mission to the
Sahel region last week, we witnessed the dedication to a
brighter future by Government officials, officials from
the Group of Five for the Sahel and members of civil
society and of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. Those men
and women are fighting an expanding threat that is
mobile and resilient and has little respect for life. Their
dedication is not only admirable, but worthy of the
Council’s continued attention and support.
The United States supports the initiative of the G-5
Sahel countries to develop a Joint force and deepen
cooperation, which has the potential to improve security
and complement the efforts of the peacekeeping mission
in Mali. To that end, the United States will continue its
long-standing bilateral support to the security forces of
the members of the G-5 Sahel. We will also continue
to work closely with our partners to help the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force to be effective and well-coordinated with
other counter-terror efforts in the region. The United
States is committed to stabilizing the Sahel region. We
17-35058

30/10/2017

Peace and security in Africa

are proud to announce today that we plan to provide
up to $60 million in bilateral assistance, which we will
work with our Congress to identify, in order to help
stand up the Joint Force.
We understand that the Force will need ongoing
support, and we are eager for opportunities to
work closely with our partners to make this effort a
successful one. However, we believe that the G-5
Sahel Joint Force must be owned first and foremost
by the countries of the region themselves. We expect
that the G-5 Sahel countries will take on full regional
ownership of the Force within a period of three to six
years, with continued United States engagement. That
is the approach that will be most effective in the end to
free the region from terror.
We are inspired by the region’s effort and
intent, but we have reservations about encumbering
a large peacekeeping mission with tasks it would
not traditionally perform. The Mission in Mali has
struggled to reach its full troop authorization. It
continues to suffer from a lack of enabling equipment
and it expends most of its resources protecting and
resupplying itself. Moreover, the Mission is coming
under increasing attack from violent extremists and
shifting operations and locations. For those reasons,
the Mission struggles to execute its strategic objective:
to support the peace process in Mali. Its ability to focus
on its core objective could be further compromised by
a mandate to support a force with a broad concept of
operations and recurring needs. We owe it to the troops,
as well as to those who have lost their lives, to protect
the Mission’s vital resources from further overstretch
and ensure that they are devoted to supporting a
political solution in Mali.
I note that we also have serious and well-known
reservations about using United Nations resources to
support non-United Nations activities. We will each
bring different strengths, insights and resources to bear
on addressing insecurity in the Sahel. We look forward
to discussions with our Security Council colleagues in
the coming days on how best to bring the Force to life.
We know that security alone will not solve the
complex and entrenched challenges in the Sahel, and
we applaud the G-5 Sahel for encompassing aspects of
resilience, governance and infrastructure in addition
to security.
The mass closure of schools and the loss of safety
and opportunity that comes from extremist violence

S/PV. 8080

threaten an entire generation. For many, the temptation
to join the extremists is strong. We cannot abandon the
people of Mali, the Niger, Burkina Faso, Mauritania
and Chad to this fate. A long-term solution must be
found as the G-5 Sahel Joint Force continues to evolve,
and security gains must be consolidated by bringing
good governance.
In Mali, interim authorities in the northern part of
the country need to deliver services to show the local
population that their presence will deliver concrete
improvements for the Malian people. The United
States will continue to work closely with regional
stakeholders and partners to identify the needs of the
Force and tailor our support as effectively as possible.
We look forward to participating actively at the donor
conference in Brussels, which will help the Force move
closer to directly addressing and defeating this threat.
It is important to remember that the fate of the
region is ultimately in the hands of the Governments
in the Sahel. After several difficult months, the
armed groups have reached a long-term ceasefire and
expanded dialogue. These are positive signs, but serious
differences between the Malian Government and the
armed groups continue to challenge the peace process.
The armed groups and the Malian Government must
work together to implement the agreement.
As with all peacekeeping missions, we must see
the Government working with MINUSMA towards
achievable outcomes and a durable political solution.
Real progress here would provide the surest path to
greater security in the region.
In closing, let me reiterate our strong support for
the undertaking of the G-5 countries. We welcome this
regional ownership of security and stabilization in the
Sahel. We will continue to stand with the people of the
region as they take these important steps towards peace
and security.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to thank
the French presidency for bringing once again to the
attention of the Security Council the issue of peace
and security in the Sahel region. Today’s briefing
is a good opportunity to discuss the steps that the
international community can take to respond to the
challenges facing the region, so I would thank you
once again, Mr. President. Our appreciation goes
also to the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres,
for his report on the Joint Force of the Group of Five

17-3505813/32

S/PV.8080

Peace and security in Africa

for the Sahel (S/2017/869) and for his comprehensive
presentation today.
Ukraine is extremely concerned by the rapidly
deteriorating security situation in the Sahel region. The
crisis in Mali in 2012 created a State authority vacuum
in the central and northern parts of the country that
was subsequently filled by violent extremist groups
associated with Al-Qaida, Da’esh and other terrorist
entities. Weak governance, poverty and the influx of
weapons and armed combatants created an environment
conducive to the spread of radical extremism and
terrorism to neighbouring countries, in particular those
sharing common borders with Mali.
The terrorist attack in Ouagadougou in August,
a spate of attacks against the the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) in September and other recent
militant strikes in the region show that the threat of
terrorism continues to loom over most of the Sahel.
This is a vivid example of how a regional spillover
of violence is becoming a threat to global peace
and security.
In this regard, Ukraine welcomed the decision of
the States members of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5) to create a joint force tasked with combating
violent extremism and terrorism within their borders.
We could not agree more with the Secretary-General
that the establishment of the Joint Force represents an
opportunity that cannot be missed.
During a field mission to Mali, Burkina Faso and
Mauritania earlier this month, organized in a timely
manner by France and co-led by Italy and Ethiopia, the
Security Council had a chance to garner insight into
the realities of the situation on the ground and the state
of operationalization of the Joint Force.
Given the limited resources of the participating
countries, the progress made so far has been impressive.
I refer in particular to the development of the concept
of operations and steps to attain initial operational
capability of Force headquarters in Sévaré and the
command post in Niamey.
However, much more remains to be accomplished.
It is important now that the G-5 Sahel member States
maintain a strong commitment to their initiative
and continue working towards the goal set with the
support of bilateral partners, the Council and the wider
international community.
14/32

30/10/2017

As has already been noted in this Chamber, reaching
full operational capability will require significant
technical and financial resources. While recognizing
the primary responsibility of the G-5 Sahel countries,
we believe that it is crucial that international partners
provide a helping hand to address the equipment and
financial needs of the Joint Force. In this context, the
donor conference scheduled for December in Brussels
is an important initiative. We commend the SecretaryGeneral for his readiness to get involved personally to
mobilize the resources needed.
Ukraine also believes that, in its turn, the United
Nations can play a role in supporting the Joint Force.
The four options for support set out in the SecretaryGeneral’s report are worthy of in-depth consideration.
It is our view that MINUSMA can provide valuable
targeted assistance to the Force. It is clear that
the Mission’s mandate will have to be adjusted
accordingly. However, any expansion of MINUSMA
operations should not come at the expense of the
Mission’s ability to implement its primary mandate.
Nor should we forget that there are still significant gaps
in the Mission’s capabilities that prevent it from fully
reaching its potential.
This leads me to my last, and perhaps most
important, point: the need to address the root causes of
the crisis and instability in the Sahel. We are convinced
that the Joint Force, once fully operationalized, will
still constitute only one part of the required broader
strategy. The full and unconditional implementation
of the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali is another crucial piece of the regional puzzle
on how to restore peace and stability in Mali and the
Sahel, as well as contain and eliminate any spillover
effects of the internal struggle in the country.
The signatory parties should redouble their efforts
to complete the operationalization of the interim
administrations in the north and to engage in inclusive
national consultations in the light of the upcoming
constitutional review and referendum. The ultimate
goal of these efforts should be the comprehensive reform
of national institutions, which will help to bring real
peace dividends to the people of Mali and to contribute
to curbing instability in neighbouring countries.
In this regard, we believe that resolution 2374 (2017)
remains an important tool for achieving change in the
behaviour of the signatory parties and for encouraging
them to be more proactive in advancing peace in Mali.
17-35058

30/10/2017

Peace and security in Africa

Let us be clear. If we want to achieve a sustainable
peace and stability in the region, there must be greater
investment in socioeconomic development. Without
functioning Government structures, without the
provision of essential social services, without working
law enforcement or a judiciary, without active State
support for local businesses and trade initiatives,
vulnerable communities in conflict-affected and
Government-neglected areas will remain an easy
target for terrorists and extremists. Thus, initiatives
on fighting terrorism; bringing about economic
development; and ensuring respect for human rights,
including the active promotion and protection of the
rights of women and children, must go hand in hand
and complement one another.
Lastly, I wish to echo the Secretary-General’s call
for the deployment of the Joint Force to be kept on the
radar of the Security Council and for the Council to
stand ready to take additional measures if necessary.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
Minister of State for the Commonwealth and the United
Nations of the United Kingdom.
Baron Ahmad (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s debate.
Your country deserves great credit for your leadership
and your steadfast support for the countries of the
Sahel. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
Foreign Minister of Mali Abdoulaye Diop, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission Moussa Faki
Mahamat and European Union Special Representative
for the Sahel Angel Losada Fernández. We welcome
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/869) and today’s
briefing on the activities of the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
During the recent Security Council visit, all
Council members saw the serious challenges facing
the countries of the Sahel. Those challenges represent
a serious danger to the people of the region and to
partners and allies who are working to support them.
I want to begin by offering my condolences to all
those so tragically killed, including, most recently,
three United Nations peacekeepers from Chad in
Northern Mali on Thursday. In the past 12 months, we
have witnessed a continuing stream of deadly terrorist
attacks resulting in the tragic loss of innocent lives; an
increase in attacks against forces of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA); the ongoing corrosive influence

S/PV. 8080

of organized criminals trafficking weapons, drugs and
people across the region; and the desperate journey of
migrants, so often intercepted by people traffickers
seeking to exploit them.
We all have a role to play in addressing those
challenges. The United Kingdom have supported
projects across the Sahel and the wider region,
particularly in Nigeria and the Lake Chad basin.
Last year alone, the British army trained 22,000
Nigerian troops in counter-terrorism tactics. We have
invested over $6 million in tackling modern slavery,
and $2.5 million in a joint border task force with the
Nigerian army. We also provide training for Nigerian
anti-trafficking officers. Across the Sahel, the United
Kingdom spent over $225 million on humanitarian and
development projects last year, and we are providing
human rights training to Malian troops through the
European Union Training Mission in Mali.
Our national crime agency recently dismantled
two people-smuggling rings in Mali, and we stand
ready to do more to support the G-5 Sahel countries
and their allies to improve the security situation. The
establishment of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force is a step
forward in countering terrorism and illegal migration.
We were pleased that the Council offered its political
support to the Mission earlier this year. For its part,
the United Kingdom is currently undertaking a scoping
mission to see what more it can do in the Sahel,
including potential bilateral support to the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force.
Funding is an important factor in determining a
mission’s success, which is why we were pleased to
support the European Union commitment to provide
€15 million to the Joint Force. We welcome the work
undertaken to establish the G-5 Joint Force. I was
encouraged by reports from my Ambassador following
his visit to the region.
We recognize the challenges faced by the Force and
the value of tackling terrorists and traffickers with a
holistic approach right across the region — in particular
ensuring there is a clear plan to deliver services
alongside security. If security gains are to take root,
work must also continue to develop robust frameworks
for compliance with human rights and international
humanitarian law. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
support and his proposals for potential United Nations
support. We are studying them in detail and considering
the complementary roles that bilateral and multilateral

17-3505815/32

S/PV.8080

Peace and security in Africa

support can play in the Sahel region. We must ensure
that MINUSMA is able to deliver its current mandate
effectively and efficiently.
More than 140 brave MINUSMA peacekeepers have
given their lives for the people of Mali. They and the
G-5 Sashel forces operate in one of the most dangerous
places in the world, and I pay tribute to them. I call
upon the Government of Mali and other parties to the
peace process to show the same courage, commitment
and resolve to bring unity to the country. A successful
peace process is at the heart of any strategy to defeat
terrorism and traffickers in the Sahel. We in the Council
expect a redoubling of efforts for peace and to see the
political will to overcome the remaining obstacles.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom remains
committed to peace and security across the Sahel.
To that end, I reiterate our strong support for the G-5
Sahel Joint Force, which I sincerely believe can make
an important contribution to achieving that goal.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We appreciate the French
presidency for organizing this ministerial-level
meeting on the situation in the States of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We very much appreciate
the presence among us of the French Minister and
his presiding over the meeting. We also welcome the
participation of other ministers at the meeting.
This meeting could not be more timely or relevant,
coming as it does after the Security Council mission to
the G-5 Sahel region. The visit has certainly helped the
Council have a far more comprehensive understanding
of the enormity of the challenges faced by the G-5
Sahel countries and reinforced the appreciation of the
need to fully and speedily operationalize Joint Force,
with the support of the international community. We
welcome the report (S/2017/869) of the SecretaryGeneral pursuant to resolution to 2359 (2017) on the
activities of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, including on its
operationalization, on challenges encountered and on
options concerning possible United Nations support for
the Force. We wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report, for today’s briefing and for his demonstrated
efforts to try to address the challenges facing the Sahel
region as a matter of priority. No doubt, his commitment
in that regard is partly the result of the conviction that
what happens in the G-5 Sahel region has broader and
global implications.
I must stress that there is a full convergence of
views on the matter with the Chairperson of the African
16/32

30/10/2017

Union Commission. Of course, we are very pleased
to have Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat with us
via video-teleconference during this very important
occasion and to listen to his views on the challenges
faced by the G-5 Sahel countries, We appreciate his
leadership and commitment to supporting the Sahel
region within the framework of the African Union
Peace and Security Architecture.
We are also very pleased to see Minister Abdoulaye
Diop of Mali, the rotating Chair of the G-5 Sahel, who
only a few days ago welcomed us in Bamako. We also
wish to welcome his colleagues, the other ministers of
the G-5 Sahel member States. I must acknowledge with
thanks the hospitality we enjoyed it in Mauritania and
Burkina Faso.
The G-5 Sahel countries have demonstrated their
commitment to fighting terrorism and transnational
organized crime by mobilizing their forces and
allocating their limited resources. We take note of
the efforts that they have made to fully operationalize
their Joint Forces, but we recognize the enormous
constraints they face in doing so. The challenges and
threats to peace and security in the Sahel region are
not only a matter of concern to the G-5 Sahel countries,
but has broader implications for international peace
and security. It is not very difficult to imagine the
consequences if we fail to address the situation in
the region by assisting the efforts of the G-5 Sahel
countries, and we cannot agree more with what the
Secretary-General said in that regard.
That is why we believe there is an urgent need to
mobilize international support for the G-5 Sahel. In
that regard, we note the commitments made by some
bilateral and multilateral partners in financing the
Joint Force. We appreciate the efforts by France and
Germany to mobilize additional support by hosting
planning meetings in support of the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force, and welcome the pledge made by European
Union member States to provide various forms of
technical and logistical support. However, what has so
far been pledged falls far short of what is required to
cover the preliminary budget required to sustain the
Force for one year, as indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General. We look forward to the holding
of the Brussels donor conference in December, in
line with resolution 2359 (2017), which we hope will
contribute to mobilizing additional support for the G-5
Sahel countries.
17-35058

30/10/2017

Peace and security in Africa

We commend the Secretary-General for his
commitment to be personally involved in the resource
mobilization endeavour, and welcome the various
options that he has proposed for possible United
Nations support to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. It is indeed
vital that the Council support this important regional
initiative, which adds greater significance to the fight
against terrorism and transnational organized crime.
After having visited the countries in the region
and witnessing firsthand the multiple and complex
challenges they are facing, the importance and
urgency of the matter cannot be overemphasized. We
therefore hope the Council will seriously consider the
options proposed by the Secretary-General, which
were developed by drawing lessons from previous
experiences, and make appropriate decisions soon.
The Security Council should be ambitious, as the
Secretary-General said earlier. We fully agree with
the Secretary-General on the complementarity of the
Joint Force and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
with proposed options for support to the Joint Force
also benefitting the work of MINUSMA. We also
agree with him on the need to ensure cooperation
and interoperability of the Joint Force with other
operations and frameworks, including the African
Union-led, Nouakchott process, Operation Barkhane
and MINUSMA. Overall, the close coordination of
the G-5 Sahel countries with other regional actors, the
African Union and the United Nations, as well as the
support of other bilateral and multilateral partners, is
key to the success of the Force.
The multifaceted challenges facing the Sahel region,
as stressed in the Secretary-General’s report, can be
effectively addressed only through a comprehensive
strategy that0 encompasses security, governance,
development, human rights and humanitarian issues.
Therefore, the rapid and effective implementation of
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, as
called for in resolution 2359 (2017), is absolutely critical.
We hope that countries of the region, in cooperation
with bilateral and multilateral partners, will redouble
their efforts in implementing the Strategy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): I would like to
begin by thanking the French presidency for its briefing,
which furthers a conversation that the Security Council
has been holding on the Sahel in recent months, as well
for the initiative of visiting the Sahel region. I would

S/PV. 8080

also like to thank the four briefers for their respective
contributions to our debate.
I will turn first to the critical situation in which the
Sahel currently finds itself. The security threats, which
flow from terrorism and illegal trafficking and which
coincide with a fragile political development context,
jeopardize the peace and security of the entire Sahel
region and the future of that region of the world. This is
a concern shared by the entire international community,
as attested to this morning by the speakers at this
table. Italy shares those concerns, both as a member
of the Security Council and the European Union and
as a country that is focused on, and connected to, the
Mediterranean, where the transregional dimension of
instability in the Sahel reveals its tragic magnitude
and pushes us to strengthen our relationship with the
countries of the region.
The response of the countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), which aims to counter
terrorism, trafficking in drugs and human beings
through the establishment of a Joint Force, has the full
political support of the Council and of the international
community. The Council’s visit to the region a few
days ago confirmed the shared commitment of the G-5
Sahel countries to take ownership of their problems,
the progress made in recent months in setting up the
Joint Force, and what remains to be done for the full
realization of this initiative.
Therefore, the question before us today is how
we can support the Joint Force to enable it to fulfil its
mandate. The Secretary-General provides us with four
options in his report (S/2017/869), which the Security
Council should address with the same courage and
ambition that was evident in their development. We
believe that the Security Council, in addition to any
collegial choices that it may make, must be driven
by its moral responsibility to provide, as soon as
possible, predictable support to the Force, based on the
fulfilment of certain conditions that the G-5 countries
will be called upon to fulfil, such as ensuring respect
for human rights.
Against that backdrop, we must work together to
further increase the effectiveness of the concept of
operations, the coherence between the military strategy
and the development and stabilization strategy, the
equipment and the financial viability of the Force in
order to clearly identify the obligations of every actor

17-3505817/32

S/PV.8080

Peace and security in Africa

with a view to cooperation that develops along a defined
and progressive path.
The added valued of multilateral support, which
is the only way to ensure a coherent, coordinated and
consistent framework for intervention, must also include
the important potential of bilateral contributions,
especially in view of the donors conference to be held
in Brussels in December.
It is clear that the security response embodied
in the G-5 Sahel initiative to create a credible peace
and security architecture should be combined with
development initiatives at national and regional
levels. The Secretary-General recalls in his report
his determination to revitalize the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. We would like
to express our full support for such revitalization,
which could lead to the strengthening of international
coordination and integration of the various initiatives
that are being carried out in the Sahel region.
The only credible way to ensure lasting peace and
stability in the Sahel is by tackling the root causes
of instability through measures that are capable of
addressing the transregional challenges affecting
the region. We support such an approach within the
European Union. In that regard, I would like to mention
the migration trust fund initiative, which combines
addressing the deep-rooted causes of the migration
phenomenon with a regional perspective.
The Sahel is not only a challenge for the United
Nations, but also an opportunity. Over the coming
months, we will be in a position to assess, first, the
ability of peacekeeping to address new challenges;
secondly, the success of the United Nations in developing
coherent and coordinated regional strategies with other
initiatives at the local level; and, thirdly, the capacity
for integration and cooperation among the United
Nations and the peace and security initiatives led by
African countries. On the latter point, the international
community, and in particular the United Nations, which
bears responsibility for peacekeeping, must not shy
away from investing both politically and financially in
effective and long-term African ownership.
Italy is ready to play its part in these endeavours, as
well as through its upcoming presidency of the Security
Council in November, following France, during which
time we are ready to continue our deliberations on the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force and on the Sahel as a region writ
large. During our presidency, we intend to hold an open
18/32

30/10/2017

debate on security challenges in the Mediterranean,
which is a subject that I have already alluded to and is
deeply intertwined with what is happening in the Sahel.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are happy to see you, Mr. President,
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council.
We would like to thank Secretary-General Guterres;
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali, Mr. Diop;
Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat; and European Union Special
Representative for the Sahel, Mr. Losada Fernández,
for their detailed briefings. We also welcome to the
Chamber the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Burkina
Faso, Chad, Mauritania and the Niger.
We are concerned about the situation in the SaheloSaharan region. In spite of the efforts that have been
made, terrorism — and as we were informed by our
interlocutors during the Security Council’s recent visit
to the region, I emphasize that I mean terrorism, not
extremism — remains a very serious threat to security
and stability in that part of the African continent. On
top of that, there are also transnational issues that have
destabilizing effects, such as drug trafficking, the illegal
arms trade, the smuggling of various goods, separatist
tendencies, acute internal conflicts and complex
humanitarian and socioeconomic circumstances.
The situation in the Sahel is a reminder of
the destructive nature of frankly reckless outside
interference by force in the internal affairs of sovereign
States. It is worth recalling, as we have often done,
that the regime-change operation in Libya, which was
done in violation of international law and the relevant
decisions of the Security Council, has been a catalyst for
instability in the region. We welcome the establishment
by the countries of the region of the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to combat the
terrorist threat, which was unanimously endorsed in
resolution 2359 (2017). We believe that the Joint Force
is an appropriate response to regional issues along the
lines of the principle of African solutions to African
problems, which in our view is the only way to achieve
sustainable peace in Africa. The Joint Force will help
to address a whole range of tasks, not only counterterrorism efforts but also the work of eliminating the
transborder criminal groups that are the terrorists’
allies.
We support the Joint Force’s operational deployment
on the ground and its participants’ determination
17-35058

30/10/2017

Peace and security in Africa

to achieve that as soon as possible, and urge them to
strengthen their collaboration on that. However, going
on the conclusions of the Security Council mission to the
Sahelo-Saharan region, it appears that the countries of
the G-5 Sahel are deploying their contingents at varying
speeds and that some are falling behind. In that regard,
I would like to underscore that only a genuine joint and
coordinated effort on the part of all members of the G-5
Sahel can have effective results. The members of the
G-5 Sahel need and deserve support in responding to
the challenges they face. We believe it is vital that the
international community give them support.
We should carefully consider the options that the
Secretary-General proposes in his report on resolution
2359 (2017) (S/2017/869) with regard to United Nations
involvement in such efforts. However, we believe it
will also be important to consider gradually expanding
United Nations cooperation, based on the fourth option,
especially since the mandates of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the countries of the G-5 Sahel coincide
where providing support to the Government of Mali
and restoring its authority throughout the country are
concerned. But there are a lot of problems that will have
to be solved in that regard, so it would not be a good
idea to get ahead of ourselves until the tasks mandated
by the Security Council are fulfilled.
It is still quite clear that, in order to achieve longterm security, development and stability in the region,
besides enhancing counter-terrorism measures, State
institutions will have to be strengthened to ensure
systemic economic and social development and
universal respect for human rights and the rule of
law. In that regard, we enthusiastically commend the
programmes for developing remote regions that have
been adopted by the Governments of Burkina Faso
and Mauritania.
We believe that the foundation for making progress
in the areas we have mentioned is the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, which has not yet been
exploited to its full potential. It will be essential to get
more out of the Strategy’s existing mechanisms and to
involve the countries of the Sahelo-Saharan region and
of Africa as a whole in it as much as possible, with an
emphasis on relevant steps to be taken by the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States and the G-5 Sahel itself. The views of regional
partners should be a top priority in that process.

S/PV. 8080

In conclusion, we would like to point out that in an
age of globalization, terrorism, too, has become global.
We can eradicate its threat only by uniting in the
broadest possible front, which Russia has been calling
for for a long time. Furthermore, my country has begun
providing support to the security forces of a number of
countries of the Sahel and will continue to do so. After
all, the effectiveness of the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel
will ultimately depend on improving the potential of its
national armed forces.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal is pleased to see you, Sir,
presiding in person over today’s briefing on the report
of the Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (S/2017/869), only a few
days after the Security Council’s mission to the region.
We also welcome the presence and participation
of the delegation of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), led by Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali,
accompanied by his colleagues from Chad, the Niger,
Mauritania and Burkina Faso.
The fact that the issue of peace and security in
Africa is on the agenda of the French presidency of the
Security Council in October is another illustration of the
special importance that France attaches to stability on
the African continent. France’s ongoing commitment to
supporting African countries in their efforts to combat
terrorism and promote development is commendable
and deserves our thanks. I would also like to welcome
the participation in today’s meeting of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson
of the African Commission, and Mr. Angel Losada
Fernández, European Union Special Representative for
the Sahel.
I will spare the Council the details of the volatile
situation in the region, since the briefers I just
mentioned have already provided them in plenty. I
would simply like to add that what the members of the
Security Council saw, heard and reported following
our mission to the Sahel, along with the briefings we
have heard today, has confirmed our belief that only
a comprehensive response, backed by united, wellcoordinated efforts can put an end to the multifaceted
threats that continue to undermine the very foundations
of security and stability in the entire West African
region of the Sahel and its member States.

17-3505819/32

S/PV.8080

Peace and security in Africa

Senegal therefore emphasizes that, given the
transborder and transregional nature of this threat,
only by strengthening regional cooperation and
streamlining our efforts can we address the challenge.
Indeed, the G-5 Sahel countries have committed to
that goal by establishing a Joint Force to better combat
the terrorist and other criminal armed groups in the
Sahel region. We welcome that initiative, as it fits
squarely into the broader scheme that is gradually
being implemented throughout the Sahelo-Saharan
region to halt the propagation and spread of terrorism
and stamp out a scourge that undermines every effort to
build sustainable development and peaceful societies.
We should also consider the G-5 Sahel Joint Force’s
complementarity with the Multinational Joint Task
Force in the Lake Chad basin, of which both the Niger
and Chad are members, as well as France’s Operation
Barkhane and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
as they all work together to combat the negative
effects of the conflict in Libya and the proliferation of
foreign terrorist fighters in the region, not to mention
the various types of trafficking — in arms, drugs and
cultural assets — and the smuggling of migrants.
All of these reasons should encourage resolute
international support for the operationalization of the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force, and all the more so because
it has not been conceived as a miracle cure for all
the problems threatening the region but as playing
a decisive additional part in the international and
regional efforts already under way. As the SecretaryGeneral makes clear in his report, the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force’s efforts will complement those of MINUSMA,
Operation Barkhane and Member States’ national
forces, as well as other initiatives in the region.
As part of the effort to strengthen Africa’s Peace
and Security Architecture, the African Union, which
has already given its blessing to the Joint Force,
should continue to play a central role in coordinating
and aligning the various subregional, regional, and
even international, efforts and initiatives. Ensuring
multidimensional support on the part of the international
community is exactly in tune with resolution 2378
(2017), which the Security Council adopted this year.
While the G-5 Sahel countries are chiefly responsible
for financing and equipping the Joint Force, it is a
fact that political, financial and operational support
from the United Nations and bilateral and multilateral
partners will be essential to enable it to reach full
20/32

30/10/2017

operating capability between now and March 2018, as
established in its concept of operations.
For all of those reasons, Senegal supports the G-5
Sahel initiative, as President Macky Sall explained in
this Chamber on 20 September (see S/PV.8051) at the
Security Council meeting on peacekeeping operations
in Africa during Egypt’s presidency, as well as more
recently in Dakar during the State visit by President
Roch Marc Christian Kaboré of Burkina Faso. That is
because of the common destiny that links Senegal and
the G-5 Sahel countries, with which we share the same
space, the same aspirations and the same fight, as well
as extensive borders.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to sincerely thank the SecretaryGeneral for his valuable briefing, his comprehensive
and excellent report (S/2017/869) and the various
and ambitious options he has put forward. I would
also like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Mali in his capacity as Chair of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission and the European
Union Special Representative for the Sahel for their
informative briefings. And I thank France, presiding
over the Security Council for the month of October,
for convening today’s meeting and organizing the
Council’s recent visit to a number of countries of the
Sahel, which has helped to shed light on the challenges
they are facing and the assistance they need from the
international community at this critical juncture.
The Sahel is dealing with a number of security and
development challenges with regional and international
repercussions. The inadequate border controls of the
countries of the region have enabled illegal trafficking
to flourish, including trafficking in drugs and persons,
and the area has become a safe haven for terrorist groups.
In the absence of State development initiatives, disputes
over resources have led to a further deterioration of
the security situation. A number of extremist groups
have begun to organize, propagating their extremist
ideologies and imposing them on citizens, and as a
result many young people have resorted to fleeing as
migrants or refugees.
The Security Council has a legal and moral
obligation to provide support and assistance to the
countries of the Sahel in order to restore stability and
security. Many of the challenges they are dealing with
are new, the direct result of the changing regional
17-35058

30/10/2017

Peace and security in Africa

environment, especially in Libya. The crisis in the
Sahel and its reverberations will not remain confined
to the region, or even to the African continent, but are
an immediate and clear threat to international peace
and security. The initiative of the countries of the G-5
Sahel to create the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel is the best possible way of dealing with
regional security challenges, being in the long term the
most sustainable and least costly option financially,
militarily and in terms of human resources. In that
regard, I would like to stress that regional ownership
does not obviate the importance of providing financial
and logistical support, whether through the United
Nations or bilaterally. A security-focused approach
alone will not guarantee sustainable peace in the Sahel.
That is why the G-5 Sahel countries need development
support, as a first step towards a balanced partnership
among the States of the region based on mutual respect,
transparency and open dialogue, which would enable us
to listen to the concerns of the countries involved and
understand their needs, with a view to improving their
technical capacity, supporting sustainable development
and promoting good governance and the rule of law.
During the Council’s recent visit to the Sahel,
we acknowledged the importance of addressing the
root causes of the crisis, whether social, economic,
development or climate-related, by demonstrating the
political will needed to implement — as quickly and
urgently as possible — the programmes and activities
of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel, adopted by the Council in 2013. The Integrated
Strategy is a comprehensive framework for preventing
further crises in the region, as well as contributing to
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and, through that, to durable and lasting
peace. In that regard, Egypt looks forward to the results
of the Secretariat’s mapping exercise on the support
to be provided for implementing the Strategy in the
near future.

S/PV. 8080

which the international community can support the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel). We thank Secretary-General António Guterres;
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission; Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
Mali; and Mr. Angel Losada Fernández, European
Union Special Representative for the Sahel, for their
insightful briefings.
I would first like to express our deepest
condolences to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the Governments of Mali, the Niger, Chad and the
United States on the tragic deaths of their troops in the
recent terrorist attacks in Mali and the Niger. We salute
the bravery of the personnel of MINUSMA for their
selfless service in the cause of peace in one of the most
dangerous places in the world.
The security situation in the Sahel continues to
deteriorate as a result of the threats posed by Ansar
Eddine, the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara, and
other terrorist and violent extremist groups. The
insecurity is aggravated by their alliances with groups
involved in transnational organized crime, drug
and human trafficking and arms proliferation from
neighbouring Libya. We firmly believe that deploying
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force will help to reinforce the
efforts of MINUSMA, the Malian national security
forces and other operations in the region, such as
France’s Operation Barkhane, to bring peace and
stability to the Sahel.

In conclusion, Egypt will spare no effort in
supporting our brothers in the G-5 Sahel, whether
through our contribution to dialogue in the Council
on the situation in Mali and the Sahel, or through
our bilateral and regional cooperation programmes,
which we always develop in consultation with the G-5
Sahel countries.

During the Council’s recent field mission there, we
were pleased to see how determined the leadership of
the G-5 Sahel is to overcome these challenges to their
security. We therefore welcome the official opening on
9 September of the Joint Force’s headquarters in Sévaré
and look forward to its full operationalization by March
2018. Its effectiveness will depend on predictable
and steady funding, as well as the political support
of other regional actors. We therefore commend the
financial support that the European Union and France
have provided and hope that others will also make
major pledges at the donor conference in Brussels
in December so as to bridge the funding gap, which
currently stands at more than €300 million.

Mr. Ali (Kazakhstan): We thank Mr. Jean-Yves
Le Drian, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs
of France, for this opportunity to discuss the ways in

We
welcome
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations in his report (S/2017/869) regarding
four possible options for supporting the Force, and

17-3505821/32

S/PV.8080

Peace and security in Africa

echo his appeal to the Security Council that any action
taken should be ambitious. We should also ensure the
complementarity and improve the coordination of the
Joint Force’s operations with all security forces in the
region, including MINUSMA, Operation Barkhane,
the Multinational Joint Task Force for the Lake Chad
basin and regional frameworks, particularly the
African Union-led Nouakchott proces, designed to
enhance security cooperation and operationalize the
African Peace and Security Architecture in the SaheloSaharan region.
However, we realize that a military approach alone
will not address the instability in the region, which
is the result of an accumulation of problems of which
violent extremism is only the most recent layer. It will
be vital to focus on the root causes of the conflict
and instability by strengthening local governance,
reducing poverty and tribal rivalries, providing basic
services, creating more jobs and mitigating the effects
of climate change. We therefore need a comprehensive
subregional approach aimed at building resilience
in the region’s human and environmental systems
and increasing peace and prosperity. In that regard,
the effective implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, with increased
investments in sustainable development, climate
mitigation and development, can help us to achieve the
goals I have discussed. Concerted efforts to promote a
strong disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
policy, address impunity and corruption, advance
structural reforms in security, justice and the rule of
law and foster human rights are also vital. Peace will
also be more durable when women and young people
are fully integrated into all activities at every stage of
the peace process and are at the negotiating table at the
highest levels.
In addition, initiatives such as the G-5 Sahel
countries’ regional development strategy, the Alliance
for the Sahel — a joint initiative of France, Germany
and the European Union — and others will help to
enhance the Strategy’s mandate. Successful results at
the international investment forum in Mali scheduled
for 7 December will help to boost the region’s social
and economic emergence and development. However,
none of that will happen without concrete progress
in the Malian peace process. We hope that the
operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force will
improve the implementation of the 2015 Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, including the
22/32

30/10/2017

operationalization of the interim authorities in northern
Mali. However, that can succeed only if all stakeholders
work together and stick to a clearly formulated vision
and process, as well as realistic timelines.
My delegation therefore supported the Council’s
adoption of resolution 2374 (2017), which establishes
a sanctions regime on Mali, since we believe it will
send a strong message to the parties to change their
approach and implement the Agreement. In conclusion,
Kazakhstan remains committed to helping the countries
of the Sahel fulfil their vision for peace, progress
and prosperity.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes Mr. Le Drian, Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs, as he presides over today’s meeting in New
York, as well as Foreign Minister Diop. We would also
like to thank the Secretary-General, the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the European
Union Special Representative for their briefings.
The Sahel region is currently facing multiple
challenges, including a fragile security situation,
spreading terrorism and an increasingly serious
incidence of transnational organized crime, all of which
will require a greater contribution and comprehensive
policies and strategies on the part of the international
community. That is the background on which the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) has
been established to bring a combined response to bear
on the G-5 Sahel’s regional security challenges. China
commends that initiative and would like to make the
following comments.
First, the Joint Force should receive effective
assistance and support from the international
community. It represents an important embodiment
of African countries’ self-empowerment, solidarity,
cooperation and coordination and should make a
significant contribution to peace and stability in
Africa, and in the world generally. The Security
Council welcomed the Joint Force in its unanimous
adoption of resolution 2359 (2017). The international
community should fully respect Africa’s ownership of
its issues and enable it to play a leading role in solving
them. It should support the efforts of the countries of
the region and regional organizations to maintain peace
and stability in the Sahel and provide assistance to the
Joint Force, especially financially.
Secondly, greater efforts must be made to push
for a political solution to the hotspot issues in the
17-35058

30/10/2017

Peace and security in Africa

region. The international community should respect
the sovereignty of the countries concerned and give
them active support, advance the peace process and
promote national reconciliation so as to defuse tensions
on the major issues and lead to their final settlement.
We should support the accelerated implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
give particular attention to external issues such as
the Libyan crisis that can have a spillover effect and
reduce the negative impact of external factors on the
Sahel region.
Thirdly, we must step up our contributions to
counter-terrorism cooperation in the Sahel. The relevant
counter-terrorism agencies of the United Nations
should work to improve cooperation in this area among
the countries of the region, while the international
community should help them to build their security
capacity and support their counter-terrorism efforts.
Terrorism is the common enemy of humankind, and it
is vital to fight it whenever, wherever and in whatever
forms it appears. All States should adhere to the same
norms and work to fight all groups that the Security
Council designates as terrorist. In our international
counter-terrorism cooperative efforts and operations
we must ensure that the Council in particular, and the
United Nations in general, play a leading role, in line
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and with the internationally recognized
norms governing international relations, with a view to
strengthening effective coordination.
We should recognize the importance of regional
cooperation and ensure that regional and subregional
organizations play their due part. China acknowledges
the positive roles that the Group of Five for the Sahel,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States are playing in the efforts to resolve
the issues in the Sahel. The international community
should strengthen its coordination and communication
with countries in the region, as well as the relevant
regional and subregional organizations, in order to
closely align country-specific and regional strategies,
as well as the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, thereby enabling all actors to play to their
respective strengths and form synergies.
As a permanent member of the Security Council
and a developing country itself, China has always
supported African countries in solving African issues
in their own ways. We support the specific roles of
regional organizations in addressing African matters.

S/PV. 8080

China is of the view that supporting Africa’s efforts
to achieve peace, stability and development is in the
common interests of all of us, all over the world. It is
also the common responsibility of the international
community. China supports the efforts made by
African regional and subregional organizations,
including the G-5 Sahel. We have already approved
a China-United Nations peace and development fund
aimed at supporting counter-terrorism cooperation
projects for the Sahel. China will continue to work with
its international partners to step up its contribution to
peace and sustainable development in the Sahel and the
whole of Africa.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Sir, for convening
today’s important meeting. I also thank today’s briefers
for their insightful and powerful statements, as well
as the leaders of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) for their initiative and commitment. I especially
appreciate the presence here today of His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali, and his participation
in today’s discussion.
Japan thanks the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2017/869), issued in accordance with resolution
2359 (2017). We look forward to participating actively
in discussions on possible United Nations support
to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel,
recommendations for which were presented in the
report. Today I would like to point out that such
discussions should take into account all aspects of the
situation, including broader societal transformations,
which the G-5 Sahel Joint Force is meant to support.
Lasting security in the Sahel is ultimately a
function of political, social and economic development.
That was clear during the Council’s recent mission to
the Sahel, which focused on the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
the political foundation for our current and future
work on Mali and the other G-5 Sahel States. That is
in line with the emphasis of resolution 2359 (2017) on
pursuing counter-terrorism efforts in the region with
a view to supporting the Peace Agreement. Indeed,
throughout the year, we have reaffirmed that the
nexus between peace and security and humanitarian
concerns and development requires an integrated and
preventive response.
The Sahel is facing a growing threat. Japan
commends the efforts by the G-5 Sahel States and

17-3505823/32

S/PV.8080

Peace and security in Africa

France to counter terrorism. We also believe that
preventive efforts will be needed to mitigate the
threat in the future. As the Council observed during
its mission, security-focused and short-term measures
alone will not bring about lasting stability. We need
a sharper focus on addressing the root causes of the
conflicts that bedevil Sahel countries in both crossborder and local contexts. By that I mean chronic
underdevelopment, inadequate local governance and
State institutions and a lack of education and job
opportunities, particularly for young people, all of
which open the door to exploitation by terrorist groups
and organized crime. The Secretary-General’s report,
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel,
the African Union Strategy for the Sahel Region, and
the Peacebuilding Commission all identify the same
problems. In essence, human security is at stake.
Addressing these root causes in a comprehensive
manner is at the core of conflict prevention and
sustaining peace. That is not easy and it takes time,
but there are no shortcuts to this approach. As the
Secretary-General has noted, the Joint Force must
be paired with deeper reflection on development and
institutions. With those principles in mind, Japan has
provided approximately $1.3 billion in development and
humanitarian assistance to the Sahel since 2013, both
bilaterally and multilaterally, within the framework
of the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development. Those efforts promote development and
security institutions, thereby weakening the influence
of terrorist and criminal groups. They include activities
as diverse as supporting laws on migrant smuggling
in the Niger and terrorist financing in Burkina Faso,
developing human rights-compliant criminal justice
responses to terrorism in Chad and enhancing border
controls in Mauritania and Mali.
We would particularly like to highlight the
International Ministerial Conference on Border
Management and Border Communities in the Sahel,
convened in March 2016 under the auspices of the
G-5 Sahel States with the support of United Nations
Development Programme and Japan. The Conference
resulted in the Bamako declaration, in which the G-5
Sahel States called for development-focused efforts in
border communities, with particular emphasis on young
people and conflict prevention. The G-5 Sahel States
will continue to need international and United Nations
support in order to implement those development
priorities and enhance social cohesion and community
24/32

30/10/2017

security, particularly in border communities. In the
short term, the Joint Force will focus on combating
terrorism and organized crime, and we appreciate
its important work. At the same time, its operations
must ultimately contribute to long-term solutions in
the Sahel.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for your
initiative and your presence here today to preside over
our meeting.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Guterres; Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mali, in his capacity as Chair of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel); Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission; and Mr. Angel Losada Fernández,
European Union Special Representative for the Sahel,
for their briefings.
Uruguay has been very involved in the complex
problems on the African agenda and once again
underscores the commendable initiative of the
countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel to form a
multinational Joint Force to fight terrorism, in a clear
example of taking national ownership in the face of
the multiple challenges confronting the region. The
terrorist threat in the Sahel region knows no political
borders, and we should not lose sight of the fact that
the challenges that those countries are facing are
factors that affect stability at both the regional and the
international levels.
My delegation has repeatedly expressed the
view that it fully shares the observations contained
in the report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peacekeeping Operations (S/2015/446) on United
Nations peacekeeping operations, in particular that
they should not be mandated to conduct counterterrorism activities. With that in mind, we believe that
the multinational initiatives, such as the multinational
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel), represent important tools for addressing those
issues. With the deployment of the Joint Force of the
G-5 Sahel, it will be possible to give the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) greater room to manoeuvre
in the full implementation of its mandate, which has
been an impossible task to date owing to the multiple
operational challenges that the Mission faces. With
17-35058

30/10/2017

Peace and security in Africa

adequate coordination at the level of their command
structures, the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel and
MINUSMA will be able to complement each other and
improve their effectiveness.
With regard to MINUSMA’s mandate, I would
like once again to express a more general opinion. I
believe that it is essential that deployed peacekeepers
be adequately equipped, trained and prepared to carry
out all the tasks set forth in their mission’s mandate.
Bearing that in mind, the national restrictions — the
so-called caveats — whether they are declared or, even
worse, not declared, such as the absence of effective
command and control, the refusal to obey orders, failure
to respond to attacks against civilians, or inadequate
equipment, cannot be tolerated, since they negatively
affect shared responsibility for effective fulfilment
of mandates.
With regard to the deployment of the Joint Force,
we believe that it is necessary for the international
community to lend its support and stand shoulder to
shoulder with the G-5 Sahel countries in their initiative
to support such regional efforts. It would be dishonest
to say that such challenges should be borne only by
the countries of the Sahel region, which is why the
support of the international community is, we believe,
essential and self-evident. Accordingly, we commend
the generous contributions made by international
partners to date. At the same time, we underscore
that it is important to continue providing support to
the Joint Force until it reaches its full and sustained
operational level.
Uruguay fully shares the Secretary-General’s view
that the Security Council should provide ambitious
support to the Joint Force through the support module
recommended by the Security Council. We believe that
the international community must undertake a strong
commitment to that end so that positive and lasting
results can be achieved as quickly as possible.
Regardless of the way in which the United Nations
provides support for the ramping-up of the Joint Force,
Uruguay believes that it will be essential to have a
monitoring, supervision and accountability mechanism
to deal with compliance with international human rights
standards and humanitarian law. All security activities,
including those in the fight against terrorism, will have
to be carried out in strict adherence with standards
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. Similarly, appropriate guarantees of

S/PV. 8080

due process will have to be provided to the victims of
such violations.
I would also like to draw attention to the
multiplicity of factors that aggravate the crisis in
the Sahel region, which are not limited solely to the
terrorist threat or the absence of State control over
the full territory of the countries in question. As the
members of the Council were able to see during their
recent mission to Mali, Mauritania and Burkina Faso,
as well as during their visit last March to the Niger
and Chad, the difficulties encountered encompass a
very broad range of challenges that are intrinsically
related to the development of the region. Terrorism
and trafficking networks operating in the region are
paralysing Governments and societies and are delaying
the development of these five countries.
Our assessment would appear simplistic if we
focused on security as the main and sole priority in the
Sahel region. Taking initiatives to improve ​​security is
important in order to pave the way for us to implement
policies on development, the promotion of the rule of law,
institution- and capacity-building, and strengthening
the resilience of the various communities in the Sahel
region. Such combined efforts will be precisely those
that lead to the sustainable peace that will enable the
G-5 Sahel countries to focus on their political stability
and their economic and social progress.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Bolivia would like
to express its deepest condolences to the members
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), who have
lost three of their own in recent days. We also extend
our condolences to the people and the Government
of Chad.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2017/869) and His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye
Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs, International
Cooperation and African Integration of Mali, for his
statement on behalf of the countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
I would also like to thank Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and
Mr. Ángel Losada Fernández, the European Union
Special Representative for the Sahel. Bolivia also
welcomes the presence in this Chamber today of the
Foreign Ministers of Burkino Faso, Chad, Mauritania
and the Niger. We wish to express our gratitude to the

17-3505825/32

S/PV.8080

Peace and security in Africa

presidency of France for organizing not only today’s
meeting, but also the trip to the region that allowed the
members of the Council to have a much more direct and
profound view of problems that affect the region.
Bolivia welcomes and commends the efforts of
Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger
in the deployment and operationalization of their
forces on the ground. The deteriorating political,
socioeconomic and security situation in the region,
in addition to jeopardizing the integrity and lives of
the people in the area, has curtailed and obstructed
the development of the region. We are sure that the
strategic concept of the operation and the deployment
of their forces with the purpose of countering the
impact of terrorism and transnational organized crime
through multidimensional operations in border areas
provide an appropriate complement to the work being
done by MINUSMA in Mali. The challenges facing the
G-5 Sahel are critical, and the response must, of course,
not be delayed.
We would also like to highlight the efforts of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
as it seeks to implement the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, which goes hand in hand with
the Nouakchott Process on the enhancement of security
cooperation and the operationalization of the African
Union Peace and Security Architecture in the SaheloSaharan region. The G-5 Sahel is the clearest example
of the contribution that African countries are making
to strengthen their security capacity in the region.
As an example of the situation in the countries of the
Sahel, let me refer to Mali, which, following a peaceful
transfer of power in 2002, enjoyed a period of political
stability and economic growth. Today, however, it
is suffering in a complex and volatile environment,
facing asymmetric threats that are not only putting the
political peace process at risk, but are also threatening
the civilian population and the members of the United
Nations peacekeeping mission. Not only must they
grapple with the impact of the violence from armed
groups, but they must also fight the threat of terrorist
groups and the transnational underworld and organized
crime, which are operating illicit networks trafficking
in persons, including migrants, drug and arms,
inter alia.
As a number of my colleagues have said, it is
therefore important to analyse the structural causes
of the conflict, which have brought about the volatile
26/32

30/10/2017

security situation in the region. We have witnessed with
great concern the consequences of interventionism and
regime-change politics pursued in the aftermath of
the 2011 conflict in Libya. One of the side effects of
the foreign interference was the destabilization of the
Sahel, which brought chaos, terrorism and trafficking
in weapons and generated a vicious circle of violence.
Likewise, we cannot ignore, among the underlying
structural causes, the exploitation of natural resources,
which is intrinsically tied to international peace
and security. Countries of the subregion, such as
Mauritania, Mali and the Niger, are depositories of
substantial mineral wealth, while others like Chad are
rich in hydrocarbon resources.
It is clear that the security situation in the Sahel
presents great challenges both for national Governments
and for the international community. According to
statistics from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, of the almost 150 million of
inhabitants in the region, approximately 30 million
people face food insecurity; 12 million live at the crisis
and emergency levels; and six million children under
the age of 5 and pregnant and nursing women suffer
from malnutrition and are in need of urgent assistance.
That does not include the 4.9 million people who have
undergone the ordeal of internal displacement.
Moreover, the effects of drought and climate
change affect the Sahel every year. The lack of basic
services is having a negative impact on health, thereby
increasing the risk of the spread of diseases and the
need for their treatment. Bolivia believes that it is
necessary to mobilize a humanitarian response in order
to curb the population’s vulnerability.
Within the framework of the United Nations four
support options for the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel,
it is necessary not only to take into account the
recommendations of the African Union, but also to
ensure sustainable and predictable economic support
for the Force. In that regard, as the five representatives
of those countries have pointed out, every effort and all
cooperation must be channelled through multilateral
institutions like the United Nations.
In conclusion, we call on and encourage the
international community to continue to contribute with
technical support to and economic and humanitarian
cooperation with all initiatives aimed at helping the
people of the Sahel in the interest of achieving stability
and permanent peace in the region. It is not only a
17-35058

30/10/2017

Peace and security in Africa

question of every country feeling duty-bound out of a
sense of solidarity and self-interest with regard to the
situation in the Sahel, but, above all, countries that are
partly responsible for the extremely volatile situation
in the region must also shoulder their responsibility.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation
and Burkinabé Abroad of Burkina Faso.
Mr. Barry (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Following the appeal and statement by my brother
Abdoulaye Diop, who just described the ongoing
situation in our region to the Security Council, I would
like, in my national capacity, to tell members that, at
this very moment, in one of the provinces of Burkina
Faso on the border with Mali, more than 2,000 school
children are unable to go to school They were not able
to return to school in early October, unlike children
in other regions, because of the terrorist attacks and
threats of attacks on their schools and villages. Some of
them have fled their villages with their parents to seek
refuge elsewhere. Others have stayed, but they no longer
have teachers, because the latter have also abandoned
their jobs. Like other Government employees, those
teachers live in a state of paranoia caused by the fear
of seeing terrorists arrive, as occurred last March in
one such village, where one of their colleagues was
gunned down in front of schoolchildren during recess.
Unfortunately, yet another was killed a few days ago by
unidentified assailants.
The threats are real. Schools, prefectures and
town halls are being set on fire. Mayors and municipal
officials are being kidnapped and killed. The entire
administration in the strip bordering our neighbour, the
brotherly country of Mali, has been affected. Symbols
of the State are under attack by people whose aim is to
wipe out the public administration and take control of
the area, which would give those terrorist groups free
reign to traffick as they please in whatever can pay for
their activities, including weapons, drugs, cigarettes,
human beings or even cattle. Accordingly, they attack
everything, including military camps, convoys of all
kinds, and gendarme, police and customs installations.
They have also carried out kidnappings and placed
anti-personnel mines.
Over the past 18 months, Burkina Faso has suffered
more than 80 terrorist attacks, including two attacks
in the capital of Ouagadougou, namely, an attack on
the Cappuccino restaurant in January 2016 and another

S/PV. 8080

on the Aziz Istanbul café in August. I would like to
take this opportunity once again to thank the members
of the Security Council who gathered at the scene
of the attack of 13 August and showed their support
for the staff of the Cappuccino restaurant. In total,
those attacks led to the deaths of 133 people, many
of whom were foreigners who were fellow citizens of
member countries of the Council, thereby confirming
that the security challenge facing us is a shared and
international one.
Eradicating the terrorist threat in Burkina and in
every one of our countries also means safeguarding
other countries, including the countries of members
of the Council, and protecting our citizens and theirs.
During their mission, Council members were able to see
for themselves on the ground the determination of our
Governments and the increased capacities of the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5). It is not
yellow, orange or red alerts that will effectively protect
their or our fellow citizens against such barbarians,
but rather true cooperation among us and real support
from the Security Council for our actions, such as
those provided within the framework of the G-5 Sahel.
Protecting Burkina Faso is synonymous with protecting
the other countries of West Africa — those in the north
and those in the south of the region, including Côte
d’Ivoire, Ghana, Togo and Benin, to name only those
sharing a border with Burkina.
Terrorist groups seeking territories to control must
not be allowed to gain the least bit of ground on any
of our borders or in any of our territories, because the
countries that I mentioned that are further south are on
average situated 500 kilometres away and consequently
not that far from the northern front. The threat is
therefore hardly remote for every one of those countries,
and for every one of the countries represented here.
Investigators have found evidence linking the
attacks on Grand-Bassam in Côte d’Ivoire and those on
Ouagadougou with terrorist groups based in Burkina,
Mali and in the Niger, as those attacking our borders
flee towards Mali and the Niger — or conversely they
attack in Mali and flee towards Burkina. All of us
must accept that the Malian crisis is spilling over that
country’s borders. Burkina therefore firmly calls for a
regional solution to the crisis. That is the raison d’être
of G-5 Sahel in its current phase with regard to the
burgeoning deployment of the Joint Force.

17-3505827/32

S/PV.8080

Peace and security in Africa

As my brother Abdoulaye Diop recalled earlier,
the Force positively complements the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali. While the United Nations Force takes care of
the interior of Mali, the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel
can assume responsibility for the border regions and
neighbouring countries. We accordingly welcome
the report of Secretary-General António Guterres
(S/2017/869), in particular the options proposed to
support the G-5 Sahel. That report is a great step
forward for the G-5 Sahel because it considers the
regional dimension of the Malian crisis and the security
challenges of the area.
For its part, Burkina is not only participating to
the best of its ability with the means at its disposal, but
is also acting in cooperation with some of the States
represented here — and I take this opportunity to thank
them — to protect our borders and our territory. Our
defence and security forces are engaged in a fierce
combat with the few means at their disposal. They are
operating while respecting human rights, the rights of
the people and the rights of the 32,000 Malians who
have sought refuge on our soil.
In the same vein, the Government has launched
an emergency programme for the Sahel involving the
region bordering Mali and the Niger, because combating
terrorism must be accompanied by development
activities in the region. With a total of $750 million
for four years, including $135 million for 2017, that
programme is aimed at improving the living conditions
of the people of the area and at redressing inequalities
with regard to the rest of the country’s population.
The emergency programme, which is currently funded
from our own resources, covers basic social services,
infrastructure, and income-generating production and
processing activities for the people, almost exclusively
farmers and breeders. The goal of the Government is
to ensure that those people do not feel abandoned by
the State, that they do not resort to trafficking, and that
they do not become easy prey for the terrorists, who
dream of enlisting all the young people of the region.
To that end we must act quickly so as not to fall straight
into a vicious cycle that could be summed up in one
sentence: without security, there is no development;
without development, there is no security.
We call for the mobilization and support of the
Council in the form of multilateral support, bilateral
support or both during the G-5 Sahel donor conference
scheduled for 14 December in Brussels. More than
28/32

30/10/2017

ever, Burkina Faso is counting on the Council. More
than ever, the G-5 Sahel is counting on the Council. As
I have said, we must act quickly. Since the Council’s
visit last week there has been another attack. There
has been another death. That is why I will repeat once
more: we must act quickly.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, African
Integration and International Cooperation of Chad.
Mr. Taha (Chad) (spoke in French): First and
foremost, I would like, on behalf of the Government of
Chad, to convey my gratitude to the various speakers
for their expressions of sympathy and solidarity
following the deaths of the three soldiers of the Chadian
contingent of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
The deaths of young Chadian soldiers in northern Mali
add to the heavy price already paid by my country for
the cause of peace in that part of Africa, which is in the
grip of insecurity and violence.
Allow me to congratulate the French presidency
of the Security Council for their leadership and the
crucial role that they have been playing in developing
a correct understanding of our shared will to fight
terrorism and cross-border organized crime in the
Sahel region. The recent visit of the Council to our
subregion was quite reassuring, for it was a powerful
expression of the Council’s clear interest in the Sahel
and the people living there, who are confronted with the
combined effects of terrorism and violent extremism,
trafficking of all kinds and the ongoing degradation
of their environment owing to climate change. The
Council’s poignant testimonies echo the concerns that
we have constantly raised concerning the reality of the
threats prevailing in the Sahel and the need to eradicate
them swiftly.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/869) refers to the numerous challenges, both
natural and manmade, facing the peoples of the Sahel. It
also recognizes the determination of our Governments
to improve the living conditions of our people through
the implementation of development projects in a secure
environment. The report strongly emphasizes the
necessity for international community support for the
effort, which is being led by the States of the Sahel.
I would also like to take this opportunity to convey
to the Secretary-General the cordial greetings of
President Idriss Déby Itno, as well as his congratulations
17-35058

30/10/2017

Peace and security in Africa

to the Secretary-General for the innovative spirit that
he has brought to our Organization with a view to
realizing its major objectives. I address to him these
words of gratitude from my country and our people for
his commitment to the Sahel. The unequivocal terms
that he used in depicting the situation in the region
indicate an informed understanding of the threats and
the responsibilities that we must bear to overcome
those threats. May I also praise the very important role
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
who has spared no effort in bringing this project to its
current stage.
In setting up the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the Heads of State of the
G-5 Sahel wanted to show their determination to fight
terrorism, organized crime and trafficking in drugs and
human beings in the region, while taking into account
the need to respect human rights, the gender issue and
child welfare. Resolution 2359 (2017) of 21 June and
the adoption of the strategic concept of operations
marked a turning point in the establishment of the
Joint Force. However, it is clear that much remains
to be done, because some key issues that are part of
what is intended to be a robust mandate still need to be
addressed, and we need resources to render the Force
fully operational.
International peace and security are indivisible,
and terrorist activities are now crossing the borders
of the Sahel. The recent attacks in Burkina Faso, the
Niger, Mali, including those against MINUSMA,
are a perfect illustration of the danger posed by the
terrorists’ actions, which also reveal a paradigm shift
in their modus operandi. In addition, violent extremists
and others who preach jihad, particularly those close to
Da’esh, exploit the volatility of the situation in Libya
to re-establish themselves there and continue their
criminal activities. The freedom of movement inherent
in the very geography of the Sahel allows them to
engage in transnational crime and the trafficking of
drugs, weapons and human beings.
To combat those threats and ensure the security of
the peoples of the Sahel, the G-5 States, in the exercise
of their sovereign responsibilities, have undertaken
considerable efforts. But the threats are of such
magnitude that our limited logistical, material and
financial capacities cannot stop them. The situation
therefore calls for the immediate commitment on the
part of the international community in order to give
the Force real intervention capabilities. Any hesitation

S/PV. 8080

will only benefit criminal groups and weaken both the
resilience of the people and the reaction of our States,
which, it should be emphasized, fully understand the
situation prevailing in the Sahel.
Against that backdrop, we welcome the options
presented by the Secretary-General in his report, and
we believe that the implementation of the first phase
of the strategic concept of operations, in particular the
ramping-up of troop levels within the three strategic
corridors, responds objectively to current security
concerns. The international community is also affected
by this threat and must respond by providing substantial
support to G-5 Sahel States, which are pooling their
operational capabilities in order to fight this scourge
through the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel.
The Security Council, which has dispatched
working missions to the States members of the G-5
Sahel and which has the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, is
sufficiently informed about what is at stake. We await,
therefore, strong and robust support that will launch
the start of G-5 operations. Only the availability of
predictable and sustainable resources will make it
possible to pre-empt the deadly strategies of terrorists
and give the countries of the Sahel the means to take
responsibility for the immense needs of the population.
We therefore call for strong mobilization and tangible
pledges at the next donors conference, scheduled for
14 December in Brussels.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the renewed
commitment of the Government of Chad to continue
the fight against terrorism through its contribution to
MINUSMA and to the Multinational Joint Task Force
to fight Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin. Chad will
also stand beside its brother countries of the G-5 Sahel
as part of the Joint Force, for which we once again ask
for the international community’s support.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister of Defence of Mauritania.
Mr. Bhatia (Mauritania) (spoke in French): At the
outset, on behalf of the people of Mauritania and its
President Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz, I would like to
thank the Security Council and express our gratitude
for its ongoing interest in the security and development
challenges of the Sahel region.
Mauritania is absolutely determined to fight
robustly alongside its brother countries to combat

17-3505829/32

S/PV.8080

Peace and security in Africa

terrorism because we ourselves have been fiercely
attacked by these forces of evil. It has cost us enormous
effort and sacrifice to fight them and to have achieved
a more or less stable situation today, despite the fact
that we know that in our region we are never safe
from this network. We are therefore pleased to be here
and very grateful to the Council for the invitation to
participate in today’s meeting. As all the speakers have
said, the Sahel region, and West Africa as a whole, is
currently the focus of several threats, which, if not
firmly checked, could threaten the stability of the
entire region. Indeed, they could also threaten peace
all over the world, because our region is located on the
borders of Europe, and if it is destabilized, it in turn
could destabilize a significant part of the world.
It was to tackle this situation that the member
States of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
established and launched the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel in order to combine their efforts
to fight terrorism together. That started some time ago,
and I would like to take this opportunity to thank all
the countries, especially France, that have supported us
in our struggle to launch this Joint Force for combating
terrorism. The Joint Force is beginning to mobilize. We
are making progress in organizing it that is significant
for an organization as recently established as the
G-5 Sahel. That is why we believe that for this kind
of venture to succeed it unquestionably requires the
support of the international community. Without that
it cannot succeed, and what it particularly needs is the
support of the United Nations and the Security Council,
which is why we asked for the Council’s support at a
very early stage.
We thank the Council for all its efforts so far. We
requested that support in order to establish a legal
foundation for the Joint Force. That is very important,
since we believe that the Joint Force must act on a
basis of international law. A resolution was adopted
and perhaps in the future others will be, too. In any
case, it is important to us that these resolutions be
robust, as the Secretary-General has requested, and
that they can ensure that the Joint Force enjoys the
maximum possible support from the Security Council,
the European Union, the African Union and the other
relevant organizations. It is therefore important that the
resolutions not only welcome the creation of the Joint
Force but also support, endorse and provide it with
authority to engage in this fight against terrorism on
behalf of the international community.
30/32

30/10/2017

The second point that matters to us is that the
Security Council can provide support to enable the
Joint Force raise the resources it needs to succeed,
because this kind of effort obviously requires resources
that the countries concerned are not always in a
position to provide. That is why it is important for the
Security Council to support us in mobilizing resources
through the various financing meetings to be convened
and bilateral assistance, as has been discussed. The
Joint Force’s requirements for its operations have
been evaluated and are generally reasonable. We have
various stages to get through, but despite all the various
political and other kinds of support that the Joint Force
has been offered, we believe that without the minimum
resources it needs to fulfil the mission it is tasked with,
it has no chance of succeeding. It will therefore be very
important to continue providing support to the G-5
Sahel countries in mobilizing resources.
I would like to conclude by thanking the French
presidency, especially Mr. Le Drian, for included this
item on the Council’s agenda at short notice. I wish
France every success with its presidency and I thank
all the members of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation, African Integration
and Nigeriens Abroad of the Niger.
Mr. Yacoubou (Niger) (spoke in French): First
and foremost, here in New York, in the United States
of America, I would like to pay tribute to the four
American soldiers who died at the hands of terrorists
in the Niger in the line of duty, weapons in hand,
alongside our soldiers in the village of Tongo Tongo.
On behalf of the President of the Republic of Niger, I
would like to say that we share the immense grief of
their families and of the American people. The Niger
and its people will never forget this sacrifice. We would
like to convey the same thoughts and undying gratitude
to all the Nigeriens and all of our allies who have fallen
on the front of a war that has been forced on us. The
Niger is also grateful to all the friendly countries and
to the European Union for their active partnership for
security and peace in our region.
The speakers before me all agree that the security
problems facing the Sahel today are direct and potent
threats to the peace and security of the whole world.
We must all be fully aware of them and act accordingly.
We have recognized the fact that this war brought
on us by narcoterrorists is an asymmetrical one. I am
17-35058

30/10/2017

Peace and security in Africa

also afraid that our own reactions — of us, the States
and the international community — are asymmetrical.
For while the narcoterrorist groups are massively
expanding their arsenals and strengthening their
dominion over local populations, we do a lot of meeting
but not much acting. It is true that the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) is making
progress, but not as fast or as robustly as we could wish.
During this time, the numerous attacks on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and our countries show that we are
losing ground in terms of our balance of forces with the
enemy, as well as with the local populations, who, with
no strong or effective forces ready to defend them, are
pledging allegiance to the foe.
As we said before the General Assembly and wish
to reiterate here, it is the Niger’s profound conviction
that in order to guarantee peace, security and stability
in Mali and the Sahel region, we must stamp out
narcoterrorist groups, ensure the presence and authority
of the Malian State over the entirety of its territory,
and implement the relevant political agreements.
We cannot and will not attain our goal of peace and
stability unless the narcoterrorists and their financial
sources are neutralized. Those who believe or imagine
for one moment that we can learn to live with the
presence of terrorists and traffickers do not understand
the gravity of the situation. Those who believe that they
are insulated from the situation in the Sahel are wrong.
We are all affected by what is happening.
Those who believe or imagine that the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) will fulfil its mandate
without waging war on the narcoterrorists are deceiving
themselves. The death toll of a peacekeeping operation
that has already become the most deadly operation of
its kind will continue to swell. It is already deploying
12,000 soldiers at the cost of almost $1 billion a year.
Despite these figures and resources, and because we
have given it a faulty mandate, the Mission spends
most of its time protecting itself from the increasingly
audacious terrorists. That is why an offensive force to
complement MINUSMA and Operation Barkhane is
essential and needed urgently. Such a force, we believe,
is the Joint Force of the G5-Sahel.
We must speak the truth. Today, terrorists have
their own territory in northern Mali. They rule territory
from which they have killed 149 MINUSMA personnel

S/PV. 8080

and brought death to the Malian army and Barkhane,
and from which they regularly attack and kill in the
Niger and Burkina Faso. They rule territory from
which they conceived and planned the attack on GrandBassam in Côte D’Ivoire, and where they will no doubt
continue to thrive on the traffic in drugs, weapons
and migrants that allows them to pursue their attacks
against the countries of the Sahel and the rest of the
world. I therefore call for an immediate jumpstart and
acceptance of the reality. Each day that we squander is
a day won by the terrorists. I must tell it as I see it — we
are tired of counting our dead and our wounded.
Our numerous meetings must not fool us into
believing that we are taking action. The only true
and beneficial action is to contribute immediately
and concretely to the operationalization of the Joint
Force of the G5-Sahel. To that end, we need a new
resolution with a robust and clear mandate, and above
all a guarantee of predictable, sustainable and adequate
multilateral financing. Security Council member
States have the power and ability to make this a reality.
I hope that they have understood the need and urgency
of doing so.
The five States members of the G-5 Sahel rank
among the poorest in the world, but we are among
the most determined and the most attentive to our
responsibilities to making the Sahel secure. Today, we
have no choice but to carry the battle to the enemy in its
heartland in northern Mali and to destroy the terrorist
groups in their lairs. Otherwise, they will destroy our
States. That is an absolute certainty, as it has already
happened elsewhere on our continent.
Every attack and every victory of terrorist groups
over MINUSMA, Barkhane or a country of the G-5
Sahel helps to attract new recruits. Hundreds more
young people will join the ranks of terrorist groups so
long as they sense that the opportunity to earn money
or glory outweighs the risk of dying in an attack on
Government or United Nations forces. The more of
our people they kill and the more of our resources they
steal, the numbers joining terrorist groups in Mali will
grow ever larger. That is how Boko Haram developed
in Nigeria and how many narcoterrorist groups are
beginning to emerge in Mali.
We all know that, when compared with certain other
operations and measured against the stakes that we face,
the resources requested for the Joint Force of G-5 Sahel
appear realistic and within our grasp. They represent

17-3505831/32

S/PV.8080

Peace and security in Africa

the costs of a mere few days of operation in certain
other conflicts. Since we believe that all atrocities are
equivalent and that addressing these threats calls for
the same commitment and sense of responsibility, we
hope that indifference will give way to the engagement
of all, particularly the most powerful countries.
It is in appealing to these common responsibilities
that we say that today is the time to act. Otherwise it

32/32

30/10/2017

will too late, too costly or simply too complicated. We,
the States of the G-5 Sahel, will remain firm in our
determination to wage war against terrorism. It is up to
other States to play their traditional roles in time for the
next international donor conference in Brussels.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

17-35058
