Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

of the Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders with a
view to assisting the Congress in the implementation
of the task set out in paragraph 4 above;
6. Decides to consider at its thirtieth session the
question of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in relation to detention and imprisonment.
2278th plenary meeting
6 November 1974
3219 (XXIX). Prot~tion of human rights in Chile

The General Assembly,
Convinced of its responsibility under the Charter of
the United Nations to promote and encourage respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
Recalling that, in accordance with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, everyone has the right
to life, liberty and security of person and the right not
to be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile
or to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment,
Recalling also its resolution 3059 (XXVIII) of
2 November 1973,
Taking into account the deep concern expressed by
the Commission on Human Rights about reports from
a wide variety of sources relating to gross and massive
violations of human rights in Chile, particularly those
involving a threat to human life and liberty,
Taking note of the appeal made by the Economic
and Social Council, in its resolution 1873 ( LVI) of
17 May 1974, to the Chilean authorities to take all
necessary steps to restore and safeguard basic human
rights and fundamental freedoms in that country, particularly in those cases involving a threat to human
life and liberty,
Noting that the Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, in its resolution 8 (XXVII) of 21 August 1974,7 made an urgent
appeal to the Chilean authorities to respect the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and to comply
with the International Covenants on Human Rights 8
signed and ratified by the Government of Chile,
Noting also that the International Labour Conference, in its resolution X of 24 June 1974, 9 urged the
Chilean authorities, inter alia, to cease violations of
human rights and trade union rights, to guarantee the
life and freedom of arrested, deported or imprisoned
workers, militant workers and trade union leaders and
members of any political party, to put an end to the
practice of torture, to close down the concentration
camps and to abolish the special tribunals, and decided
. to urge the speedy expedition to Chile of the FactFinding and Conciliation Commission on Freedom of
Association as well as the setting up of a commission
of inquiry,
Considering that, notwithstanding all the appeals
made by various organs of the United Nations system,
gross and massive violations of human rights, such as
arbitrary arrest, torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of political prisoners and detainees,
7 A/9767, annex II.
8 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
9 International Labour Office, Official

No. J, 1974, p. 40.

Bulletin, vol. LVII,

83

including former members of the Chilean Government
and Parliament, continue to be reported,
I. Expresses its deepest concern that constant flagrant violations of basic human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Chile continue to be reported;
2. Reiterates its repudiation of all forms of torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment;
3. Urges the Chilean authorities to respect fully the
principles of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and to take all necessary steps to restore and
safeguard basic human rights and fundamental freedoms, particularly those involving a threat to human
life and liberty, to release all persons who have been
detained without charge or imprisoned solely for political reasons and to continue to grant safe conduct
to those who desire it;
4. Endorses the recommendation made by the SubCommission on Prevention of Discrim,ination and Protection of Minorities, in its resolution 8 (XXVII), that
the Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-first
session should study the reported violations of human
rights in Chile, with particular reference to torture and
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
5. Requests the President of the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General to assist in any way they may deem appropriate
in the re-establishment of basic human rights and fundamental freedoms in Chile in the light of paragraph 3
above;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session
on the action taken and progress achieved under paragraphs 3 to 5 above.
2278th plenary meeting
6 November 1974
3220 (XXIX). Assistance and co-operation in accounting for persons who are missing or
dead in armed conflicts

The General Assembly,
Recalling that one of the purposes of the United
Nations is the promotion of international co-operation
in solving international problems of a humanitarian
character,
Regretting that, in violation of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, resort to force has
continued to occur, causing loss of human lives, widespread devastation and other forms of human suffering,
Reaffirming that it is one of the fundamental obligations of Member States to ensure and promote international peace and security by preventing or ending
armed conflicts,
Recognizing that one of the tragic results of armed
conflicts is the lack of information on persons--civilians as well as combatants-who are missing or dead
in armed conflicts,
Noting with satisfaction resolution V, adopted by the
twenty-second International Conference of the Red
Cross held at Teheran from 28 October to 15 November 1973, calling on parties to armed conflicts to accomplish the humanitarian task of accounting for the
missing and dead in armed conflicts,' 0
10

lntemationa/ Review of the Red Cross, No. 154 (Janu-

ary 1974), p. 22.

General AHembly-Twenly-ninth Ses1ion

84

Bearz,.g in mind the inadmissibility of a refusal to
apply the Geneva Conventions of 1949, 11
Reaffirming the urgent need to ensure full adherence to, and effective implementation of, the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 on the protection of war victims
by all States, in particular those signatories to the
Geneva Conventions of 1949,
Considering that the desire to know the fate of loved
ones lost in armed conflicts is a basic human need
which should be satisfied to the greatest extent possible, and that provision of information on those who
are missing or who have died in armed conflicts should
not be delayed merely because other issues remain
pending,
l. Reaffirms the applicability of the Geneva Conventions of 1949 to all armed conflicts, as stipulated
by those Conventions;
2. Calls upon parties to armed conflicts, regardless
of their character or location, during and after the end
of hostilities and in accordance with the Geneva Conventions of 1949, to take such action as may be within
their power to help locate and mark the graves of the
dead, to facilitate the disinterment and the return of
remains, if requested by their families, and to provide
information about those who are missing in action;
3. Appreciates the continuing efforts of the International Committee of the Red Cross to assist in the
task of accounting for the missing and dead in armed
conflicts;
4. Calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to cooperate, in accordance with the Geneva Conventions
of 1949, with protecting Powers or their substitutes
and with the International Committee of the Red Cross
in providing infonnation on the missing and dead in
armed conflicts, including persons belonging to other
countries not parties to the armed conflict;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of the second session of
the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and
Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts.
2278th plenary meeting
6 November 1974
3221 (XXIX). Improvement of the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, having considered at its twenty-eighth
session the item entitled ''Creation of the post of
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights",
it decided, in its resohition 3136 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session an item entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means within the United
Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms",
Recognizing the need for adequate information and
documentation on which consideration of this item
should be based,
Noting that the International Covenants on Human
Rights 12 will enter into force in the near future,
11 United Nations,

Treaty Series, vol. 75. Nos. 970-973.

1 2 Resolution 2200 A ( XXI), annex.

Noting that the Secretary-General plans to issue
shortly up-to-date versions of the comprehensive studies
prepared for the International Conference on Human
Rights, held at Teheran in 1968, 13 on methods and
measures taken within the United Nations system in
the field of human rights,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to solicit the
views of Member States, the specialized agencies and
regional intergovernmental organizations on alternative
approaches and ways and means within the United
Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
2. lnvites appropriate non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council to submit to the Secretary-General any
relevant material on the subject, taking into account
that such material will not be politically motivated
contrary to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
concise analytical report based on the views and material submitted under paragraphs 1 and 2 above and
taking into account the above-mentioned instruments
and studies and any other relevant material;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the
report to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session.
2278th plenarv meeting
6 November 1974
3222 (XXIX).

Human rights and fundamental
freedoms

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which stresses respect for the dignity and worth
of the human person,
Recalling that, in resolution 2860 (XXVI) of
20 December 1971, it declared its conviction of the
historic significance and the value of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights as a common standard
of achievement for all peoples and all nations,
Recalling Economic and Social Council re~olutions
1864 (LVI) and 1869 (LVI) of 17 May 1974,
Highly indignant at the continuing repression and
inhuman treatment inflicted on peoples still under
colonial and foreign domination,
Recalling also its resolution 3059 (XXVIII) of
2 November 1973 on torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment,
1. Reaffirms its attachment to the principles, values
and ideals of the Charter of the United Nations and
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
2. Reaffirms also its determination to ensure to all
persons, without any distinction whatsoever, the full
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
3. Reaffirms further the right of all peoples, in particular the peoples of southern Africa, to self-determination, freedom and independence, and the legitimacy
of their struggle to free themselves from colonial and
foreign domination in conformity with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights;
• i:i_ For the report of the Conference, see Unite-0 Nations pubhcat1on, Sale~ No.: E.68.XIV.2.
