1332nd

United Nations

PLENARY MEmHC

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

(Opening meeting)

•

TWENTIETH SESSION

Of/iciill Records
CONTENTS

Page
Agenda item 1:
Opening of the session by the Chairman of
the delegation of Ghana • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

1

Agenda item 2:
Minute of silent prayer or meditation. • • •••

1

Address by Mr. Alex Quaison-Sackey, Temporary President, Chairman of the delegation
of Ghana . . . . . . .. . ,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . " .

1

Agenda item 3:
Credentials of representatives to the nineteenth and twentieth sessions of the General
Assembly:
.
&) Appointment of the Credentials coinrnittee
Agenda item 4:
Eleotion of the President. • • • • • • . • • • • ••
Address by Mr. Amintore Faniani, President
of the twentieth session of the General
Assem1Jly oa • • • • e _ • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Agenda item 20:
Admission of new Members to the United
~ . . . . . .

. Nations

4

President: Mr. Amintore FANFANI <Italy).
Temporary President:
Mr. Alex QUAISON:SACKEY (Ghana).
AGENDA ITEM 1
Opening of the session by the Chairman of the
delegation of Ghana
1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I declare open
the twentieth regular session of the General Assembly.

AGENDA ITEM 2

Minute of si lent prayer or meditation
2. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I invite represent-

atives to stand a.nd observe one minute of silent
prayer or meditation.
The representatives stood in silenoe.

Address by Mr. ALex Quaison-Sackey, Temporary
President, C~airmtim of the delegation of Ghana
3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: It is with a deep
sense of pleasure and relief that I welcome all
representatives present in this Hall. As you are all
aware, I assumed the onerous responsibility of
guiding the work of the nineteenth session of the
General Assembly in at' atmosphere charged with
tension, fear and unce:r,~ ..inty about the very future
of QUIt' Organization. Today, thanks to the spirit of
s!atesmanship, compromise and magnanimity .dis-

Tuesday, 21 September 1965,
at3p.m.

NEW YORK
played by all Member· States,:the way is now clear
for the General Assembly to resume its normal
functions. It is fitting therefore, that special tribute
should be paid to all those who patiently and indefatigably gave their unstinted support and cooperation to me andto the Secretary-General, U Thant,
during the protracted and difficult negotiations which
have yielded this happy result.
4. I have no :..ntention, as the outgoing President,
to discuss the work of the twentieth session of the
General Assembly. Nevertheless. I should like to
recall that the unprecedented crisiS which threatened
the survival of the United Nations prevented the
nineteenth session from considering some of the
burning issues of the world. Thus, we failed to
discuss and take decisions on vital problems like
disarmament, apartheid and racial discrimination,
the representat! on of China and peaceful coexistence
among States. The Assembly was also unable to take
up the problems of territories that are not yet
independent, foremost among which are Southern
Rhodesia, Angola, Mozambique, so-called Portuguese
Guinea. South West Africa and British Guiana.
5. In spite of this setback. we must concede that the
nineteenth session had a few bright spots. The fact
that ratification of the amendments to the Charter
of the United Nations went through according to
schedule should be a matter of gratification to all
States Members of the Organization, particularly
to .African and Asian members whose legitimate
aspirations have been satisfied. This achievement
should inspire in us the hope that steps will be
taken to convene a conference to reView the Charter
as soon as practicable. The time may not be opportune
for further amendments of the Charter, but every
effort should be made to strang~hen the Organization
as an effective instrument for peace.

6. The successful solution ofthe problem of Article 19
of the Charter is convincing evidence that there is no
dearth o£ statesmanship in the world today. If this
can be fully utilized by the United Nations, then we
can approach many of the intractable problems of the
world with hope and confidence. The ominous clouds
The printed offioial reoords of the plena.ry
meetings of the General Assemblyare published
in fasoiole form, the reoord of eaoh· meeting
being issued separately. A prefatory fasoicle
is issued for eaoh session, oontaining a table
of oontents, the agenda, a list of members of
delegations, and other prefatory matter. The
fasoicles are subsequently bound in volumes
by session.

A/PV.1332

,

General Assembly - Twentieth Session - Plenary Meetings

2

which hovered over the nineteenth session have been
dissipated. and the twentieth session provides a
fresh opportunity for a.U to find solutions to the
conflicts that are plaguing the world today. The
prospects for a fruitful session are encouraging,
and I hope that Members -will seize this opportunity
of making good the havoc that the locusts of dissension
have created.
7. We are living in a very uneasy world. Therefore.
guided by the moral conscience of the world which
must be evident here in this very Assembly, we
should bend all our energies to remove the root
causes which produce conflicts between man and
man. whether black, white or yellow. and between
nation and nation. Let the twentieth session. which
is a culmination of the International Co-operation
Year. herald in an era of peace and harmony.
AGEND,\ ITEM 3
Credentials of representatives to the nineteenth and
twentieth sessions of the General Assembly:
(g) Appointment of the Credentials Committee

8. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: Under rule 28
of our rules of procedure, a Credentials Committee
shall be appointed at the beginning of each session.
It shall consist of nine members. who shall be
appointed by the General Assembly on the proposal
of the President. I propose that the Credentials Committee for the twentieth re .uar session should consist
of the following Member States: Australia, Costa Rica.
Guatemala, Iceland. Madagascar, Syria. the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Arab Republic
and the United States of America.
9. If there is no objection. I shall consider those
countries appointed to the Credentials Committee.
It was so decided.

10. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: Members will
recall that the General Assembly dEicided at the close
of the nineteenth session (13318t meeting) to refer
the credentials of representatives to the nineteenth
session to the Credentials Committee appointed at
the twentieth session for study and report, together
with credentials of the representatives to the twentieth
session. It was understood that this action would.
be without prejudice to the positions of some delegations regarding certain credentials. The Credentials
Committee just appointed will therefore examine the
credentials of the representatives to the nineteenth
and twentieth sessions and report to the General
Assembly without delay.
AGENDA ITEM 4

Election of the President
11. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: We shall now
proceed to the election of the President of the
twentieth regular session of the General Assembly.
At th,e invitation of· the Temporary President,
U Ba Thaung (Burma) and Mr, G6mez Robledo
(Mexico) aoted as tellers.
A. vote was taken by seoret ballot.
Number of ballot papers:
114
Invalid ballots:
0
Valid ballots:
114

Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required majoritY:

2

112
57

Number of votes obtained:

Mr. Fanfani (Italy) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
Mr. Popovlc (Yugoslavia). . . . . . . . . . . . .

110
2

Having obtained the required majority, Mr. Fanfani
(Italy) was eleoted President of the twentieth session
of the General Assembly and took the Chair.

Address by Mr. Amintore Fanfani, President of the
twentieth session of the General Assembly
12. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In
assuming the presidency of the United Nations General
Assembly at its twentieth session, my first thought
is to thank you for the honour you have done my
country in my person. It is a tribute to the ideals of
peace and justice which ha-le consistently motivated
Italian foreign policy since the end of the world
war. The confidence you have placed in me obliges
me to do my best to be deserving of it. I shall faithfully interpret your will and I shall devote all my
energies to diEcharging the responsibilities you have
placed upon me, guided solely by the princi.ples of
law and democracy which alone can enable us to
act realistically.
13. In this task, I shall endeavour to follow the
example of my eminent predecessor, who directed
the work of the nineteenth session of the General
Assembly with self-sacrifice and wisdom. We all
followed Mr, Alex Quaison-Sackey's efforts to encourage moderation and conciliation, and I am sure that I
interpret the feelings of all in expressing our deepest
gratitude to him.
14. Frankness is a duty. I should be failing in that
duty were I not to stress in unvarnished terms the
graVel!9SS of the situation confronting the entire
'world at the present time. Immense responsibilities.
both individual and collective, rest upon us all.
Enormous difficulties face us. We must overcome them
at all costs if we are to fulfil the anxious expectations
of public opinion in our countries.
15. Our deliberations last year. unfortunately, were
neither as productive nor as far-ranging as had been
hoped. The twentieth session is opening now to the
accompaniment of battles which are drenching Asia
in blood, and progress is at a standstill. Our agenda.
last year. included crucial items. It is most regrettable
that, notwithstanding the President's efforts, we
should have shelved them so long instead of dealing
with them in clear-cut resolutions. Not only did we
plunge the United Nations into actual lethargy, but
we also believed that this international Organization
could survive without taking any (lecision6. Harsh
reality has proved the contrary.
16. Today, the obstacles which confronted us last
year seem. fortunately. to have been overcome. Far
be it from me to analyse here the rea,sons for the
paralysis of the nineteenth session of the General
Assembly. What I wish to do is to emphasize the
great responsibility which we all assumed in failing
to agree in good time to clear up thE! misunderstandings
which divid~d us concerning the interpretation of
Article 19 of the Charter. By showing ourselves

incapable of a
prestige of th
everything in
such a situati
goodwill no 1
that we are a
do not succeed
United Nation::
forum. but we
it the champic
the soul of P
bankruptcy.
17. As I spe~
Houses are c
more familiee
armies which
Members of
which asked t
use of force. b
18. Unfortuna
spreading fur
close our eye
evade our ste
end to such a
easy way out
common sense
must not reI
the doom of th'
19. The madn
World War. I
spread, as we
the destructio
cannot allow tl
with all our m'

20. The defe
am sure that
my duty sole
responsibilitie
and to the le
have all assur.
it is good, of
but that it is
in all sinceri~
solutions capa
to the regions
regard the Ul
of internationa
21. Our Secrs
with many clif
Asia. Neverth
positive eleme
on those elem
them to prev!
succeed if we
is our dearest
from the test
of life and not
22. As regal'
Eighteen!! has
Which, aithougl
does show tha
and that prog

Y Conference of

1332nd meeting - 21 September 1965
incapable of agreeing, we dealt a severe blow to the
prestige of the United Nations. We must therefo't'e do
everything in our power to prevent the recurrence of
such a situation in the future. Vague declarations of
goodwill no longer suffice. Deeds alone can show
that we are able to build, and to build solidly. If we
do not succeed in coming to practical agreements, the
United Nations will perhaps :cemain an international
forum. but we shall have abandoned all hope of making
it the champion of law, the guardian of our security.
the soul of peace. We shall have declared our own
bankruptcy.
17. As I speak to you. guns are thtmdering in Asia.
Houses are crumbling. Men are dying. More and
mort:; families are plunged in despair. Some of the
armies which are fighting now helong to States
Members of the United Nations. that is. to States
which asked to sign our Charter. which prohibits the
use of force, because they were "peace-loving."
18. Unfortunately, the conflagration appears to ::>e
spreading further and further. We have no right to
close our eyes to these terrible realities. We cannot
evade our stern responsibility to put an immediate
end to such a state of affairs. We would be taking the
easy way out were we merely to repeat appeals to
common sense and feelings of humanity. Such appeals
must not remain a dead letter; that would spell
the doom of this Organization.
19. The madness which, twenty years after the First
World War. ravaged the world a second time. can
spread. as we know, like wildfire. This time. however.
the destruction of the human race is at stake. We
cannot allow this spectre to reappear without reacting
with all our might.
20. The defence of peace is a collective task. and I
am sure that we shall succeed in fulfilling it. It is
my duty solemnly to draw your attention to the
responsibilities incumbent upon us, upon all of us.
and to ihe legal and moral obligations which we
have all assumed. That is why I must say to you that
it is good. of course. to tleplore what is happening.
but that it is essential to act. If we cannot manage.
in all sincerity. to lay the foundations for equitable
solutions capable of restoring peace and tranquillity
to the regions torn by conflict. it will be difficult to
regard the United Nations as a determining factor
of international order and a rampart of our security.
21. Our Secretary-General, U Thant. was confronted
with many difficulties during his recent mission to
Asia. Nevertheless, he was able to discern certain
positive elements. What we must do is to concentrate
on those elements and take such action as will cause
them to prevail over the rest. We shall certainly
succeed if we do our utmost. In this case-and this
is our dearest hope-the United Nations will emerge
from the test acknowledged f
all time as a source
of life and not as a witness of death.
22. As regards disarmament. the Committee of
Eighteen.!J has presented us with a report [A/5986]
Which, although it unfortunately records no agreement,
does show that the work done at Geneva was useful
and that progress will be possible once that work

3

is resumed. It is for us in this Assembly to give the
Geneva talks the necessary impetus and encouragement. so that the difficult but so necessary task
of disarmament may b~ pursued tmremittingly and
with some hope of success.
23. The Committee's report contains useful ideas
and many proposals. Our goal lemains, of course.
general and complete disarmament. but our endeavours
must also be directed towards collateral measures
whose urgency' was clearly emphasized by the Committee. in particular. the prohibition of all tests, and
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
24. In its work here. the Assembly will be able to
take up either the interesting suggestions which have
been put fOl,~vard. or certain other practical proposals
aimed at halti~g the spead of nuclear weapons. These
proposals call fJr the conclusion. first and foremost.
of a general treaty on non-proliferation; the draft of
such a treaty has for the first time been deposited
on the conference table at Geneva. That. of course.
i~ the main goal: the conclusion of a treaty which
would permanently bind both nuclear and non-nuclear
Powers to collaborate in halting the spread of nuclear
weapons.
25. There are decisions which even non-nuclear and
poorly armed nations can take. There are examples
which we must have the cOill'age to give in order to
1ead others on to the r!ght road and to be sure in our
own minds thf': we have dc:ae everything in our power.
That is why a proposal fJr a verilted moratorium has
been submitted at Geneva. It offers Powers which
do not possess nuclear weapons the opportunity to
prove that they do not ju~~t ask others to disarm.
Preaching by their own example., t.~ey can show the
whole world that it is posf.dble to advance, not only
in words but also in deeds.
26. Here we have an opportunity. 8,lld we should be
wrong to let it go. It will give us the right to ask
others, in all good conscience. to take the road of
nuclear disarmament in their turn oy };'l'actical and
constructive action.
27. The debates at the twentieth sessi m of the
General Assembly will also bear on certain eticnomlc
problems of fundamental importance. and. in par·
ticular. on the resuli;s ofthe United Nations Conferer.ce
on Trade and Development. Y The economic imbalance between the different parts of the world. has
worsened in recer.'& years. despite the end(lavours
to increase economic assistance to the. developing
countries. Indeed, this imbalance is so great and so
serious as to jeopardize the economic and social
progress of all mankind.

t

t

[
t

28. We thus have befc" ·a us a task no less important
and urgent than that ofdisarmament. The two problems
are. in fact. closely inter-related. because. if we
can achieve real progress in disarmament. we shall
be able to mobilize more resources and great~r
energies for economic development. We hav-e to look
upon the problems of world peace and economic'
stability from a world-",ide perspective; therefore
they must be solved together.

3
}J Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Ccmmittee on Disarmaml:lnt.

Y The Conference met at Geneva from 23 March to 15 June 1964.

s

4

'.3eneral Assembly - Twentieth Session - Plenary Meetings

29. The twentieth mmiversary of the founding of the
United Nations must not mark the failure of our
Organization: it must, on the contra.ry, mark its
revival. In a dark hour of our century, during the
final convulsions of the bloodiest tragedy in the
history of mankind, we saw a light shining over
San Francisco. When we became Members of the
United Nations, we all undertook, before our consciences, to feed that flame, to maintain it and to
spread the ideals it inspires.
3(.. Leading figures from all nations and continents
are gathered together here to reaffirm those ideals,
mindful of the deeds and words of President Kennedy,
and of the sacrifice of Secretary-General HammarskjlUd. If we forget the lessons offered to us and
show ourselves incapable of honouring our signatures,
then the responsibility towards the entire international
community will fall upon us, upon our countries,
upon our children.
31. In afewdays'tim~,theHolyFather,PopePaul VI,
will .come here to remind us of this and to encourage
us to remember this obligation. The announcement of
tilis visit has been received as a token of confidence
in the spiritual values, of universal application, whose
preservation all the States Members of the United
Nations are called upon to ensure.
32. In conclusion, may I express the well-pondered
hope that the work of the tweftieth session of the
United Nations General Assembly will prove that we
live up to our duties and obligations.
AGENDA ITEM 20

Admission of new Members to the United Nations

33. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In
accordance with the procedure followed in the past,
I should now like to invite the Assembly to consider
agenda item 20, entitled "Admission of new Members
to the United Nations". This procedure has been
applied on previous occaswQ.'3 in order to given
newly independent· States wl"Jch have applied for
membership in our Organization the opportunity, if
the General Assembly accedes to their request, of
participating in the work of the session from the
outset. If there is no objection, we shall proceed in
this manner.
34. The Security Council has unanimously recommended to the General Assembly the admission of the
Gambia [A/5911], the Maldive Islands [A/598!] and
Singapore [A/5982] to the United Nations.
35. I suggest that we should consider first the draft
resolution recommending the admission ofthe Gambia
[A/L.462]. May I take it that the Assembly accepts
the recommendation of the Security Council and
adopts the draft resolution by acclamation?
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.

36. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
declare the Gambia admitted to membership in the
United Nations.
The delegation of the Gambia was escorted to its
place in the General ASSembly Hall.

37. The PRESIDENT (transJated from French): We
shall now consider the draft resolution recommending

the admission of the Maldive Islands [A/L.463]. May
I take it that the Assembly accepts the recommendation
of the Security Council and adopts the draft resolution
by acclamation?

. aims is a.-'speci
emerging nations
relations between

The draft resolution was adopted by accI . . mation.

38. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
declare the Maldive Islands admitted to membership
in the United Nations.
39. The representatives of the Maldive Islands have
not yet arrived at United Nations Headquarters.
Upon their arrival, we shall arrange to have the
flag of their country raised at a special ceremony
and to seat them in the General Assembly Hall.
40. We shall now take up the draft resolutionrecommending the admission of Singapore [A/L.4M and
Add.!]. I shall ask the Assembly whether, 0).1 the
recommendation of the Security Council, it adopts
the draft resolution by acclamation.
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.

41. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
declare Singapore admitted to the membership in
the United Nations.
The delegation of Singapore was escorted to its
place in the General Assembly Hall.

42. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): On
behalf of the General Assembly, I am happy to
welcome the Gambia, the 'l\/{aldive Islands and Singapore
to the United Nations. :I. should like to address to the
Governments and peoples of the three new Member
States the warmest congratulations of the General
Assembly on this happy occasion, and to convey
to them our best wishes for their future. It is a
great pleasure for me to extend a very warm welcome
to the Gambia, the Maldive Islands and Singapore,
which have just been admitted into the great family
of the United Nations by the unanimous vote of the
Assembly. These are three newly independent countries whose history, civilization and attachment to
the ideals of peace and freedom assure us that their
contribution to the work and deliberations of the
United Nations will be useful and important. I extend
to the three countries my most sincere and cordial
congratulations on their admission to the Organization,
and to their peoples and Governments my personal
wishes for their happiness and prosperity.
43. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
first let me offer my respectful congratulations to
you, Sir, on your election to th~ Presidency. Equally,
we congratulate ourselves. How fortunate wee,re
that you, who have held high office in the service
of your own great country, should now come to
preside over the deliberations of this world assembly.
44. It would be impUdent for me to attempt to
enumerate your personal qualifications for the unique
position which you now occupy, but we know how
diverse and extensive those qualifications are. You
combine-and this is surely a rare combination-the
qualities of the scholar, the writer, the distinguised
professor of political economy, with the qul!lities
of a man of action, the creative orator, tb-e political
organizer, the fearless reformer. Anu I would add
that we are glad that amongst your main inttirests and

I

45. When we thi
our minds the gl
Rome has repres
of order in soci
devotion to the
a universal and
we. should be re
principles-and it
tribute to them,
greatly benefited
Fifteen hundred y
not diminished ou
46. All of us
critical year, in
the authority of·
in international e
a distinguished It
47. At the outs
fitting that we
extending a welc
happily the kind 0
had long and wide
48. Last year,
session, I had t
gratulating three
of welcoming thr
Maldive Islands a
long enjoyed relat
49. The path to s
now a well-trodd
each traveller alo
of full sovereign
50. At the same
only a time of
an end but a be
friendship of equa
51. The Gambia
States previously
Nigeria, Sierra
a total population
to attain indepen
in comparison .
made and will m
constructive cont

52. On·behalf of
word of respect
Minister of the
his delegation wh
53. Sing'3.pore ha
East, and. we are
continue to put
experience and t
home and in the
54. We are ha
Deputy Prime M
members of the
come to take thei
55. The State 0
with the qualific

a

1332nd moeting - 21 September 1965
aims is a.··special concern for the problems of the
. emerging nations, and a determination to improve
relations between the West and the East.
,

45. When we think of your country all of us have in
our minds the glol'ies of Rome. From. ancient times,
Rome has represented to the world the conceptions
of order in society and discipline under the law,
devotion to the arts and sciences, and the ideal of
a universal and indivisible peace. It is well that
we. should be reminded by your Presidency of those
principles-and it is not unsuitable that I should pay
tribute to them, for I represent a country which
greatly benefited from being colonized by yours.
Fifteen hundred years of subsequent independence have
not diminished our respect for Julius Caesar.
46. All of us can join in rejoicing that in this
critical year, in which we hope to see a revival of
the authority of ·the United Nations-a renaissance
in international endeavour-we shall be led by such
a distinguished Italian.
47. At the outset of this momentous session it is
fitting that we should start our proceedings by
extending a welcome to new Member States. It is
happily the kind of ceremony in which my country has
had long and wide experience.
48. Last year, at the opening of the nineteenth
session, I had the honour of welcoming and congratulating three new Member States. I have the honour
of welcoming three more this year: the Gambia, the
Maldive Islands and Singapore. With all three we have
long enjoyed relations of true friendship,
49. The path to self-government and independence is
now a well-trodden road, and we rejoice together as
each traveller along that road arrives at the:destination
of full sovereignty.
50. At the same time we recognize that this is not
only a time of fulfilment and achievement. It is not
an end but a beginning-a new start in a renewed
friendship of equality and freedom.
51. The Gambia is the last of the West African
States previously under British administration-Ghana,
Nigeria, Sierra Leone and the Gambia-States with
a total population larger than that of my own countryto attain independence. But, small as the Gambia is
in comparison with its great neighbours, it has
made and will make, we are sure, a distinctive and
constructive contribution to the advance of Africa.

5

relations with all, a devotion to the principles of
Islam, and a love of freedom.
56. In our Commonwealth, with a total population of
nearly a quarter of the population of the whole world,
we are pround to share common traditions and
common ideals, and we are proud that more than 99
per cent of the population of the Commonwealth now
lives in self-governing and independent countries. We
also believe in diversity. We like to remember Lord
Acton's famous phrase, "Liberty provokes diversity;
diversity preserves liberty".
57. We believe in diversity not only in geography and
religion and race, but also in size, for while we
respect numbers and power we respect justice and
liberty more. Our welcome is therefore no less
genuine to these States comparatively smallinpopulation or in area than it has been to States with far
greater resources and populations.
58. We warmly welcome these new Members to the
family of sovereign States, and respectfully wish
them all good fortune as fellow Members of the
United Nations.
59. Mr. PONNAMBALAM (Ceylon): Mr. President, I
find myself in the very happy position of being able
to tender the felicitations of the Government and
people of my country on your elevation to the office
of the highest dignity that this Assembly canoffer.
60. In thinking ofyour country one cannot help thinking
of Rome, and while I may not be able to echo the
sentiments of the representative ofthe United Kingdom
in regretting that my country was not colonized by
Rome, I should lilte to state that one cannot think of
Rome without recalling the legal institutions to which
she has given birth. In the regulation of any orderly
society, the rule of law as we understand it has to be
observed, and when one considers law he is reminded
of the great Roman emperor Justinian, whose institutes
and Digest have been the inspiration of legal systems
not only in my nation but in a nu.mber of other progressive countries.
61. If it is not impertinent I should like to say this:
having held the highest offices which your country can
offer to any citizen, you bring here, Mr. President, a
sense of impartiality and dignity in the conduct of
the proceedings of this Assembly. May I very humbly,
on behalf of my delegation, offer you our fullest cooperation in the work you will ha.ve to face.

54. We are happy to welcome very warmly the
Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and the other
members of the Singapore delegation, who have
come to take their place amongst us.

62. I now turn to the new Members which have been
admitted to the brotherhood of nations in this Assembly.
It may be L"1vidious to single out one or two, but
the Members of this Assembly will pardon me, I am
sure, if I refer first to that little island State of
Singapore, which, during the British era, was a
country with which my Government was closely
associated. Singapore evok~s sentiments offriendship
and cordiality in us. If 1 may be permitted, I should
like to tell them that Ceylon, during the British era,
contributed in some small measure to the development
and progress of Singapore, and Singapore in· return
was a. home away from home to a number of us who
had to leave our shores to seek work elsewhere.

55. The State of the Maldive Islands comes to us
with the qualifications of free government. friendly

63. May I say that it is a matter of personal gratification that the Foreign Minister of Singapore, who is'

52. On· behalf of my country I wish to add a special
word of respectful greeting to the distinguished Prime
Minister of the Gambia and to the otheY' members of
his delegation who are seated with us today.
53. Singapore has long played a leading role in the
East, and. we are confident that this island State will
continue to put to good effect the vitality and the
experience and the enterprise of its people both at
'home and in the wider world of international affairs.

6

General Assembly - Twentieth Session - Plenary Meetings

present along with his Deputy Prime Minister, is
a countryman from Ceylon.
64. May I now turn to the Maldive Islands~ I welcome
the Maldive Islands not merely because ofgeographical
proximity, of certain common ethnic origins and
of linguistic I:?imilarities,' but because of a close and
intimate association from time immemorial.
65. All these countries are· very small, but may I
be permitted. as the representative of a small
country myself, to assure members here that they
and we yield to none of the bigger, more powerful
and more gifted nations in our devotion to peace
and its pursuit. I have no doubt that they will. each
in their own way. assist in the defence of the Charter
of the United Nations. My country and its neighbours
in Asia. on whose behalf I speak, sincerely welcome
the Gambia, the Maldive Islands and Singapore to
the community of nations.
66. I should like to take thiS! opportunity to say that
it must be gratifying to the United Kingdom to witness
the ease with which an evolution has taken place and
to see those small States, which were under its
wings and its tutelage. today take their places
as fully fledged nations exercising sovereign
independence.
67. To the other larger and more powerful countries,
I should like to say that it is particularly gratifying
to note the spontaneity and enthusiasm with which
they are here to welcome smaller, less fortunate
andless developed countries into theworldAssembly.
By the admission of ·smaller nations on terms of
complete equality, you have set the seal of sovereign
national independence and raised the dignity of man
wherever he may. be found.
68. Dato' !SMAIL (Malaysia): Mr. President. permit
me at the outset to congratulate you, on behalf of
the Government of Malaysia, on your near unanimous
election as President of this important session of the
General Assembly, the jubilee session. Mr. President.
your career. among other things, as the Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister of Italy, has been in
the public eye for many years and your standing and
reputation as a European statesman are so well
known as not to need any special mention by me.
69. I am particularly happy to recall the close
association between your great State and mine,
extending back to several years. It therefore gives
me particular pleasure, as a Minister ofthe Malaysian
Government. to extend to you a very warm welcome
and convey to you my delegation's and my Government's
good wishes for your tenure of office as President of
the Assembly for its twentieth session.
70. I have come to this rostrum on this occasion to
perform .the very pleasant task of welcoming three
new Members. to our great Organization. The Gambia.
the Maldive Islands and Singapore. The admission of
more members to the United Nations increases the
influence oUhe Organization. not merely in numerical
terms but also improves the status and the stature of
the Organization by helping it to get closer to the
ideal of universality. It goes without saying that the
broader its base in terms of membership, the more
meaningful becomes its authority. so that the. United

Nations may gain the power and the strength it needs
in the translation of the noble ideals of the world
body into practical reality.

and economic ti
deeply embedded
which the new
in its upper re
basin constitute
Upper Gambia or

71. I wish to offer, in the first place. my sincere
congratulations and good wishes to the Gambia and
the Maldive Islands and we look forward to close
co-operation with them in the activities of the United
Nations.

80. Moreover,
peoples of the s
Volofs and Diol
frontier live po
related. Trade
Senegal follow
markets ~re not
transport costs
Gambia are mu
for each other.

72. Of Singapore, I claim a special privilege to
speak. Singapore is our closest neighbour whose
progress and welfare are so inter-linked with those
of Malaysia, particularly with its peninsular part,
that until the other day it was an important constituent part of Malaysia.
73. The peoples of Malaysia and Singapore have
been thrown together by the inescapable incidents
of geography and long subjected to a common administration by the accidents of history. Hence,
notwithstanding the separation, there is the fullest
awareness in the leadership of both States that,
constitutionally separated as they may be, their
identity of interests and the inter-twined activity
of their peoples in every facet of human life will,
as in past decades, create the incentives and provide
the encouragement for them to live together as
good neighbours. In a variety of common tasks. we
share the same attitude and prize the same ideals.
The constitutional bond has been severed; the human
bond remains.

81. Consequentl
stated, it is Se
between the two
The future of t
economic and so
82. We again c
Gambia, Mr. D.
hall, and to his
g-ratulations of t
of Senegal on
national independ
Nations. We exp
prosperity of th
people.

74. Singapore has a great contribution to make in
the field of international co-operation in the United
Nations and has adequate resources, both human
and material, to enable it to do so.

83. In addition, I
of the United Ki
work of decolon'
this good exampl
Mozambique, so
Africa and Rhode

75. My Government therefore welcomes Singapore's
admission to the United Nations with particular
pleasure and wishes it all success.
76. Mr. mop (Senegal) (translated from French):
The delegation of Senegal would like, first of all on
behalf of the Senegalese Government, to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your election by such a
notable majority. We echo the well-deserved compliments which previous speakers have addressed
to you. You are already well known to us by reputation,
and your outstanding career as a statesman. both
national, in Italy, and international, is for us a
guarantee supporting our conviction that you will
bring the work of the twentieth session of the General
Assembly to a successful conclusion.
77. On behalf of the Government of Senegal. my
delegation wishes to convey its warm congratulations
to the new Member States-the Gambia. Singapore
and the Maldive Island-on their attainment of international sovereignty and their admission to the
United Nations.
78. The Senegalese Government. may, perhaps. be
allowed to make special mention of the Gambia since,
more than any other Government represented in
this Assembly. it welcomes the Gambia's accession
to national independence and its entry into the United
Nations.
79. We shall be recounting n9thing new if'we recall
briefly the close ties which exist between the Gambia
and the Senegal, in particula.r their geographical

I

84. Mr. MISHRA
to the Presiden
General Assemb
May I, before an
tions and greeti
and the delegati
exalted office. I
responsible for
are known as a
leader symboliz'
India have had th
of the ancient R
of the Kushan a
cultural. litera
either land found
we venture to ho
as a rallying p
people o,f India
your occupation 0
85. My delegatio
all three resoluti
the Maldive Isla
which have just
Organization. Th
Organization one
of universality.
belong to the A
have even great

1332nd meeting - 21 September 1965
and economic ties. The territory of the Gambia is
deeply embedded in our country. and the river from
which the new Afl'ican nations takes its name is,
in its upper reaches. a Senegalese river. whose
basin constitutes the area of Senegal known as
Upper Gambia or Beledougou.
80. Moreover. our two countries are inhabited by
peoples of the same ethnic groups: chiefly Malinkes.
Volofs and Diolas. On either side of the official
frontier live populations which are very closely
related. Trade relations between the Gambia and
Senegal follow age-old economic channels. Since
markets ~re not far distant from one another. goods
transport costs are low. so that Senegal and the
Gambia are mutually advantageous trade outlets
for each other.
81. Consequently. as President Senghor has already
stated, it is Senegal's hope that the collaboration
between the two countries will expand increasingly.
The future of the Gambia and Senegal and their
economic and social development are interdependent.
82. We again convey to the Prime Minister of the
Gambia. Mr. D. K. Jawara, who is present in this
hall, and to his delegation, the 'most sincere congTatulations of the Government and the delegation
of Senegal on the accession of their country to
national independence and its ,admission to the United
Nations. We express our warmest wishes for the
prosperity of the Gambia and. the happiness of its
people.
83. In addition, I should'Uketothank the Government
of the United Kingdom,'whichcisthus continuing its
work of decolonization· in Africa. and
hope that
this good example will shortly be followed in Angola,
Mozambique, so-called Portuguese Guinea, South
Africa and Rhodesia.

r

84. Mr. MISHRA (India): Mr. President,your election
to the Presidency of the twentieth session of the
General Assembly is indeed an auspicious augury.
May I, before anything else, offer you the congratulations and greetings of the Government, the people
and the delegation of India on your election to this
exalted office. In your own country. where you are
responsible for the conduct of foreign affairs, you
are known as a scholar of eminence and a political
leader symbolizing courage and integrity. Italy and
India have had the friendliest relations from the days
of the ancient Romans. During that era-the period
of the. Kushan and Maurya emperors in India-the
cultural. literary. artistic and industrial mores of
either land found reflection in the other. Even today
we venture to hope that your Presidency will serve
as a rallying point for a troubled world. and the
people of India will derive hope and inspiration from
your occupation of this high office.
85. My delegation has had the honour of co-sponsoring
all three resolutions for the admission of the Gambia,
the Mald:i.ve Islands and Singapore-three new States
which have just become Members of our great
Organization. Their admission no doubt brings the
Organization one step close:i.' to attaining the ideal
of universality. These three new Member States
belong to the Afro-Asian family. and therefore we
have even greater cause to rejoice. The Maldive

~.

• ""'.>;{'' '" .::J

J~

"--

-.,r-

-~

~

7

Islands and Singapore are both our close neighbours.
Their peoples and ours have had friendly contacts
through the ages, and they have a heritage that we
share. Their admission into this Organization is.
therefore, a source of strength to us. Though the
Gambia faces the Atlantic Ocean on the west coast
of Africa and is geographically not as close to us as
the Maldive Islands or Singapore, our common AfroAsian heritage, our common faith in Afro-Asian
ideals and the quest for justice through peace bind
the Indian people to the brave people and land of
the Gambia. In this case. let us pray that the Gambia's
admission into the United Nations is a precursor of
the eventual admission of Angola, Mozambique and
other territories of Africa which are still groaning
under the colonial yoke.
86. In welcomingthese three countries to membership
of the United Nations, India extends to them the hand
of friendship and assures them that they will not
find us wanting or tardy in promoting technical and
economic co-operation witn them to the fullest extent
possible for attaining our common goals of social
and economic development.
87. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): It
is with great pleasure that I join my colleagues
who preceded me in congratulating Foreign Ministe:c
Fanfani on his election here today. I congratulate him
both as an old friend, personally. and as a friend of
my country. It was my pleasure not so long ago to
see him in Washington, and I am sure that neither of
us realized at that time that we would renew our
friendship here in this Assembly Hall.
88. I hope you will forgive me, Mr. President, if I
have a special message for Lord Caradon. If Lord
Caradon takes justifiable pride in the fact that his
country was colonized by Italians fifteen hundred
years ago, I must remind him of that great and
peaceful voyage of Christopher Colombus which opened
the way for his country's colonization of my country.
and the subsequent Revolution and the subsequent
independence of my country. And. to emphasize the
peaceful character of Italian colonization of the United
States, I now extend a most cordial welcome to Lord
Caradon to join me on the stand at the forthcoming
Colombus Day Parade in New York.
89. I take pleasure in welcoming the three new
nations as Members of the United Nations. The
United States has long enjoyed cordial relations
with the Gambia. In fact. if my history is correct,
President Franklin D. Roosevelt was the first
President of the UnitedStates, in his official capacitythere were others who did so as private citizens-to
visit the African continent: and he enjoyed several
stops in the Gambia during the Second World War.
The United States therefore welcomes the Gambia
as a Member of the United Nations , with the convi.ction
that its role in this body will be a positive and
constructive one in the important work which stands
before all of us. We wish the Gambia and its people
all success and godspeed.
90. It is always gratifying, further. to welcometothe
family of nations a State which has achieved its
independence through peaceful negotiation. The United
States therefore. has the '~pleasure of noting the

f

d
h

r
h

a
c
9

s
9

b

a
c
t
f
9
t

a

_ _ _ _ _ _. ._
8

. .-

....IIi!lIIIIiI. . .IIiiIlIIIII. . .' ·-·'---~-. . . .-

General Assembly - Twentieth Session - Plenary Meetings

admission of the Maldive Islands to the United Nations.
We are certain that within the framework of this
world Organization which recogPizes the equality of
all States, large and small, the Maldive Islands
will make greatptogress towards the ultimate goal
we all shal'e, of economic and social justice.
91. Similarly, I take particular pleasure in extending
the welcoIlle of our country to Singapore on its admission as a Member of this great Organization.
It was my pleasure to visit Singapore last summer,
and I can pear personal witness to the energy and
capacity of the peoplb ofthat country. We confidently
expect the Government and people of Singapore to
make a significant contribution to the deliberations
and councils of this Organil!:ation, and we are convinced
that Singapore will apply to our common problems
of world peace and security the· dynamic and
constructive approach which has been a hallmark of
the extraordinary sO!lial, economic and political
development of this Asiatic State.

92. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
wish to thank Mr. Goldberg for the worQ$ which he
has addressed to the President and, by leave of
Members of the Assembly, to thank him also on
behalf of the peaceful Italian colonizers of this
hospitable land.
93. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): May I first of all, Mr.
President, congratulate you on your election to the
Presidency of the twentieth session of the General
Assembly. You have come to us, Sir, with a very
well-established reputation as a scholar of renown
and it statesman of great distinction. In your own
country you have occupied the highest position. Your
wise and varied experience in world affairs eminently
qualifies you to lead us and guide our deliberations
in this important session of the General Assembly.
You rep~'~;>ent It country that has contributed immeasurably to'human civilization and that has always
played a .central Role in the progress of mankind
towards a better and fuller'life. I happen to come
from' a very ancient country myself, andyour people
and ours have crossed paths on many occasions
during the last 2,000 or more years. Our histories
have been so long that it is difficult for me to
remember how many times we colonized you and
how many times you colonized us. But I can say,
as you know, Sir, that we have the closest and most
cordial relations with your great country.

94. It gives ,me great pleasure now to· speak on
behalf of the Arab States Members of the United
Nations, who have been kind enough to ask me to
speak on their behalf, in welcoming the three new
Members of the United Nations.
,95.· It is always an important occasion when new
Members are admitted to the United Nations. It

brings us nearer to the goal of universality for which
we all strive but which we have not yet attained. We
are particularly gratified in this case that the three
countpies that have become full-fledged Members of
this Organization have always had the closest and
friendliest relations with the Arab people.
96. The admission of the Gambia and its accession
to independence is particularly gratjfyingtous because
as Members of the United Nations, and particularly

-\~--. . . . . .-----~

..

of the Committee of Twenty-Four,lI we have seen
at r.:.rst hand the progress of the Gainbianpeople
toward liberty and independence. We hope that the
independence of the Gambia and its.- admission to
the United Nations will accelerate the process of
liberation in the entire African continent, which
has stayed too long under forei61l domination and
has suffered the indignities of being ruled by others.
97. The Maldive Islands have a special relationship
with the Arab nation. We have the closest historical
and cultural ties with the people of the Maldive·
Islands, and our own language is spoken by the m.
98. We are also very happy to see Singapore admitteci

as a Member of the United Nations. The Arab people
and the people ofSingapore have had a long association,
and we have always had the most cordial and the
closest relations with them.
99. It is therefore my very great pleasure to welcome
very warmly these three new Members of !'he United
Nations and to wish them success. We are sure that
they will enrich our debates and will help us very
greatly in achieving our .objective in handling the
tasks that lie ahead.
100. Mr. MATSm: (Japan): Mr. President, may I
first offer to you the warm congratulations of the
Japanese delegation on your election as President
of the twentieth session of the General Assembly,
an event that gives us the greatest satisfaction. We
look forward to working under your very distiZ'l.!,'llished
leadership, and we are sure that this session will
produce an abundance of fruitftu results under your
wise guidance.
101., May I~ at the same time, express our profound
thanks and appreciation to our former President, His
Excellency Mr. Alex Quaison-Sackey, who at a moment
of crisis in the United Nations was able to discharge
the heavy responsibilities placed upon him and guide
the nineteenth session of the General
Assembly
to
.
./
a successful conclusion.
102. The Japanese delegation has deemed it a high

honour to participate as one of the co-sponsors of
the resolution proposing Singapore for membership
of the United Nations, and we now take great pleasure
in extending to the delegation of Singapore our warm
congratulations and a hearty welcome.
103. Singapore is a relatively- smallcountryperhaps,
but we all know in the United Nations that small
countries frequently make the largest contributions
to the successful outcome of our tasks. The truly
remarkable progress Singapore has made under
the leadership of its highly resp'3cted Prime Minister,
Mr. Lee Kwan Yew, in the few short years since
it became fully self-governing, is ample evidence of
what VIe might expect from Singapore in the United
Nations. We are <lonfident that the delegation of
Singapore will have many very substantial contributions to make to our deliberations and to our work
for the freedom and independence and the peace
and prosperity of mankind.
§J Special Committee on the Situatio~ with regard to the Implements-,

non of the Declaration Oil the Granting ,of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples.

104. On thisocca
group has asked m
and to eXtend the w
welcome of this
Gambia, the Maldi
sure that those
veri substantially
pledge our unstinti
of all three of 0'
forward to a close
relationship with th
105. Sir James

s}'eaking for the
sho..:.li! !:l:?- to e
behalf of the Austral
on your election.
country; it is a t
qualities and exper
to the high offices
today. I assure you 0
delegation to the be
of your tasks this s
106. I should also

retiring President,
old colleague of roi
that the circumst
impossible for him
as long as and on a
Presidents. But tl
more effort from
going and ~n ti'Yin
were preventing i
occasions when the
meant more wOlk :£
grateful to hitr. f
that he showed
Prf'lsident.
10'1'. I now turn to

and on this subjec
Government of Aus
ments of Canada
glad to welcome th
tries with whicb
the past through m
or through other Co
these countries in t
before us for approv
~ .•.
The Gambia i
monwealth. It is
Commonwealth. We
and co-operative
African members
look forward to t
Gambia.

109. The Maldive I
have only a stretch
us and we are de
progress and stabil"
We look forward t
we hope that they
part, in this Assemb

'110•. I turn now to
. with which Australia
close ~ssociations.

•

F

1332nd meeting - 21 September 1965
104. On this occasion, the Chairman of the Asian
group has a.sked me to speak on behalf of this group
and to eXtend the warm congratulations and the hearty
welcome of this group to the delegations of the
Gambia, the Maldive Islands and Singapore. We are
sure that those delegations will also contribute
veri substantially to our work. We are happy to
pledge our unstinting co-operation to the delegations
of all three of our newest Members, and we iook
for.ward to it close. continuing and very harmonious
relationship with them.
105. Sir James PLIMSOLL (Australia): As I am
sf'eaking for the first time in this Assembly, I
sho..::lrl !!!:~ to extend to you, Mr. President, on
behalf of the Australian delegation, our congratulations
on your election. It is a tribute to your very great
country; it is a tribute to. you per:sonally, to the
qualities and experience that you have, and a tribute
to the high offices you have held in the past and h0ld
today. I assure you of the co-op'3ration of the Australian
delegation to the best of our ability in the performance
of your tasks this session.
106. I should also like to say a few words, about the
retiring President, Mr. Quaison-Sacker, who is an
old colleague of mine and an old friend. I am afraid
that the circumstances' of the last session made it
impossible for him to preside at the rostrum here
as long as and on as manY occasions as some former
Presidents. But this same circumstance called for
more effort from him in keeping the Organization
going and ~n t:i'Ying to overcome the obstacles that
were preventing its meeting. Thi!'; is one of the
occasions when the absence ofwork ~ )r the Assembly
meant more wOlk for the President. We are\ all very
grateful to hitr. for the devotion and imagination
that he showed throughout the year that he was
President.
10'l. I now turn to the admission of new Members,

and on this subject I am speaXiI!g not only for the
Government of Australia, but also for the Governments of Canada and New Zealand. We are very
glad to welcome these Members. They are all countries with whic.h we have had some connexions in
the past through membership of the Commonwealth
or through other Commonwealth links. I shall discuss
these countries in the order in which they have come
before us for approval.

9

graphical region of the world. We have over a period
of many years developed ties with them. There are
ties of trade, fo'/;' example. There is a considerable
amount of trade between Australia and Singapore.
We have many hundreds of students from Singapore
in Australia. There are students from' E,ingapore
in New ZealaIiu.
111. The Prime Minister of Singapore. Mr. Lee
Kuan Yew, paid a most successful and impressive
visit earlier this year to Australia and New Zel?.land.
Only a few weeks ago the Minister of Law, Mr. E. W.
Barker, was in Australia with the Chief Justice,
representing Singapore at the Commonwealth Law
Conference. which was the first Commonwealth conference to be held since Singapol~e became a new
State. So the three of us-Australia, New Zealand and
Canada-look forward with particular pleasure to
having Singapore in our midst. We look forward to
the very close and intimate relations with them. We
look forward to doing what we can to further the
continued progress of Singapore.
11 ,. Singapore and Malaysia and all the other Com-

monwealth' countries in this region have a particular
interest 1.'1 the welfare of a new State. Therefore, on
behalf of the tlu'ee Governments I have mentionedAustralia, Canada and New Zealand-I tai~e pleasure
in welcoming the new Members.
113. Mr. CHALMERS (Haiti) (translated from
French): It is a real pleasure for me. Mr. President.
to present to you the warmest congratulations of
the Republic' of Haiti on your almost unanimous
election to the Presidency of the twentieth sessi0n
of the General Assembly. The choice which the
delegations here have made is a well-deserved
tribute to your well-known qualities of moderation
and wisdom, and is a happy refter-cion on your great
country, Italy, the mother of literature and the arts.
The wishes of the delegation of Haiti for your
success go with you in the arduous task that lies
before you during the present session.
114: I am particularly happy to welcome, on behalf
of my country. the entry of the Gambia. the Maldive
Islands and Singapore into the 'great family of the
United Nations which, it is our cherished hope, will
grow until it embraces all the na.tions of the world.

109. The Maldive Islands are close to Australia. We
have only a stretch of the Indian Ooean lying between
us and we are deeply interested in the pontinued
progress and stability and security of those islands.
We look forward to good relations with them and
we hope that they will play their part, their worthy
par", in this Assembly.

115. The countries which are today being admitted
to participation in the life of the Organization are
not large countries. countries with exceptional economic and human resources, the use of which could
be a threat to anyone or anything. These are countries
which ask only to live in peace with their neighbours.
to develop harmoniously for the well-being of their
citizens, and to partake of the benefits and achievements of civilization, while respecting the principles,
purposes and ideals, of the United Nations. Their
accession to full political independence is. nevertheless. a new victory for justice and the right of
peoples to decide their own destiny, in brief. a
victory for the principleS of self-determination and
non-intervention on which the political balance 'in
the world is founded.

'110. I turn now to Singapore. Singapore is a State
with which Australia and New Zealand have particularly
close ~ssociations. We are in much the same geo-

116. ' Haiti, a weakcount.TY withollt great resources
but proud of its glorious, past, and', one of the first
countries in, America to have thrown off the yoke of

~-, The Gambia is a fellow member of the Commonwealth. It is another African member of the
Commonwealth. We al;ready have the most friendly
and co-operative arrangements with the existing
African members of the Commonwealth, and we
look forward to the same intimate ties with the
Gambia.

I

-;10:·_·_·A_2~~~I_$ ~·_£: : : : GI ~.:. :~: :er:I·~al·~·~A:s:s:e"m:_b:ly:·'_1:1 1_' 'l1::'fl:=:lIiit_i:e"t_h::S·_~·_S·S_·i_o:n:III,_-:·p_·_le:n:ar::Y::M:ee::t·in_·_g·s-~--""-"-"-"'Ill"·--"-

lIiIiiI_ _

..

__1_1_1.

colonialism, wishes its brothel' countries which have
just heen admitted to our Organization a happy
existence as free and independent peoples.
117. Mr. DUGERSUREN (Mongolia): Mr. President,

I wish to IDt.,iend to you, on this first opportunity, my

sincere congrat\tlations on your election to the high
post of the President of the General Assembly. Itake great pleasure in expressing our warnl congratulations to the representatives of the Gambia,
the Maldive Islands and Singapore on the unl;l..mmous
admission of their respective countries to membership
of the United Nations.
118. I have been instruced to fulfil this pleasant

duty in the name of the delegations of the People's
Republic of Bulgaria, the Byelol'ussianSovietSocialist
Republic, the Republic of Cuba. the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic, the Hungarian People's Republic,
the Polish People's Republic, the Socialist Republic
of Romania, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and the
Mongolian People's Republic.
119. In expressing the common feelings of the
peoples of the above-named countries, I extend to
the peoples of the Gambia. the Maldive Islands and
Singapore our best wishes for their well-being and
prosperity.
120. Mr. MALECELA (United Republic of Tanzania):

Mr. President, before I go on to congratulate you on
behalf of the African group. I should like to say a
word or two about the former President. Although we
had the opportunity of paying tribute to the Foreign
Minister of Ghana for the excellent way in which he
conducted the nineteenth session of the General
Assembly, I want once again. on behalf of the African
group. to pay him a great tribute for his great
statesmanship. In our memory, he will remain the
son of Africa who served the world Organization
at a time when a statesman like him was needed.

admission of fresh blood and new thinking to the
deliberations of the United Nations. But it gives
particular pleasure to my delegation, on beI:alf
of the African group, to welcome the soverelgn
States of t..'le Gambia, the Maldive Islands and
Singapore.
125. The Gambia has had a long colonial history.

like that of my own c-ountry, and indeed like that of
many AfricaJ:l countries. It had to fight for its
independence under the wise and able leadership of
its Prime Minister. The admission of the Gambia
to the United Nations is there.fo:re to us a symbol of
the growing forces of the Third World. the forces
which are dedicated to the ideals of international
peace and world security,the liquidation ofcolonialism
and imperialism, and the bettermG~t of the economic
conditions oi? the overwhelming majority of the human
race.
is destin:d to play its positive part in the liberation
of the peoples who are still under the colonial
yoke. I am therefore greatly privileged on this
historic occasion to welcome Singapore into the
membership of the United Nations on behalf of the
African group.
127. We also are very happy to welcome the Maldive

Islands to our midst. We are privileged to extend the
hand of friendship and comradeship to the leaders
and the people of these islands. We feel that their
active participation in the deliberations of this
Organization will certainly further international peace
and international understanding.
128. At the same time. while we take this opportunity
to welcome the new Members. the occasion also
remulds those of us from Africa of many of our
brothers who are still under the yoke of colonialism.
Here I am reminded of s11",h countrie~ as Southern
Rhodesia. South West Africa, and many of the
Portuguese colonies in Africa. and indeed of the
many colonies elsewhere in the world. Therefore,
while we take pleasure in welcoming the new Mernbe:>:'s,
we hope at the same time that this process of
decolonization will soon be completed.
take this opportunity to welcome the States of the
Gambia, the Mlildive Islands and Singapore to this
Organization.

122. Italy is the cradle of past and present civiliza-

130. Mr.

123. The twentieth session begins with grave international problems still unresolved. We feel confident,
however. that your election to the office of President
will make a positive and significant contribution to
8. lastipg· solution of the complex and vexing issues
facmg mankind today.
124. I have great pleasure. ai,. "'1 Cll behalf of the
African group, in welcoming the new Members to
this august body. One of the happy signs of dynamic
growth of our present Organization is the annual

132. Yourare well kn
as the r€-pre
to associate
tributes whi
European gr
success of t
been entrust
of this Asse
133. My c
the Gambia,
extends the
on the occas

126. Simrapore. an independent a.,d sovereign State,

121. It also gives me great pleasure, on behalf of
the African group. to congratulate you. Mr. President,
on your election to the high office of the Presidency
of the twentieth session of the General Assembly. Your
distinguished career in the field of international
affairs is very well known and highly appreciated.
It is therefore most opportune that the destiny of
this august body should be in your very capable
hands.

tion. Rome, to many of us. is still the capital of all
that represents progress, peace and prosperity.
During this session. we therefore have every right
to be optimistic about the furtherance of the wort.1.ly
ideals of international peace and prosperity.

the world
to recall tUI
upon which
based which
in Latin.

129, Once again, on behalf of the African group, I

134. The P
kind remar
fereui. coun
very consci
the confiden
in me toda
shown the d
pleasure in i
Mr. D. K. Ja
135. Mr. J
please allo
delegation's
to those ofs
on the ooca
twentieth se
we are reI
achievement
are no secre
speakers. It
us, and I da
untiring effo
national fell
given the rec
136. I shoul
predecessor
given in the
devoted ser
of crisis and

SEYDOUX (France) (translated from
French): The Western European group, comprising
eighteen countries. has requested me to act as its
spokesman. Mr. President, and to congratulate you
most warmly on your election by a sweeping majority
to the Presidency of the General Assembly at its
twentieth session. It is a duty which I fulfil with great
pleasure.

137. It is
the General
because of
Commonweal
the moment
these two gr
peace emana
about an i
ance with the

131. History and geography have given Italy a special
and eminent position in Europe. Many Europeans
regard themselves as sons, or :rather, great-grandsons
of Rome. that extraordinary civilization whicJ;1 to a
great extent helped to shape the emerging European
societies. Many European States owe to it an essent!al
part of their institutions. Italy has been and remalOS
for us a marvellous source of culture without which

138. But it
humility that
of addressi
take pride i
from the pat
Gambia has
.nations. But
terms of siz

, .

..

1332nd meeting - 21 September 1965
the world would not be what it is today. Allow me
to recall tuat there Is not a singlr )rinciple of action
upon which our nati.onal 01' intbrnational policy is
based which can be better formulated t.b.an it has been
in Latin.
132. Your qualities as a statesman, Mr. President.
are well known, and I am happy. as a Frenchman and
as the rE-presentative of the Western European group.
to associate myself with the many and well-deserved
tributes which have been paid to you. The Western
European group expressed the warmest hopes for the
success of the lofty and difficult mission which has
been entrusted to you by the virtually unanimous vote
of this Assembly.
133. My country is gratified at the admission of
the Gambia, Singapore and the Maldive Islands, and
extends the most cordial good wishes to their leaders
on the occasion of their admission to the Organization.
134. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The
kind remarks which many representatives from different countries have made about me make me
very conscious of the need to do my best to deserve
the confidence which the Assembly has expressed
in me today. After thanking all those who have
shown the desire to reiterate that confidence, I take
pleasure in inviting the Prime Minister ofthe Gambia.
Mr. D. K. Jawara. to address the Assembly.
135. Mr. JAWARA (The Gambia): lVIr. President.
please allow me to arid my own and the Gambian
delegation's warmest and most sincere congratulations
to those of so many othe:;.' distinguished representatives
on the occasion of your election as President of the
twentieth session of the General Assembly. Although
we are relative strangers here, the services and
achievements which have earned you this distinction
are no secret to us. as has been evidenced by previous
speakers. It is a matter of immense satisfaction to
us, and I dare say it is to everyone here. that your
untiring efforts in the cause of world peace, international fellowship and co-operation should now be
given the recognition which they so eminently deserve.
136. I should also like to congratulate your immediate
predecessor. Mr. Alex Quaison-SalJkey, for having
given in the course of the past year. wonderful and
devoted service to this Organization during a period
of crisis and anxiety.
137. It is with a sense of deep sorrow that I address
the General Assembly for the very first time: sorrow
because of the fratricidal war in which two of our
Commonwealth brothers-India and Pakistan-are at
the moment engaged. It is my earnest hope that
these two great countries will heed the counsels of
peace emanating from this United Nations and bring
about an immediate cessation of hostilities in accordance with the Security Council resolutions.
138. But it is also With a deep sense of pride and
humility that I avail myself ofthe honour and privilege
of addressing this Assembly. With my people. I
take pride in the thought that. without ever departing
from the path of peaceful and orderly progress, the
Gambia has taken its rightful place in the family of
.nations. But I am all humility when I reflect that, in
terms of size, population and resources. the Gambia

11

is one of the smallest countries to achieve national
sovereignty and a place inthe international community.
139. This presents very special problems when a
country like the Gambia finds that it is eh1lected to
contribute to the expenses of the United Nations on the
basis of a minimum contribution which is out of
proportion to its resources, and to join speciaUzed
agencies which intend to assess the country's contribution on the basis of the same minimum rates.
This problem has been eh1l1ained to the SecretaryGeneral and. unless a solution can be found. it
may well mean that my country may not be able to
participate in the affairs of the United Nations to
the extent which we would wish.
140. The Gambia. as you may know, is a very
small country wbich, in material terms, has little
to offer this Organization. With a population of just
over 300.000 and a one-crop ~conomy, our circumstances cannot be said to be exactly comfortable;
and in this regard. my people and I are certainly
grateful to the British Government for the assistance
which we have rf>ceived in the past and are still
receiving from it.
141. My Government, being conscim.is both of tl:.e
close ethnic ties between the Senegal and the Gambia.
and of the problems which a small independent
country would eventually have to face, has always
felt that the future of the Gambia lies in a close and
friendly relationship with Senegal. With this uppermost
in mind. my Government held discussions \vith the
Senegalese Government which led to the commissioning
of a team of United Nations experts, with the assistance
of the Secretary-General. to whom I owe a personal
debt of gratitude for his generous offer of assistance.
to examine and report on the possibilities of closer
association between the two countries on the attainment of independence by the Gambia. The report was
considered by the two Governments. and Senegal
and the Gambia have agreed to a partnership based on
a loose entente regulated by treaties.
142. I am happy to be able to inform this Assembly
that the two Governments have agreed to co-operate
in the fields of foreign policy, security and defence.
In implementing these agreements. the Gambia and
Senegal have exchanged High Commissioners with
a view to furthering the cause of closer co-operation.
I must also mention that a team of sl?ecialists from
the United Nations l"ood and Agriculture Organization
(FAO), who were seconded to the United Nations
Senegal-Gambia Mission. have examined the implications, for agriculture. of economic integration between
the Gambia and Senegal, and have laid the groundwork
for a development survey of the Gambia River basin
on a regional basis. The report has been examined
by both Governments and the recommendations accepted in principle. Arrangements to provide the
finance required' for a feasibility survey of these
projects are now being examined.
143. W1rl.lst admitting that the Gambia has' many
problems. particularly economic and financial, I
take comfort from the fact that. having regard to
the sympathy and impartiality which characteri.ze
the brotherhood of nations, my country is no longer
alone in its struggles now that it has gained admission
to this society.

\

.
~

.
. ,

•

...

12

...._IIM!ilt!M~_ _IIollIIIJ_. ._--_!I!!_--_!!!!_._!!!!_.!I!!
__ !I!!
__!!!!_!!!!._!I!!_iI!!I!
__!!l!!IQ!
..__~._~\ll'i!_~_~~...-I!!i!f'! .•_......-""""'lij,ii.~iil!M. . .I'fII...~iIj5liJ!"I!!'lI!~

General Assembly - Twentieth Session - Plenary Meetings

144. I gm happy to say. and I am sure every member
Wll1 support me in this. that ~dspite its temporary
difficulties over contributions to the United Nations
peace-keeping operations. this Organization is becoming a more potent factor year by year in the maintenance of world peace. This notable achievement is in a
great measure attl'ibutable to the dedication and the
vtsion of its Secretary-Gen~ral. We in the Gambia
have always followed with great interest and admiration
his efforts and those of his predecessors to settle
international disputes. and their successful interventions in various poUtical and economic crises.
145. Everything. therefcre. which can be done should
be dcne to maintain and further strengthen such
an effective instrument for the improvement of the
lct of mankind. It is in this spirit that I pledge the
unqualified support of my co:mtry for any cause
which this Organization may decide to make its own.
and which aims at recogni?ing the uniqueness and
the value of the individual and the common humanity
of all peoples.
146. Before I finish, I should like to express my
personal gratitude and that cf my Government and
the people of the Gambia to all t,.'lOse nations which
have, at various stages in the proceedings, sponsored
my country's admission to membership in tL~e United
Nations. as well as to all those representatives who
have spoken so eloquently today to bid us welcome
to this Assembly.
147. Finally. I must say that this day will live with
me for as long as memory last•• and I pray that the
Almighty will watch over the liberwies and the destinies
of all Members of this Organization which. it is true
to say, has upheld the finest traditions of this century
and all that is noble in humanity. May continued
goodwill and success attend its deliberations.
148. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
After congratulating the Prime Minister of the Gambia
once again upon the admission of his country to the
United Nations. I have pleasure in inviting His
Excellency Mr. Rajaratnam. Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Singapore, to address tile Assembly.
149. Mr. RAJARATNAM (Singapore): Mr. President.
parmit me to add the congratulations of my delegation
to those of other representatives on your election as
President of the twentieth session of the General
Assembly. It is undoubtedly your great experience
and wisdom in the ways of Di9n and nations which
prompted your colleagues to elect you to this high and
responsible office. As. a new Member. my delegation
will rely o~ your wisdom and experience to guide it
through this session and my delegation will. for its
part, try to lighten your burden by giving you the
fullest co-operation throughout the proceedings ofthis
session.
150. I also take this opportunity to thank all members
of the Security Council who scrutinized our application
for membership and did not find us wanting. We
are particularly grateful to Malaysia. Jordan. the
Ivory Coast and t.he United Kingdom for jointly
sponsoring our appiication for membership. Last
but not least. I must thaitk all those Member States
which co-sponsorec:i the resolution welcoming our
admission into the United Nations.

151. I should like also to congratulate the Gambia
and the Maldive Islands on their admission to membership of the United Nations. This is a momentous
occasion for them as it has been for us, and like
us. they see in their membership ofthis Organization,
international endorsement of their sovereignty und
integrity as nations.
152. Now that Singapore has been received into the
fold of the United Nations. I would lUee to assure this
Assembly that my country will join with other nations
in their efforts to realize the aims and objects of
the United Nations Charter. For us, the essentials
of the Charter are the preservation of peace thl'ough
collective security. promotion of economic deve10p~
ment through mutual aid and the safeguarding of the
inalienable right of every country to establish forms
of government in accordance with the wishes of its own
people. My country stands by these three essential
principles and will give loyal and unflinching support
to the United Nations in its efforts to promote them.
153. We support these ideals because we realize
that the well-being, security Clnd integrity of our
cmmtry can be assured only on the basis of these
principles. It is practical self-interest and not vague
idealism which makes it necessary for Singapore to
give loyal support to these basic elements in the
Charter of the United Nations.
154. World peace is a necessary condition for the
political and ecor..omic survival of small countries
like Singapore. For one thing. we want pea.ce simply
because we have not the capacity to make war on
anybody. We are surrounded by biggel' and more
powerful neighbours with whom we cannot afford
to settle issues by force of arms. So it is natural
that my co~try should adhere firmly to the policy of
resolving differences between nations through peaceful
negotiations, not by violent means.
155. At the same time my country is well aware
that it is situated in a region of the world which
has traditionally been the battleground of big power
conflicts. Singapore itself. by virtue of its strategic
location, has attracted the attention of nations which
have Wished to dominate South-East Asia. Under
British colonialism, Singapore was developed not only
as the commercial hub of South-East Asia. but also
as a military base for consolidating Western
imperialism.
156. Today, with the granting of independence to
Singapore, the role of this base is no longer to
underwrite British colonialism in South-East Asia.
My country has made it clear that it will never allow
the base to be used for aggref'lsion. The base is there
with our consent to ensure our own security in an
area of increasing military instability. The moment
we can be assured of effective alternative arrangements which Will guarantee our security. that moment
foreign bases will have to go.
157. My country feels that money spent on weapons
of war and armies is money wasted. Furthermore,
it is obvious to us that. given modern techniques of
war. a country of about 2 million people can never. on
its own. adequately secure its own defence. Modern
defence has to be collective in character. especially
for small nations, and that is Why we believe that
ultimately our defence and security must be secured

th::.-ough the c
United Nations
every move to .
ness of the
as the United
security vf s'
such temporal'
security.
158. Singapor
Almost all OUT
devoted to dev
We have no roi
is small. !nste
building homes
and hospitals.
state. If indep
empty slogans.
much of our
only war that
poverty. ignora
ment. and anyt
and freedom to
159. To fight
peace with 0
peace with all
have a great d
All we ask, the
build our coun
have no wish
countries or to
lives. In retur
with us even if
in our own coun
160. This is
of non-alignme
wish to be dra"
our own way 0
between two c
the acceptance
and common fo
161. However.
equates non-al
issues of rig
taking a stand
lest it disp1ea
those with whi
is only in reg;
and· not in reg~
in the United N
regard to the b'
the integrity a
in which small
162. My count
experience. is
a developing c
pendence witho
.of nations. Our
should not drive
of absolute sov
peace with oth
acceptance of'
cultural and po
for decades b
exchange of ide
Litho in V.N.

1332nd meeting - :;n September 1965
th:.oough the collectiv9 and effective strength of the
United Nations. We shall therefore support any and
every move to strengthen the peace-keeping effectiveness of the United Nations. But until such time
as the United Nations can really safeguard the
security vf small nations we shall have to find
such temporary solutions as we can to assure our
security.
158. Singapore is essentially a trading community.
Almost all OUT energies, resources and talents are
devoted to developing our trade and 0111' industriel';.
We have no military aircraft and no tanks. Our army
is small. Instead, we have devoted our resources to
building homes for the people as well as schools
and hospitals. We seek a welfare state, not a warfare
state. If independence and freedom are not to be
empty slogans, then we mus: continue to spend as
much of our resources as we can on fighting the
only war that matters to the people-the war against
povert"y, ignoran.::e, disease, bad housing, unemployment, and anything and everything which denies dignity
and freedom to our fellow men.
159. To fight this kind of war we need to live in
peace with our neighbours. And we want to live in
peace with all our neighbours simply because we
have a great deal to lose by being at war with them.
All we ask, therefore, is to be left alone to reshape and
build our country the way our people want it. We
have no wish to interfere in the affairs of other
countries or to tell them how they should order their
lives. In return we ask other countries to ba friendly
with us even if they do not like the way we do things
in our own country.
160. This is why my country has chosen the path
of non-alignment. It simply means that we do not
wish to be drawn into alliances dedicated to imposing
our own way of life on other countries. Friendship
between two countries should not be conditional on
the acceptance of common ideologies, commonfriends
and common foes.
161. However, this does not mean that my country
equates non-alignment with indifference to basic
issues of right and wrong, or that it will evade
taking a stand on matters which it considers vital
lest it displeases some Member nations, including
those with which it has close ties, Non-alignment
is only in regard to narrow power bloc interests
and· not in regard to the basic principles embodied
in the United Nations Charter. To be non-aligned in
regard to the basic tenets of the Charter is to destroy
the integrity and effectiveness of the United Nations
in which small countries like mine place ~heir hopes.
162. My country, by the very nature of its historic
experience, is aware that in the contemporary world
a developing country must learn to cherish independence without denyingthe reality of tnterdependence
.of nations. OU1' abhorrence' of dependence on others
should not drive us into embracingthe dangerous myth
of absolute sovereignty. In order to learn to live in
peace with other countries there must be Willing
acceptance of' the need for interdependence. The
cultural and political development of my country has
for decades been based on free intercourfle a.nd
exchange of ideas drawn from many races and from
Litho in V.N.

many continents. We are a multi-racial society
constituted out of the three major racial stocks of
Asia-Chinese, Malay and Indian, in additon to Arab,
Ceylonese, Eurasian and others.
163. Four major cultures-Malay, Chinese, Indian
and Western-and their respective languages are
allowed free and equal development on the basis of
cross stimulation. We think of ourselves not as
excl:..lsively a Chinese, Indian or a Malay society but
as a little united nations in the making. The four
cultures which flourish in my country collectively
represent the historic achievements of more than
half of humanity, and we see no reason for suppressing
other cultures in order to ensure the supremacy of
only one of them. The multi-racial and multi-cultural
character of my country has made us somewhat
sceptical of those who preach the superiority and
exclusiveness of one culture and one race. In a
multi-racial society one soon learns that no one
people has a monopoly of wisdom and that one's
own culture is not without flaws. This not only
breeds tolerance for different viewpoints but also a
readiness to learn and borrow from the accumulated
wisdom of other peoples. Thesp. are, we have
discovered, attitudes of mind essential for the smooth
and constructive development of a multi-racial and
multi-cultural society.
164. The United Nations is also a multi-national
and multi-cultural Organization trying with some
measure of success to develop an international
solidarity and common purpose among the nations of
the world. We shall therefore bring to the work of the
United Na.tions the attitude and approaches of a
multi-racial nation aware that independence and
interdependence of peoples and nations are not incompatibie goals to pursue.
165. Finally, though we are a small country not
endowed with ample natural resources, and though
we cannot be counted among the highly advanced
nations of the world, we are nevertheless a highly
urbanized community that has acquired experience
and knowledge which we are prepared to share with
others in the regional co-operation schemes organized
by the agencies of the United Nations. Undoubtedly
these offers of assistance can be carried out only
on a modest scale, but if we obtain help from others
we must be ready to help others as much in return.
166. This is what the United Nations means to us
and despite the cynics who focus attention on its
many shortcomings, my country has faith in the
future of the United Nations simply because, without
it, there is no worth-while future for humanity.
167. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
wish to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Singapore for his statement and to congratulate
him once again upon the admission of his country
to the United Nations. Singapore, I am confident,
will make a valuable contribution to our work.
168. Before adjourning the meeting, I should like
to announce that the flags of the Gambia and Singapore
will be raised at a ceremony which 'will take place
at lG a.m. tomorrow, opposite the delegates' entrance.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.
nOOl-October 1966-2,075
