UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1999/6
12 February 1999
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND
FRENCH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3978th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 February 1999 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "Protection of
civilians in armed conflict", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the matter of protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
"The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the growing
civilian toll of armed conflict and notes with distress that civilians now
account for the vast majority of casualties in armed conflict and are
increasingly directly targeted by combatants and armed elements. The
Council condemns attacks or acts of violence in situations of armed
conflict directed against civilians, especially women, children and other
vulnerable groups, including also refugees and internally displaced
persons, in violation of the relevant rules of international law, including
those of international humanitarian and human rights law.
"The Security Council is especially concerned about attacks on
humanitarian workers, in violation of the rules of international law.
"The Security Council notes that large-scale human suffering is a
consequence and sometimes a contributing factor to instability and further
conflict, whether due to displacement, violent assault or other atrocities.
Bearing in mind its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Council affirms the need for the
international community to assist and protect civilian populations affected
by armed conflict. The Council calls upon all parties concerned to ensure
the safety of civilians and guarantee the unimpeded and safe access of
United Nations and other humanitarian personnel to those in need. In this
regard, the Council recalls the statement of its President of 19 June 1997
(S/PRST/1997/34) and also recalls its resolution 1208 (1998) of
19 November 1998 on the status and treatment of refugees.
"The Security Council expresses particular concern at the harmful
impact of armed conflict on children and, in this regard, recalls the
statement of its President of 29 June 1998 (S/PRST/1998/18).
99-03788 (E)

120299

/...

S/PRST/1999/6
English
Page 2

"The Security Council calls upon all parties concerned to comply
strictly with their obligations under international law, in particular
their relevant obligations under the Hague Conventions, the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977, and the United
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child of 1989, as well as with all
decisions of the Security Council.
"The Security Council strongly condemns the deliberate targeting by
combatants of civilians in armed conflict and demands that all concerned
put an end to such violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. The Council expresses its willingness to respond, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, to situations in which
civilians, as such, have been targeted or humanitarian assistance to
civilians has been deliberately obstructed.
"The Security Council also condemns all attempts to incite violence
against civilians in situations of armed conflict and calls upon States to
fulfil their obligations to take action at the national level. The Council
affirms the need to bring to justice, in an appropriate manner, individuals
who incite or cause violence against civilians in situations of armed
conflict or who otherwise violate international humanitarian and human
rights law. In this regard, the Council reaffirms the importance of the
work being done by the ad hoc Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda and calls upon all States to cooperate with the Tribunals, in
accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions. The Council
acknowledges the historic significance of the adoption of the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court.
"The Security Council notes the deleterious impact of the
proliferation of arms, in particular small arms, on the security of
civilians, including refugees and other vulnerable populations. In this
regard, it recalls its resolution 1209 (1998) of 19 November 1998 which,
inter alia, stressed the importance of all Member States, and in particular
States involved in manufacturing and marketing of weapons, restricting arms
transfers which could provoke or prolong armed conflicts or aggravate
existing tensions or armed conflicts in Africa, and which urged
international collaboration in combating illegal arms flows in Africa.
"The Security Council expresses concern over the widening gap between
the rules of international humanitarian law and their application. The
Council welcomes the commemorative events planned to mark the fiftieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions and the centenary of the First
International Peace Conference of The Hague. These occasions provide an
opportunity for a further exploration of ways and means by which the
international community may enhance the compliance of parties to an armed
conflict with the relevant rules of international law, including those of
international humanitarian law.
"The Security Council welcomes the continuing contribution to the
implementation of international humanitarian law of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.

/...

S/PRST/1999/6
English
Page 3

"The Security Council considers that a comprehensive and coordinated
approach by Member States and international organizations and agencies is
required in order to address the problem of the protection of civilians in
situations of armed conflicts. To this end, the Council requests the
Secretary-General to submit a report containing concrete recommendations to
the Council by September 1999 on ways the Council, acting within its sphere
of responsibility, could improve the physical and legal protection of
civilians in situations of armed conflict. The report should also identify
contributions the Council could make towards effective implementation of
existing humanitarian law. The report should examine whether there are any
significant gaps in existing legal norms, through the review of recent
reports in this regard. The Council encourages the Secretary-General to
consult the Inter-Agency Standing Committee in formulating his
recommendations.
"The Security Council affirms its intention to review the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in accordance with its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations."

-----
