S/PV.8250

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8250th meeting

Wednesday, 9 May 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Córdova Soria
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Alfassam
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mrs. Dickson
Mr. Simonoff

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-14045 (E)
*1814045*

S/PV.8250

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

reportedly resulted in the deaths of at least 15 people
and injured many others.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: I thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to present my latest report on my Office’s
activities in relation to the situation in Libya. Before I
do so, allow me to congratulate the Republic of Poland
for holding the presidency of the Security Council
during the month of May, as well as to thank you,
Madam President, for presiding over today’s briefing.
In 2017, I announced before the Council that Libya
is a priority situation for my Office. I am pleased to
inform members that since I last reported, in November
2017 (see S/PV.8091), my Office has made significant
progress, including a return to investigations on the
ground in Libya. Despite that progress, significant
challenges remain, including ongoing conflict and
insecurity throughout Libya, which have had an
adverse impact on our ability to progress swiftly
with our investigations. That ongoing conflict and
instability continue to create fertile ground for violence
and, regrettably, the commission of atrocities. Hence,
I welcome the efforts of stakeholders in Libya to hold
broad-based inclusive consultations aimed at breaking
the long-drawn-out political stalemate, in an effort to
stabilize and bring an end to conflict in Libya.
The efforts of those who continue to sow the seeds
of further violence and discord are, first and foremost,
at the expense of the suffering Libyan people. I express
my condemnation of the recent double suicide bombing
of the headquarters of the Libyan High National Election
Commission in Tripoli a few days ago, on 2 May, which
2/17

09/05/2018

Surely, accountability for the grave and
destabilizing crimes under the Rome Statute and full
respect for the rule of law are integral to sustainable
peace, stability and development in Libya. My Office
continues to do its part within the four corners of its
mandate, notwithstanding the challenges inherent in
undertaking our investigations and prosecutions in a
situation of ongoing conflict, as is the case in Libya. I
am pleased to report that, on the strength of our resolve
and commitment, we are steadily progressing in our
investigations into not only crimes committed in 2011,
but also more recent and ongoing crimes.
As the Council is aware from previous reports, due
to security considerations, my Office had not conducted
investigative missions in Libya for over five years.
During that time, my Office sought innovative ways
to continue its investigations and, as a result, secured
successes. Nevertheless, not being able to investigate
on the ground in Libya was far from ideal. We have
remained committed to sending our investigators to
Libya and have looked for every opportunity to do so.
I am therefore pleased to report that, in March 2018,
members of my Libya team travelled to the country for
our first mission on Libyan territory since June 2012.
That recent visit to Libya marks significant progress
in my Office’s investigative activities. The value of
the opportunity to work in the territory where alleged
crimes have been, or are being, committed cannot be
overemphasized. I am confident of the prospect of
future missions to Libya that will offer renewed hope
of more rapid progress in our investigative activities.
I would be remiss if I did not take this opportunity
to express my deep appreciation to the Libyan
Prosecutor-General’s office for facilitating the mission
in March and hosting my team. The visit would also
not have been possible without the invaluable logistical
support of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), and in particular the support of the Special
Representative to the United Nations Secretary-General
and Head of UNSMIL, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, whom I
had the privilege to personally meet on the margins of
the Munich Security Conference in February. I am most
grateful to him and his staff for their invaluable support
and concrete assistance. I look forward to continued
constructive collaboration with those key partners
in Libya.
18-14045

09/05/2018

The situation in Libya

I equally take this opportunity to invite the Council
to engage further with my Office to identify areas on
which we can work together to advance the trinity
of peace, justice and stability in Libya, within our
respective and complementary mandates.
As the Council is aware, three public warrants
issued in the Libya situation remain outstanding. Most
recently, on 15 August 2017, Pre-Trial Chamber I issued
a public warrant of arrest against Mahmoud Mustafa
Busayf Al-Werfalli for his alleged role in committing or
ordering seven executions that resulted in the murder of
33 people. The executions were filmed and graphically
depicted in videos posted on social media.
The arrest warrant against Mr. Al-Werfalli
demonstrates my Office’s commitment and capacity
to quickly and effectively respond to alleged crimes
that are increasingly being committed, as a result
of social media, before our eyes. Investigators and
prosecutors working under my supervision are able
to gather and analyse evidence and, where reasonable
grounds exist, apply for a warrant within a short period.
The expeditious issuance of public warrants can be
essential in circumstances where a deterrent effect may
be achieved.
However, that desired deterrent effect can go only
so far. Greater deterrence can be assured only through
the arrest and surrender of suspects to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) so that they may answer the
charges against them. That is critical. The case of
Mr. Al-Werfalli demonstrates the crucial importance of
the timely arrest and surrender of individuals subject to
ICC warrants of arrest. The Council is certainly aware
that, despite being the subject of an ICC arrest warrant,
Mr. Al-Werfalli remains at large and appears to have
continued to act as a commander in the Al-Saiqa
Brigade. Regrettably, there are now credible allegations
that, in the period since the warrant was issued, he has
committed further murders, which may be prosecuted
by my Office as war crimes under the Rome Statute.
Since the issuance of the warrant, last year, I have
repeatedly called on the Libyan national authorities to
comply with their obligation to arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Werfalli to the ICC. I have also specifically called
on General Khalifa Haftar, Commander of the Libyan
National Army (LNA) and superior of Mr. Al-Werfalli,
to cooperate with the Libyan authorities to enable and
facilitate his arrest and surrender. ICC suspects who
are indicted with charges of grave crimes under the

S/PV. 8250

Rome Statute cannot be sheltered or given refuge. They
must be apprehended and face justice before the Court
so that their guilt or innocence can be established. The
Libyan people deserve answers. The victims of atrocity
crimes in Libya deserve to have justice done and see
that it is genuinely done. I have also appealed to all
States, including members of the Council, to assist
in effecting Mr. Al-Werfalli’s immediate arrest and
surrender to the Court.
That notwithstanding, to date Mr. Al-Werfalli has
not been surrendered to the Court. What is further
troubling is that, on 24 and 25 January, photographs and
video footage emerged on social media that appeared to
depict Mr. Al-Werfalli brutally murdering 10 people in
front of the Bayat Al-Radwan Mosque in Benghazi. At
the time of their deaths, those people were blindfolded,
with their hands tied behind their backs. That horrific
execution was reportedly carried out in retaliation for
the equally horrific bombing carried out by unknown
perpetrators at the same mosque the day before. Those
two bombings resulted in the killing of at least 34
people, including children, and the wounding of more
than 90 others. Those are all terrible crimes.
As I made clear in my public statement on
26 January, the bombings in front of the Bayat
Al-Radwan Mosque, as well as the execution of 10
persons in apparent retaliation, demand condemnation
from us all. They also demand action to prevent further
atrocities that claim the lives of Libyan citizens. My
Office continues to closely monitor the volatile situation
in Libya, including in and around Benghazi. I will not
hesitate to file new applications for warrants of arrest
in relation to the Libya situation, including crimes
in Benghazi, where there are reasonable grounds to
believe that crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court
have occurred, and the evidence supports such action.
The LNA has claimed that it is investigating. Mr
Al-Werfalli in relation to this most recent execution. In
August 2017, the LNA also publicly stated that it was
investigating Mr. Al-Werfalli for the alleged executions
that are included in the ICC warrant of arrest. In the
light of the additional murders allegedly committed by
Mr. Al-Werfalli, which were filmed and shown on social
media, those claims simply do not appear credible.
In my report to the Council in November 2017,
I expressed my concern that the continued failure to
secure the arrest and surrender of ICC suspects in
Libya emboldened those already committing crimes.

18-140453/17

S/PV.8250

The situation in Libya

Mr. Al-Werfalli’s immediate arrest and surrender is now
more important than ever, not only for him to answer
for his alleged crimes but to also send a clear message
to would-be perpetrators that such reprehensible
crimes will not be tolerated and that there will be real
consequences for the commission of such crimes.
I repeat my call to the Council to engage with my
Office and lend its support in assisting with strategies
for the arrest and surrender of ICC fugitives in Libya.
Once again, I appeal to all States, including members
of the Council, the Libyan authorities and the LNA,
to facilitate Mr. Al-Werfalli’s immediate arrest and
surrender to the Court.
Turning to the other Libyan cases, reports about
Saif Al-IslamAl-Qadhafi’s whereabouts have appeared
in the media. Those reports often present conflicting
accounts about whether or not he continues to be
detained in Libya. Regardless of Mr. Al-Qadhqri’s
custodial status, I take this opportunity to reiterate
that the ICC warrant of arrest against him remains
outstanding and that Libya continues to be under an
obligation to immediately surrender him to the Court. I
call on the Libyan authorities to take all the necessary
steps to have Mr. Al-Qadhafi surrendered to the
Court, in accordance with Libya’s international legal
obligations, the Court’s rulings and repeated calls by
members of the Council.
The warrant of arrest against Al-Tuhamy Mohamed
Khaled, former head of the Libyan Internal Security
Agency, also remains outstanding. That warrant was
issued in April 2013, and made public in April 2017.
Despite efforts by my Office, in cooperation with
other organs of the Court, Mr. Khaled remains at large.
Without assistance and reliable information from States,
persons or other entities in a position to assist, it will be
difficult to ensure his surrender to the Court. Without
arrests, both the cause of international criminal justice
in Libya and the very raison d’être of resolution 1970
(2011) will be undermined.
Cooperation remains a cornerstone of the Rome
Statute legal framework and the effective functioning
of the Court. My Office continues to engage with States
and relevant organizations to exchange information,
where possible, and assist national authorities carrying
out investigations and prosecutions of crimes relating
to Libya. That is in the spirit of complementarity as
enshrined in the Rome Statute, specifically foreseen
under paragraph 10, article 93, of the Statute. That
4/17

09/05/2018

approach is also in line with goal 9 of my Office’s
strategic plan for the period 2016-2018. In our parlance,
strategic goal 9 seeks to develop with relevant judicial
actors, and with full respect for their respective
mandates, a coordinated investigative and prosecutorial
strategy to close the impunity gap for Rome Statute
and other serious crimes that foster further insecurity
in Libya.
Recently, there has been a focus on crimes relating
to human trafficking and abuses against migrants.
That engagement allows for more collaborative efforts
to gather and analyse information and helps identify
which of the judicial actors is in the best position to
investigate or prosecute alleged crimes. I take this
opportunity before the Council to offer the support
and expertise of my Office to States and organizations
engaged in combating criminality in Libya and across
its borders, where a symbiotic relationship in the fight
against impunity can be fostered.
In addition to Libya, my Office continues to
receive significant support from a number of other
States, including Italy, the Netherlands, Tunisia and the
United Kingdom, as well as regional and international
organizations, such as INTERPOL, and many
non-governmental organizations. Cooperation from
Libya, State parties and non-State parties, as well as
support from the Council, is vital to achieving progress
in the cases before the Court and to the rapid progress
of our ongoing investigations. The exemplary efforts
of a number of States and organizations are worthy of
emulation, with the end goal of reversing the trend of
violence and impunity for serious crimes in Libya.
Even though my Office is making important
progress, significant challenges remain. The volatile
security situation in Libya is exacerbated by the
ongoing armed conflict among militias in many parts
of the country. As I highlighted in my fifteenth report,
there continue to be extra-judicial killings, high
civilian casualties and the systematic use of arbitrary
detention of individuals, who are often subjected to
serious violations of human rights. I am also concerned
about the large numbers of migrants held in detention
centres — whether run by the national authorities or
by militias. Migrants are reportedly killed, abused or
mistreated while in detention and in transit.
I also remain extremely concerned about the reports
of slave auctions in Libya. The fact that such abhorrent
acts could occur in the twenty-first century is an insult
18-14045

09/05/2018

The situation in Libya

to the memories of the victims of bondage of the past
and an assault on the oneness of humankind and the
historical progress made to eradicate such callous acts.
I reiterate that my Office continues to be seized of the
Libya situation, and our investigations are ongoing. I
also benefit from this occasion to state that we expect
we will be in a position to apply for warrants of arrest
against other suspects in the near future.
Let me conclude by reiterating my appeal to the
Council to demonstrate its commitment to the pursuit
of justice in Libya by fulfilling its responsibility
to facilitate the provision of financial support, as
envisioned under article 115 (b) of the Rome Statute, as
well as practical support to my Office. Such support is
needed now more than ever as my Office forges ahead
with the ever-challenging task of executing its mandate
under the Rome Statue, as triggered by the Council in
resolution 1970 (2011) approximately seven years ago.
That responsibility includes leveraging the
Council’s unique authority under international law to
ensure the timely execution of the Court’s decisions
and, in particular, the execution of ICC arrest warrants.
Seeking justice for those in Libya who are victims of
crimes under the Rome Statute will remain a priority
for my Office. We remain determined to fulfil the
responsibility the Council entrusted to my Office,
with the Rome Statute as our guide. My Office will
do its part, but our work alone is not enough. We have
a collective responsibility to cultivate a culture of
accountability for Rome Statute crimes in Libya and
to deter the commission of future crimes. The tragic
consequences of a failure to do so are well known to
us all. I count on the Council’s support and I thank
members for their time and attention.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We would like to
thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing.
We have taken note of the Prosecutor’s fifteenth
report and update on activities regarding the situation
in Libya, which unfortunately demonstrate that
significant challenges remain. According to the report,
in the period from January to February, the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya documented 248

S/PV. 8250

civilian casualties, which represents a sharp increase as
compared to previous months. A substantial number of
those causalities were caused by improvised explosive
devices, gunfire, remnants of war and shelling.
Ongoing political instability, a fragile security
situation and a breakdown in the rule of law have resulted
in the widespread abuse of human rights and violations
of international humanitarian law. The current security
and political situation in Libya continues to create a
breeding ground for growing impunity for terrorist
groups and armed militias. In that regard, Kazakhstan
strongly condemns the 2 May attack on the Libyan
High National Elections Commission in Tripoli, for
which the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant claimed
responsibility. The perpetrators of such a heinous attack
should be held accountable.
We are deeply alarmed about reports of alleged
grave crimes relating to the abduction and subsequent
execution of members of the military and civil society
and political rivals or their family members. We are also
concerned about the fact that thousands of migrants
and refugees in Libya suffer abuses, trafficking and
detention under inhuman conditions.
Lastly, Kazakhstan believes that an effective and
credible Government is crucial in bolstering Libya’s
commitment and capability to restore and promote
the rule of law, address impunity, protect basic human
rights and provide justice for past violations. To that
end, the international community’s support to Libya
remains vital to restoring stability and security
throughout the country. Such stability and security
require the unification and reconstruction of all national
institutions, including political authorities, security
and defence forces. The United Nations and its Support
Mission in Libya have a key role to play in that process.
Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her very clear and concise fifteenth report and her
briefing to the Security Council today. The work and
focus of the International Criminal Court on Libya is
extremely important in tackling impunity and making
accountable those responsible for serious crimes of
international concern. The Court’s work has the full
support of the United Kingdom.
The most recent report of the Prosecutor makes
clear why the situation in Libya remains deeply
troubling. The continued political divisions in Libya
have benefited only certain armed groups intent on

18-140455/17

S/PV.8250

The situation in Libya

criminality. Those groups have created an environment
of lawlessness, intimidation and fear. That situation
serves to underscore the urgent need to break the
political deadlock and bring peace to Libya and its
people. It is vital that all parties engage in good faith
with the United Nations-led political process.
We must ensure that those who have committed
and continue to commit human rights violations and
abuses in Libya, including unlawful killings, do not
evade justice for their crimes. The United Kingdom has
strongly supported resolutions adopted by the Human
Rights Council aimed at increasing accountability.
We fully endorse the ICC’s efforts in parallel. The
United Kingdom also reiterates its call for all parties to
cooperate with the ICC in relation to the arrest warrant
for Mahmoud Al-Werfalli, and for all those committing
acts amounting to war crimes and crimes against
humanity to be investigated and held accountable,
regardless of the side they support. The current cycle of
violence and impunity must be stopped.
The recent mission of the Office of the Prosecutor to
Libya was an important step in strengthening the focus
of scrutiny on those who have acted with impunity. In
that regard, we welcomed the cooperation of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya and the Office of the
Prosecutor-General in Tripoli with the visiting mission.
In the wake of reports of the appalling mistreatment
and even enslavement of migrants, we also welcome
the Office of the Prosecutor’s work with Member
States, national authorities and judiciaries, interested
European institutions and the Libyan ProsecutorGeneral’s Office to investigate and prosecute such
crimes. At the same time, we appreciate the resource
constraints under which the Prosecutor is operating in
relation to those investigations.
We are grateful for the Prosecutor’s update on the
cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, Abdullah Al-Senussi
and Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled. We fully support
the Court’s call for cooperation from the members of
the Council, Libya and all States in connection with
the individuals who remain at large and are accused
of alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed in Libya in 2011. It is crucial that Member
States and the relevant international organizations work
to assist the Libyan authorities in their efforts to build
the rule of law in Libya. Together with our international
partners, we will continue to work with Libya to provide
it with the support that it needs to meet the challenges
it faces. At the same time, the United Kingdom, as a
6/17

09/05/2018

strong principled supporter of the ICC, will continue to
provide its full support to the Prosecutor and her team.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First and foremost, I would like to wish our
colleagues a happy Victory Day, which marked the
beginning of the foundation of our Organization 73
years ago.
Concerning the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and Libya, the situation in Libya remains complex.
We believe that the path to national reconciliation and
restoring the country’s unity and State institutions lies
in a broad intra-Libyan dialogue. Russia supports the
efforts to advance the political process, which should be
coordinated under the auspices of the United Nations.
We hope that the action plan for Libya developed through
the United Nations will be implemented effectively.
We take note of the fifteenth report of the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court on the investigations
of the situation in Libya, as well as the fact that during
the reporting period, members of the Office of the
Prosecutor of the ICC visited Libya for the first time in
five years to conduct investigative activities. That is in
fact the most noteworthy event mentioned in the report.
There have otherwise been no substantive changes,
unfortunately. The work of the ICC remains selective
in its approach. Every arrest warrant issued has been
directed at people from Muammar Al-Qaddafi’s circle.
Not one case dealing with the alleged crimes committed
by insurgents and terrorists has been initiated so far.
The ICC long ago distanced itself from investigating
issues related to civilian casualties resulting from the
NATO strikes. The Court continues to worry about the
army’s operations in the Derna area, but for some reason
the Prosecutor has said nothing about the mujahidin,
who for all practical purposes are holding the local
population hostage.
The report once again draws attention to the
catastrophic situation of refugees and migrants in
Libya. There can be no question that more attention
should be paid to combating the criminal networks
that are linked to the illegal migration through Libya.
We completely agree, but that situation should be
approached comprehensively, including by identifying
the purchasers of human commodities in the countries
of destination that receive migrants.
We feel that once again the report attempts to
present the Libyan dossier as a kind of burden imposed
on the Court by the Security Council. We believe that
18-14045

09/05/2018

The situation in Libya

with an attitude like that, using the services of the
Court is pointless. Our delegation is determined to do
whatever is necessary to enable the members of the
Council to avoid repeating the unsuccessful experiment
of referring Security Council issues to the ICC.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and the
briefing by Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda.
Peru notes with deep concern the continued violence
and serious human rights situation in Libya, which have
led to a serious humanitarian crisis, with more than
150,000 internally displaced persons and numerous
accusations of atrocity crimes. We believe that, in
line with its primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council
should refer to the International Criminal Court cases
in which access to justice and accountability must
be ensured, and we therefore support the work that
the Court is doing in Libya. It is clearly complex and
requires the full cooperation of all States, including the
local authorities. Accordingly, while we acknowledge
the efforts of the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s Office,
we should remind the Libyan authorities of their duty to
execute arrest warrants issued by the Court.
We also believe that, while the International
Criminal Court plays a fundamental role in ensuring
that the most serious crimes do not go unpunished,
its jurisdiction is complementary to the responsibility
of every State to protect its people. That includes
the obligation to investigate, prosecute and punish
those responsible for atrocity crimes. In that regard,
in addition to constituting a legal obligation, the
authorities’ cooperation with the Court must be seen
as an opportunity to strengthen justice and the rule of
law in domestic and international areas. That means
fostering greater confidence in legal institutions and
effective deterrence. Confidence in the justice system
and predictability in its response to atrocity crimes is
of particular relevance for a country like Libya, which
is affected by conflict and terrorism committed by
organizations — such as Da’esh and its affiliates and
Boko Haram — that control parts of Libya and are
allegedly involved in trafficking migrants.
Peru believes that it is essential to advance
implementation of the United Nations action plan on
an inclusive political process in Libya as quickly as
possible. In the immediate future, that means ending
the current cycle of violence and working on concrete

S/PV. 8250

measures to effectively protect the people, especially
the civilian population, as well as confronting terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. We believe that such
action must be predicated on discussions between the
High Council of State and the House of Representatives,
as well as through the good offices of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya throughout the process. Good
faith, a spirit of mutual understanding and respect for
international law and international humanitarian law
must prevail among the parties.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight the work
of the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, as well as that of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, whose
support in March enabled the Office of the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court to make its first
visit to the country since 2012.
Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): I thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) for her briefing on her Office’s work pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) to seek accountability for
atrocity crimes committed in Libya.
As we have said many times before in these
briefings, those responsible for crimes committed
during the 2011 revolution must be held to account. The
Security Council unanimously referred the situation in
Libya to the International Criminal Court to guarantee
that the atrocities of the Al-Qadhafi regime would not
go unpunished and that those victims would receive a
measure of justice.
Today we reiterate our demand for accountability.
We have called for Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to be
brought to The Hague to stand trial for crimes against
humanity for the murder and persecution of hundreds
of civilians in 2011. We note that the International
Criminal Court has also issued an arrest warrant
for Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled, the former head
of Libya’s notorious Internal Security Agency, in
connection with the alleged torture and other serious
crimes against individuals perceived to be enemies of
the Al-Qadhafi regime.
Turning to more recent events, the United States
continues to have grave concerns about the human rights
situation in Libya. We have noted the International
Criminal Court’s arrest warrant for Major Al-Werfalli,
who has been accused of unlawful killings. We remain
deeply concerned by those allegations and reiterate our
calls for the relevant Libyan authorities to ensure that

18-140457/17

S/PV.8250

The situation in Libya

Al-Werfalli is held accountable for alleged crimes, in
accordance with international law.
We are also horrified by the appalling reports of
human trafficking in an alleged slave market in Libya.
We commend the Government of National Accord’s
condemnation of slavery and welcome its ongoing
investigation into reports of abuse of migrants. We
urge the Government of National Accord to accelerate
its efforts to hold those responsible to account and
cooperate closely with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration to assist migrants and
improve their living conditions.
The United States supports ongoing efforts to
identify and designate individuals and entities that
threaten the peace, stability or security of Libya,
including through the commission of serious human
rights abuses and violations. In particular, designations
of those who engage in migrant smuggling or human
trafficking are an important part of the international
effort to promote accountability in Libya. To counter
those and other abuses in the long-term, Libya must
first overcome its political impasse in order to achieve a
stable, unified Government capable of ending impunity,
defeating terrorism, safeguarding the rule of law and
providing security and prosperity for all Libyans.
To that end, we continue to support United Nations
Special Representative Salamé as he works to advance
political reconciliation and help Libya prepare for free
and fair elections by the end of the year that are credible
and conducted in a peaceful manner. We look forward
to the continued collaboration with our international
partners, including through the work and attention of
the Security Council and the Human Rights Council, to
achieve a peaceful and prosperous Libya.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the United
States concerns regarding the ICC’s activity with
respect to the situation in Afghanistan, including our
long-standing and continuing principled objection
to any ICC investigation or other activity concerning
United States personnel absent United States consent or
a Security Council referral.
Mr. Alfassam (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my appreciation to the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her extensive briefing on the
fifteenth report of the Prosecutor of the ICC to the
Security Council in accordance with resolution 1970
8/17

09/05/2018

(2011). The State of Kuwait welcomes the efforts of
the Court to ensure justice and prevent impunity, in
accordance with international law, especially in the
light of the difficult situation in Libya. We commend
the progress achieved by of the Office of the Prosecutor
in confronting the security challenges that impede
its endeavours to carry out its responsibilities of
monitoring and bringing to justice the perpetrators of
crimes, especially given the proliferation of weapons
and militias that have come to harm the Libyan people.
In that regard, we share Ms. Bensouda’s concern
about the recent escalation of armed conflicts in
Tripoli, Benghazi, Sabha and Derna. We also express
our concern over the information contained in the
Prosecutor’s report with respect to the perpetration
of crimes such as kidnapping and executing military
and civilian personnel and members of the competing
political factions, targeting the mayor of Misrata,
Mr. Mohamed Eshtewi, and committing crimes against
migrants. Those are all tantamount to flagrant violations
of international humanitarian law. We therefore renew
our strongest condemnation of such crimes.
In that regard, the greatest responsibility falls to
the Libyan authorities to uphold justice throughout all
Libyan territories by exercising their jurisdiction. The
ICC should take into the account the national criminal
jurisdiction in Libya for cases being considered by
Libyan courts in the context of realizing the desired
integration between the national judiciary and the
ICC, which is a complement to the national criminal
jurisdiction, in accordance with article 1 of the
Rome Statute.
To that end, we commend the important
cooperation that the Libyan authorities provide to the
Court and Prosecutor in line with the requirements of
resolution 2174 (2014). Furthermore, the State of the
Kuwait underscores the importance of the international
community’s continued support to the Libyan
Government with a view to developing a comprehensive
strategy to address the heinous crimes committed in
Libya and providing the necessary assistance to the
Libyan authorities for them to establish the rule of law,
administer justice and implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
While the State of Kuwait recognizes the magnitude
of the security challenges facing Libya, which in turn
undermine the role of the ICC experts in conducting
their investigations, we welcome the field visit by a team
18-14045

09/05/2018

The situation in Libya

from the Prosecutor’s Office to Libya in March. It took
place after a hiatus that lasted more than five years. We
also value the support provided by the relevant Libyan
authorities and the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya. Such cooperation will undoubtedly further the
effectiveness of the investigations conducted by the
Office of the Prosecutor in the discharge of its mandate.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
appreciation for the important work being done by
the Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and her Office
in carrying out her mandate to investigate the serious
crimes committed in Libya. We emphasize the need
for the Council to provide its continued support to
those efforts.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me, at the outset, to express
my delegation’s gratitude to Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for her
efforts and courage in the discharge of her duties, as
well as for the outstanding briefing she delivered to the
Security Council on the fifteenth report on the situation
in Libya.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea strongly
condemns the terrorist attack on Libya’s High National
Election Commission in Tripoli on 2 May, in which
approximately 15 people died and several others were
injured, including staff members of the Commission
and police officers. In that regard, we wish to convey
our most sincere condolences to the Libyan people and
the families of the victims.
It is clear that, despite the enormous efforts by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and
of some local stakeholders working for reconciliation,
the security situation in Libya remains serious and
unstable. That leads to continued armed clashes among
the various factions involved in the conflict, adding
to a climate of impunity, extrajudicial executions,
widespread arbitrary detentions, trafficking in persons
and sale of migrants and ongoing violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. All of that
raises grave concerns due to the threat posed to peace
and security in the country and beyond its borders.
We therefore call on the international community to
cooperate in good faith with the International Criminal
Court and to redouble efforts to fight this epidemic of
crime. We also strongly call on the various factions
in the conflict to immediately put an end to this
grave situation.

S/PV. 8250

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses its
deep concern about the situation prevailing in Libya,
as was just detailed and illustrated in Ms. Bensouda’s
briefing. I should point out that the situation in Libya
has serious implications, not only for the entire SaheloSaharan region but for other regions of Africa, with
the consequent growing wave of terrorist activity and
attempts at destabilization. It is therefore obvious
that, if a drastic solution is not found to the situation
in Libya, the efforts deployed to respond to terrorist
actions in western and central African countries will all
be in vain, since the root causes of the evils affecting
the countries of these regions can be found in Libya
due to the support provided to terrorist groups like
Boko Haram and other Libyan criminal gangs. That is
why my Government strongly calls on the international
community to resolutely support Ms. Bensouda in
putting an end to the reigning impunity in Libya. We
also once again strongly condemn all the criminal
activities taking place in this brotherly country.
In conclusion, we welcome and greatly appreciate
the work of the Court through the Prosecutor and her
Office despite the difficulties she faces. We thank her
for the efforts to re-establish justice in Libya. We also
express our appreciation to UNSMIL for the major
support and cooperation it provides to Ms. Bensouda.
That appreciation is extended to the Office of the
Libyan Prosecutor General for having facilitated her
mission in March.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Ms. Bensouda
for her written report in accordance with resolution
1970 (2011), as well as for her briefing.
The continued violation of human rights committed
in Libya by all parties remains a source of concern.
The cycle of violence has resulted in the death and
the injury of civilians, as well as the destruction of
civilian facilities. Abduction, torture, killing and
arbitrary detention continue unabated and with a
sense of impunity. In addition, illegal armed groups
and human trafficking persist, while criminal gangs
continue to commit crimes, exploiting and further
exacerbating the general climate of lawlessness, as
well as the weakness of judicial institutions. Terrorist
groups, including elements of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham, continue their attacks. This climate of
violence and insecurity is hampering the ability of
victims to seek protection and justice. We condemn
any violence against civilians or civilian facilities,

18-140459/17

S/PV.8250

The situation in Libya

including the recent terrorist attack on the High
National Elections Commission.
We take this opportunity to express our solidarity
and sympathy with the people and the Government of
Libya. Its civilians, particularly the most vulnerable
groups, such as women, children, migrants and
refugees, bear the brunt of the violence and suffer
enormously. The agony of Libyans must stop. The sense
of continued impunity should end. It is important that
the international community work together to support
Libyans to end the current state of fear and uncertainty.
All actors who commit human rights violations and
attacks must be held accountable and brought to justice.
We also believe that it is vital to end the prevailing
sense of impunity through appropriate mechanisms
that respect the sovereignty and the territorial integrity
of Libya. All Libyan parties should be reminded that
the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure is
their responsibility.
While it is the primary responsibility of the Libyans
themselves to take all appropriate action to restore
peace and security, the international community has an
important role to play in supporting their endeavours.
In that regard, it is indispensable to continue capacitybuilding and technical assistance for the State
institutions of Libya, particularly judiciary and law
enforcement bodies, with the objective of ensuring the
rule of law. The international community should also
provide comprehensive support anchored in a long-term
strategy for the building of State institutions that could
foster an environment of peace, security and stability.
It is our conviction that the continued and
widespread violation of human rights cannot be stopped
sustainably until all Libyan political actors find a
lasting political solution for the prolonged transition.
In that regard, we reiterate our support for continued
diplomatic efforts by the Special Representative and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
Mr. Ghassan Salamé. We believe it is critical to intensify
coordinated and complimentary international efforts to
fully implement the United Nations action plan. The
reconciliation process should also be further promoted
to reinforce the political process, as well as to address
community grievances in a manner that could rebuild
the social fabric and trust.
Allow me to conclude by underlining that only
a comprehensive political process can address the
multifaceted crisis in Libya and ensure the rule of law.
10/17

09/05/2018

In that regard, we encourage all Libyans to continue to
work together in a spirit of compromise and to continue
to engage in the conclusive political process set out in
the action plan to bring about concrete results that could
facilitate its full implementation. The international
community, particularly the Council, should also send
a strong and unified message to pressure all parties to
stop violence and engage in an inclusive and sustained
political dialogue.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her report and her briefing.
As we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of
the Rome Statute this year, France wishes to acknowledge
the contribution of the International Criminal Court
to the repression of the most serious crimes. It is our
responsibility as members of the Security Council
committed to this imperative of justice to support the
Court, which, although it has not yet reached its full
potential, has made an undeniable contribution to the
maintenance of peace and security. That is the case in
Libya, and I would like to reaffirm France’s support
for the Prosecutor concerning the implementation of
resolution 1970 (2011), which referred the situation in
Libya to the International Criminal Court.
France notes with satisfaction the efforts of the
Office of the Prosecutor to carry out its investigations
in difficult circumstances. The mission led to Tripoli
in March with the help of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), a first for the Office of
the Prosecutor in five years, constitutes progress, as
Ms. Bensouda highlighted earlier this morning.
Given the scale of the challenges facing the Libyan
people, the support of the Security Council to UNSMIL
is essential. We welcome the personal mobilization of
the Secretary-General and the valuable contribution
of his Special Representative, Mr. Ghassan Salamé.
France fully supports him.
Today it is essential that all Libyan actors truly
commit to implementing the Special Representative’s
action plan. As the Council has repeatedly pointed out,
the Skhirat Agreement is the only valid and legitimate
framework throughout the transition. Following the
initial positive steps in the political process, such as
the consultations between the two chambers, which
launched a new momentum for dialogue, we must
now go further. All actors must remain committed to
the national conference and the general elections in
18-14045

09/05/2018

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8250

2018. Holding a credible, transparent and democratic
electoral process will be a key step in the transition.

been involved in other killings since the warrant for his
arrest was issued.

As we know, there are still many security, legal
and political obstacles. The situation on the ground
remains very volatile, as demonstated by last week’s
cowardly attack, claimed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, against the headquarters of the Libyan
High National Electoral Commission in Tripoli, which
we strongly condemned. That is why building a unified
national security architecture under civilian authority
remains a priority. The status quo is unacceptable. The
Libyan people have demonstrated their desire to return
to democratic legitimacy in Libya by registering in
large numbers on the electoral rolls since the beginning
of the year.

France once again urges the Libyan National Army
to transfer Mr. Al-Werfalli to the Libyan authorities as
soon as possible so that they can hand him over to the
ICC in accordance with their obligations to cooperate
with the Court, as provided for in resolution 1970 (2011).
That would be an important sign of impartial justice in
Libya. France also reiterates its calls for cooperation
with the ICC so that Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled are handed over to the
Court without delay.

Beyond those general observations, I would like to
make three more specific remarks on the work of the
Office of the Prosecutor.
First, I wish to once again recall that the ongoing
investigations by the Office require the complete and
full cooperation of all stakeholders. Cooperation with
the Court by the Libyan authorities is essential for it to
fully carry out its work in accordance with the mandate
entrusted to it by the Rome Statute and by the Security
Council. It is essential to strengthen cooperation among
all the States concerned — whether they are parties to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
or not — in order to provide the long-term support that
the Office of the Prosecutor needs in order to complete
its work. In that regard, the cooperation of the Tunisian,
Netherlands, Italian and British authorities and
INTERPOL is particularly welcome. The contribution
of non-governmental organizations is also valuable
and encouraged.
Like Ms. Bensouda, I also wish to express my
delegation’s appreciation for the support and cooperation
provided by UNSMIL and the Libyan General Prosecutor
to the Office of the Prosecutor. France particularly
welcomes the direct dialogue initiated last February
between the Special Representative and the Prosecutor
on the margins of the Munich Security Conference.
Secondly, with regard to the sections of the report
on the ongoing investigations, France regrets the failure
to execute to date the arrest warrant issued by the Court
against Mr. Al-Werfalli on 15 August 2017. We express
our deep concern over reports that Mr. Al-Werfalli not
only is still at large but continues to serve as head of
the Libyan National Army’s Al-Saiqa Brigade and has

Thirdly, France welcomes the continued attention
of the Office of the Prosecutor to crimes related to
human trafficking and the smuggling of migrants,
which are a direct threat to peace and stability in Libya.
In particular, we note with satisfaction the cooperation
begun with the Libyan General Prosecutor to crack
down on crimes against migrants. It is encouraging to
read in the report that the Libyan General Prosecutor
has issued a significant number of arrest warrants
for such crimes. The Security Council has repeatedly
recalled the importance of perpetrators of such acts
being prosecuted and brought to account. The Council
must also shoulder its responsibilities by imposing
individual sanctions against those who engage in
human trafficking and the smuggling of migrants under
the existing United Nations sanctions regime. France
will continue to mobilize its partners in that regard.
France will also continue to act against the smuggling
networks and their economic model in Libya and the
region as part of the joint statement of 28 August
2017, entitled “Addressing the Challenge of Migration
and Asylum”.
The situation in Libya once again highlights the
vicious cycle of impunity and instability. That reality
compels us to provide answers to the challenges facing
us in Libya. Those challenges cannot be overcome
without the effective assistance of the Court and the
support of the Security Council.
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
begin by thanking the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her, as
always, comprehensive briefing to the Security Council.
Let me also take this opportunity to reiterate, as stated
by our Foreign Minister, Ms. Margot Wallström, our
condemnation of the attack on 2 May against the Libyan
High National Electoral Commission. We repeat our

18-1404511/17

S/PV.8250

The situation in Libya

firm support for the United Nations-facilitated political
process in Libya and for the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Salamé.
There have been positive developments on the
issue since the previous briefing by the Prosecutor in
November 2017 (see S/PV.8091). That includes a visit
by the Office of the Prosecutor to Libya in March. We
appreciate the support provided to the Office of the
Prosecutor by the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya and Special Representative Salamé, as well as
the Libyan General Prosecutor’s Office. The ongoing
cooperation to support further investigative activities
in Libya is essential and should be continued.
We deeply regret that all arrest warrants issued by
the ICC in relation to Libya remain outstanding and that
none of the suspects have been handed over to the Court
since our previous briefing six months ago. We note
that INTERPOL has now issued a red notice regarding
Mahmoud Al-Werfalli. We support the Court’s call on
Libya to cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor and
to immediately arrest and hand over the suspects. It is
imperative that further crimes be prevented. Ensuring
accountability for perpetrators would underscore that
impunity for crimes in Libya will not be tolerated.
Cooperation with the Libyan General Prosecutor’s
Office, the Libyan authorities, States parties to the
Rome Statute, States Members of the United Nations
and all other relevant entities is crucial in order to
assist the Office of the Prosecutor in fulfilling its
mandate. Libya and all States parties are under an
obligation to cooperate with the Court and the Office
of the Prosecutor.
The efforts that have been made by the Prosecutor
to integrate a gender perspective throughout the
Office of the Prosecutor’s investigations and reports is
welcome. We note that the gender perspective was not
included in the most recent report. We wish to stress
the importance of it being considered in future reports.
We welcome the Office’s efforts to investigate the
ongoing situations and cases and to monitor closely the
ongoing situation throughout Libya. That work is crucial
and necessary, since the situation remains volatile
and insecure. Reports of violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights must be investigated and those responsible must
be brought to justice. We remain concerned about the
continued reports of grave human rights violations,
including with regard to the situation of migrants. As
12/17

09/05/2018

the Prosecutor notes, there are continuing worrying
reports of slave auctions in Libya. Those reports must
be fully investigated. We support the efforts of the
Libyan General-Prosecutor’s Office to combat impunity
for crimes related to migrants, as well as the active
engagement, in the spirit of complementarity, of the
Office of the Prosecutor with the national authorities
in relation to crimes committed. We also support the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.
In order to successfully carry out its functions,
including those asked of it by the Security Council, the
Office of the Prosecutor needs our full support — both
political and financial. In that regard, we repeat our call
for sufficient financial funding for the Office’s work on
the Libya situation.
In conclusion, we reiterate our sincere appreciation
for the valuable work and tireless efforts of the Court and
its officials in all organs. The work of the Office of the
Prosecutor continues to make a significant contribution
to accountability for the perpetrators and to justice for
the victims of serious crimes of international concern.
Ms. Córdova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish) My delegation welcomes the report
presented by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and we firmly
support the important work that she and her team are
doing. We also greatly appreciate the work that the
International Criminal Court has been doing since 2011
pursuant to the referral in resolution 1970 (2011). We
reiterate that its effective implementation depends on
the full cooperation of all actors on Libyan territory
and the international community in general. In that
regard, we call on the Libyan Government of National
Accord, the parties involved, the countries of the
region and regional organizations to make every effort
to cooperate so that the Office of the Prosecutor can
carry out its investigative work. We also reiterate that,
in order to avoid impunity, all States, whether or not
they are parties to the Rome Statute, have primary
responsibility for taking action and helping to facilitate
the Court’s investigations.
We take due note of the report and the activities
of the Office of the Prosecutor during the reporting
period. We are extremely concerned about the
incidents and irregularities surrounding the case of
Mahmoud Al-Werfalli, who is the subject of an arrest
warrant issued by the International Criminal Court on
18-14045

09/05/2018

The situation in Libya

15 August 2017, and who, according to reports from
the Libyan National Army, was arrested and placed
under investigation by a military prosecutor. However,
the Prosecutor’s report indicates that Mr. Al-Werfalli
has continued to serve as a commander in the Libyan
National Army’s Al-Saiqa Brigade and was involved
in new summary executions at the beginning of this
year in Benghazi. We also continue to be disturbed by
reports of extrajudicial executions, murders, arbitrary
detentions and armed clashes during the reporting
period, especially as more than 240 people were killed
in the first two months of this year in crossfire and
more than 3,600 displaced from areas where fighting
has intensified.
We again note with concern repeated reports of
sexual violence and harassment used as a tactic of
warfare between the parties and against innocent
civilians, as well as reports of violations of migrants’
rights. Investigations by the Office of the Prosecutor
can not only determine who is responsible but in
the case of crimes against humanity can also invoke
the jurisdiction of the Court to try them. The attack
allegedly perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant on the Libyan High Commission for
National Elections on 2 May is a clear signal that the
investigations by the Prosecutor’s Office should be
expanded to include such criminal acts. Considering all
of this, we strongly urge the parties involved to seriously
commit to the work of the Court and cooperate with it
so as to prevent continued impunity. We reiterate that
all incidents contrary to international criminal law are
subject to investigation in order to identify and punish
those responsible.
My delegation would like to highlight the
collaboration and assistance provided by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya to the Office of
the Prosecutor, which after five years has now been
able to conduct on-site investigations, and we take
this opportunity to encourage the Mission to actively
continue that cooperation. We also reaffirm that the
International Criminal Court is a global undertaking,
in the interest of all States, and its mission is intrinsic
to strengthening international criminal justice, peace
and security, respect for human rights and guarantees
of due process.
Accordingly, as we celebrate the twentieth
anniversary of the Rome Statute this year, we should
take this opportunity to reflect on the Court’s
effectiveness and whether the model, as conceived,

S/PV. 8250

meets expectations of cooperation and universality.
As we have said before, the Security Council and the
membership of the United Nations in general should
cover the costs incurred by the International Criminal
Court in conducting the investigations and prosecutions
within its jurisdiction, especially since several States,
including permanent members of the Security Council,
are not party to the Statute and do not contribute to
those investigations.
Finally, my delegation reiterates its concern about
the public complaints about the performance of former
authorities of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, which are specifically
related to the ongoing investigations in Libya. With that
in mind, and in view of the integrity and transparency
that international tribunals must have, we believe that
it is time that the Office of the Prosecutor gave a public
account of the scope and reliability of those statements
in its next report, since the integrity of the Court is
essential to ensuring its credibility and effectiveness
before the international community.
Mr. Djedje (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to thank the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for her biannual briefing on the Court’s
activity on cases relating to the situation in Libya.
The difficulties encountered by the Prosecutor in
executing various arrest warrants show the complexity
of the situation in Libya, as well as the need for
continued support from the international community
for the ICC’s efforts to combat impunity following the
events in 2011, the negative effects of which continue to
destabilize the entire region. For its part, Côte d’Ivoire,
as a State party to the Rome Statute, reaffirms its full
support for the efforts of the International Criminal
Court to promote international justice and combat
impunity both in Libya and throughout the world.
Seven years after the official end of the Libyan
conflict, the proliferation of armed groups throughout
the country has led to a situation in which abuses and
other serious human rights violations have become
recurrent. These armed groups, which continue to be
the main perpetrators of the violations, act with total
impunity, including for the most serious crimes, such
as abductions, torture, extrajudicial executions and the
sale of slaves in Libyan markets, which constitutes a
crime against humanity. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the Prosecutor’s decision to consider the

18-1404513/17

S/PV.8250

The situation in Libya

09/05/2018

possibility of extending the ICC’s jurisdiction to
crimes committed against migrants, and we continue
to support the inclusion of persons or entities engaged
in such trade on the sanctions list of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) on Libya.

respect to the work that it is carrying out despite the
many difficulties that the Prosecutor has just described
to us. We urge the international community to provide
the Prosecutor all the support necessary to the success
of her mission.

In view of the alarming situation, the international
community should support the efforts of the Libyan
Government to disarm armed groups and re-establish
State authority throughout the country in order to
restore peace and stability to Libya. Strengthening
Libyan institutions’ capacities should be a major
priority so that they can honour their commitments
in terms of promoting and protecting human rights
and, ultimately, as part of the fight against impunity,
establish a system of accountability for perpetrators
of serious violations of those rights. In that regard,
Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its full support for Special
Representative Ghassan Salamé’s action plan for Libya,
with the aim of advancing the national reconciliation
process and laying the foundations for lasting stability
and peace through an inclusive democratic process. We
also welcome the broad public consultations conducted
by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
throughout the Libyan territory to enable the people to
become involved in the peace and reconciliation process.

Ms. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): On
behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I would like to
express our sincere thanks to the Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for her fifteenth report and comprehensive
briefing on the situation in Libya.

My delegation urges all actors in Libya to overcome
their differences and to commit resolutely to a credible
political process that will lead the country to free,
transparent and democratic elections, which are a
prerequisite for the establishment of the rule of law in
the country.
Despite the extremely precarious security situation,
as demonstrated by the most recent suicide attack
on the headquarters of the High National Elections
Commission on 2 May, which killed approximately
10 people and injured several others, my country
encourages the Prosecutor to continue her efforts to
successfully complete the various investigations under
way in Libya. In that respect, my country welcomes the
cooperation of the Libyan authorities, which facilitated
the Prosecutor’s Office first mission to Libyan territory.
This cooperation is important in order to follow through
on the various arrest warrants issued by the Court and
thereby put an end to the long period of impunity in
Libya by enabling the Court to fulfil the mandate
conferred on it by the Security Council.
In conclusion, my country wishes to reiterate its
encouragement to the Office of the Prosecutor with
14/17

The Kingdom of the Netherlands has long been
a firm supporter of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). The ICC is a key institution when it comes to
accountability for the perpetrators of the most serious
crimes of international concern, and we have found the
Prosecutor to be a key ally in this endeavour. I would
like to echo the words that she just spoke — that justice,
peace and stability form a trinity — and to thank her
and her Office for their unwavering commitment to
bringing justice to the victims of atrocities in Libya,
and also, as a part of this trinity, to working towards
the achievement of peace and stability in the country.
Allow me to focus on three important aspects:
the security and human rights situation in Libya;
cooperation with the Court; and combating impunity.
First, we are deeply worried by the volatile security
and human rights situation in Libya. Civilians continue
to be the main victims of the ongoing conflict. The
situation of internally displaced persons and migrants,
especially those held in detention centres, gives
particular cause for concern.
We welcome the work of the Prosecutor in relation
to alleged crimes against migrants. We welcome in
particular her collaborative efforts with States and
organizations, in conformity with strategic goal 9, as
well as her efforts to determine whether these crimes
fall within the jurisdiction of the Court.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains ready to
employ all means available to combat abuses against
migrants and stabilize Libya, including through targeted
sanctions, which can complement and strengthen
criminal prosecution.
Secondly, on cooperation with the Court, for the
Office of the Prosecutor to fulfil its mandate, the full
cooperation and assistance of the Libyan authorities is
essential. In this respect, we would like to commend
the successful cooperation between the Office of the
18-14045

09/05/2018

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8250

Prosecutor and the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s Office,
which has resulted in the Office’s first mission to Libya
in more than five years. However, greater cooperation
is needed from all States and the Council, especially in
relation to the surrender of suspects to the Court.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands stands firmly
by the Prosecutor’s side in her fight against impunity.
Together, if all of us are fully committed to this common
goal, we can make accountability happen for Libya and
all around the world.

In particular, like others, we regret that
Mr. Al-Werfalli, commander of the Libyan National
Army’s Al-Saiqa Brigade, and other suspects have not
been arrested and brought to The Hague, especially
considering that Mr. Al-Werfalli has allegedly
committed more murders since the last report on the
situation in Libya (see S/PV.8091). This shows that lack
of accountability encourages the repetition of crimes,
as perpetrators feel free to commit further offences
without fear of punishment. We find it alarming that
Mr. Al-Werfalli was reportedly released after just one
day in custody. That he remains at large shows disregard
for the Council and for the international community as
a whole.

Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing.

We urge all relevant entities to fully cooperate
with the Court to ensure the immediate arrest and swift
surrender of all those against whom an arrest warrant
has been issued. Moreover, it is essential that the
Council abide by its financial obligations and facilitate
adequate United Nations financial funding for the
Office’s work in Libya.
Thirdly, on combating impunity, this year marks
the twentieth anniversary of the Rome Statute. Twenty
years ago, we were full of hope and confidence that we
had turned a new page, that impunity would be targeted
successfully and that this international approach of
accountability would set a universal norm. Today,
however, the picture is more grim. There are still many
situations outside the Court’s jurisdiction, with Syria
being the most visible, and the Council is all too often
paralysed and does not take adequate action.
We appreciate the efforts of the Prosecutor to
make full use of the options she has at her disposal,
including requests to the ICC for the exercise of
jurisdiction over the alleged deportation of people to
neighbouring countries.
If the Court has the ability to scrutinize situations
all around the world, justice can be brought to those who
are in need of it. We therefore urge all States to become
State parties to the Rome Statute. Until that is the case,
the Security Council needs to take responsibility for
referring situations to the Court.

China is deeply concerned at the developments in
Libya and supports all efforts conducive to stabilizing
the situation there, promoting a political settlement of
the Libyan issue and combating terrorism. We support
the United Nations in its efforts to continue to advance
the relevant plan of action and increase the use of its
good offices. China firmly supports the Libyan people
in the maintenance of national accord and unity. We
hope that the Libyan parties will remain committed
to the political settlement process, which is Libyanled and -owned, engage in inclusive dialogue so as to
move towards one another, resolve their differences and
strengthen mutual trust through negotiations so as to
find a settlement that accommodates the interests of
all parties.
The advancement of national reconciliation, the
restoration of State governance and the early realization
of peace, stability and development in Libya constitute
a prerequisite and the foundation for the realization of
justice in Libya. The international community must
continue to respect the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Libya and continue to provide various forms
of support and assistance to the country.
China’s position regarding the
Criminal Court remains unchanged.

International

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.
I wish to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for presenting
the fifteenth report of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The conclusion of the report
highlights the need for States, non-State actors,
international organizations and other stakeholders to
work with the ICC and help it to exercise its mandate.
Poland appreciates all such efforts, including the ICC’s
cooperation with the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) and Libya’s Prosecutor-General,
which, among other things, has enabled the Office
of the Prosecutor to send its first mission to Libya in
five years. We want to express our deep appreciation
to the Office’s staff, who took on this task despite its

18-1404515/17

S/PV.8250

The situation in Libya

inherent risks, and we hope that more such missions
will be possible and carried out successfully. Poland
also welcomes Prosecutor Bensouda’s declaration
that the investigations being conducted by the Office
of the Prosecutor are making progress and could
potentially lead to new arrest warrants being issued.
We hope this will help deter further crimes. We
would also like to commend some of UNSMIL’s other
actions, as described in the Secretary-General’s report
of 12 February (S/2018/140). We consider them an
important contribution to improving the situation in
Libya. Special thanks are due to Special Representative
Ghassan Salamé for his involvement on the ground.
We encourage all Libyan parties to support the United
Nations-backed political process and work for a more
peaceful situation in Libya.
It is also thanks to initiatives undertaken under the
auspices of the United Nations that more than 350,000
people have been able to return to Libya, with the vast
majority of them able to reclaim their homes. However,
more than 150,000 people are still internally displaced,
mainly due to the threats posed by armed conflict or the
presence of military groups. We are also very concerned
about the ordeals that detainees and migrants in Libya
have suffered. As of today, there are more than 700,000
migrants on Libyan territory, of whom 52,000 have
applied for asylum. It is estimated that more than 4,000
are being kept in detention centres, and the reports
on their condition are shocking. Migrants are victims
of violence, including sexual harassment; they are
tortured; they are exploited as a labour force and some
have even been killed. We join the appeal for an end to
all atrocities in Libya, particularly against migrants and
detainees, and for respect for human rights.
Poland welcomes all efforts aimed at improving
the situation in Libya and bringing about peace and the
rule of law, including the efforts of the Office of the
Prosecutor, as well as those of other international and
local actors. To that end, we remain fully committed
to cooperating with the Court on bringing to justice
the individuals suspected of committing international
crimes mentioned in the report, including the
necessity of transferring them to the Court, and we
appeal to other States to do the same. It is up to the
International Criminal Court, the entire international
community, including the Security Council, and
Libya’s stakeholders to hold to account those suspected
of committing international crimes there. The success
16/17

09/05/2018

of that endeavour will have a bearing on the country’s
future. Let us do everything we can to contribute to it.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to congratulate you, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I would also like to thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her briefing.
For Libya’s Government of National Accord,
administering justice and preventing impunity are
central to national reconciliation, which requires
support from the United Nations and from the countries
that are our friends and brothers. We also affirm that
the ICC is an important and essential partner for us in
achieving justice during this period. The memorandum
of understanding concluded in 2013 between the
Prosecutor of the ICC and Libya’s Prosecutor-General
solidified the partnership and complementarity between
Libyan justice and the ICC on cooperation with the
Prosecutor-General’s Office on a number of requests for
support in its investigations, as the Prosecutor mentions
in paragraph 30 of her report.
We are aware of the delays that have occurred with
regard to prosecuting the accused, but they do not mean
that our national justice is unwilling to investigate and
punish the perpetrators of crimes. They have more to do
with the security situation in Libya, which has prevented
the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC from conducting
investigations on Libyan territory. In that regard, we
want to emphasize that while our national judiciary
has honoured its commitment to bringing justice and
strengthening the rule of law, it is in urgent need of
assistance from the international community in order to
help the Libyan authorities emerge from the country’s
security crisis and enable them to ensure the success of
the political dialogue. In order to achieve that, we will
have to intensify our efforts to unify and restore our
security institutions and rebuild our State institutions,
so as to enable them to strengthen peace and security,
deal with the factors that lead to potential violations and
confiscate the tools used to commit crimes, particularly
firearms. That will undoubtedly help to strengthen the
capacity of Libyan justice to ensure the prosecution of
those responsible for crimes and to prevent additional
18-14045

09/05/2018

The situation in Libya

crimes, particularly considering the proliferation of
arms among militias and those outside the law.
We understand the Prosecutor’s concern about the
reports of incidents of the arbitrary detention and abuse
of migrants. We recognize migrants’ rights and are
aware of the degree to which they have suffered, owing
to the unstable security situation and the proliferation
of militias and weapons in Libya. However, the
reports of the Prosecutor, the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and other relevant organizations
seem to emphasize crimes and violations in Libya
without, however, acknowledging the problems of
trafficking in persons and other atrocity crimes against
migrants, and ignoring the issue of human trafficking,
which is one of the most heinous crimes perpetrated
by criminal transnational networks. Those crimes
must be combated in accordance with international
humanitarian law and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
known as the Palermo Convention, and the relevant
Security Council resolutions.. We hope that future
reports will mention the proceedings that are being
undertaken to fight such criminal networks in their
countries of origin and destination. We all know that my
country is one of transit, and that our security situation
is unstable. Without the presence of these criminal

S/PV. 8250

networks in their countries of origin and destination,
we in the countries of transit would not be dealing with
these kinds of violations.
In conclusion, the Government of National Accord
is determined to punish the perpetrators of every
crime and to combat impunity, in accordance with the
principle of territorial sovereignty and the primacy of
the law. Our national jurisdiction is very important to
the Libyan authorities, but that certainly does not mean
that they do not respect the decisions of the ICC. On
the contrary, the Court obliges our authorities to take
on their responsibility for prosecuting the criminals.
Libyan justice is independent and has integrity, and
it is also focused on achieving social justice. In that
regard, a memorandum of understanding on criminal
justice was concluded in April between the United
States and Libya, aimed at strengthening the capacities
of professionals in the justice sector in order to enable
Libya to meet its obligations in this area. In that regard,
the Libyan authorities hope to see greater support from
the international community aimed at enabling the
rebuilding of the security and administrative situation
and launching efforts that can help to strengthen the
rule of law. We also hope to increase cooperation and
complementarity with the ICC, while respecting Libyan
sovereignty and our national legislation.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

18-1404517/17
