United Nations

A/RES/64/205

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 March 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 53 (h)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 21 December 2009
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/64/420/Add.8)]

64/205. Sustainable mountain development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 53/24 of 10 November 1998, by which it proclaimed
2002 the International Year of Mountains,
Recalling also its resolutions 55/189 of 20 December 2000, 57/245 of
20 December 2002, 58/216 of 23 December 2003, 59/238 of 22 December 2004,
60/198 of 22 December 2005 and 62/196 of 19 December 2007,
Reaffirming chapter 13 of Agenda 21 1 and all relevant paragraphs of the Plan
of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation”), 2 in particular paragraph 42 thereof, as the overall policy
frameworks for sustainable development in mountain regions,
0F

1F

Noting the Bishkek Mountain Platform, 3 the outcome document of the Bishkek
Global Mountain Summit, held in Bishkek from 28 October to 1 November 2002,
which was the concluding event of the International Year of Mountains,
2F

Noting also the International Partnership for Sustainable Development in
Mountain Regions (“Mountain Partnership”), launched during the World Summit on
Sustainable Development, with benefits from the committed support of fifty
countries, sixteen intergovernmental organizations and ninety-six organizations
from major groups, as an important multi-stakeholder approach to addressing the
various interrelated dimensions of sustainable development in mountain regions,
Noting further the conclusions of the global meetings of the members of the
Mountain Partnership, held, respectively, in Merano, Italy, in October 2003 and in
Cusco, Peru, in October 2004, and the first Andean Meeting of the Andean
Initiative, held in San Miguel Tucuman, Argentina, in September 2007,
_______________
1

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
2
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
3
A/C.2/57/7, annex.

09-47413

*0947413*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/205

Noting the outcome of the meeting of the Adelboden Group on Sustainable
Agriculture and Rural Development in Mountain Regions, which met in Rome from
1 to 3 October 2007,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 4
3F

2.
Notes with appreciation that a growing network of Governments,
organizations, major groups and individuals around the world recognize the
importance of the sustainable development of mountain regions for poverty
eradication, and recognizes the global importance of mountains as the source of
most of the Earth’s freshwater, as repositories of rich biological diversity and other
natural resources, including timber and minerals, as providers of some sources of
renewable energy, as popular destinations for recreation and tourism and as areas of
important cultural diversity, knowledge and heritage, all of which generate positive,
unaccounted economic benefits;
Recognizes that mountains provide sensitive indications of climate
3.
change through phenomena such as modifications of biological diversity, the retreat
of mountain glaciers and changes in seasonal runoff that are having an impact on
major sources of freshwater in the world, and stresses the need to undertake actions
to minimize the negative effects of these phenomena and promote adaptation
measures;
Also recognizes that sustainable mountain development is a key
4.
component in achieving the Millennium Development Goals in many regions of the
world;
Encourages greater consideration of sustainable mountain development
5.
issues in intergovernmental discussions on climate change, biodiversity loss and
combating desertification in the context of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, 5 the Convention on Biological Diversity, 6 the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa 7 and the
United Nations Forum on Forests;
4F

5F

6F

6.
Notes with concern that there remain key challenges to achieving
sustainable development, eradicating poverty in mountain regions and protecting
mountain ecosystems, and that populations in mountain regions are frequently
among the poorest in a given country;
Encourages Governments to adopt a long-term vision and holistic
7.
approaches in their sustainable development strategies, and to promote integrated
approaches to policies related to sustainable development in mountain regions;
Also encourages Governments to integrate mountain sustainable
8.
development in national, regional and global policymaking and development
strategies, including through incorporating mountain-specific requirements in
sustainable development policies or through specific mountain policies;
Notes that the growing demand for natural resources, including water, the
9.
consequences of erosion, deforestation and watershed degradation, the frequency
_______________
4

A/64/222.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
6
Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
7
Ibid., vol. 1954, No. 33480.
5

2

A/RES/64/205

and scale of natural disasters, as well as increasing out-migration, the pressures of
industry, transport, tourism, mining and agriculture and the consequences of climate
change and loss of biodiversity are some of the key challenges in fragile mountain
ecosystems to implementing sustainable development and eradicating poverty in
mountain regions, consistent with the Millennium Development Goals;
10. Underlines the importance of sustainable forest management, the
avoidance of deforestation and the restoration of lost and degraded forest
ecosystems of mountains in order to enhance the role of mountains as natural carbon
and water regulators;
11. Notes that sustainable agriculture in mountain regions is important for
the protection of the mountain environment and the promotion of the regional
economy;
12. Expresses its deep concern at the number and scale of natural disasters
and their increasing impact in recent years, which have resulted in massive loss of
life and long-term negative social, economic and environmental consequences for
vulnerable societies throughout the world, in particular in mountain regions,
especially those in developing countries, and urges the international community to
take concrete steps to support national and regional efforts to ensure the sustainable
development of mountains;
13. Encourages Governments, the international community and other
relevant stakeholders to improve the awareness, preparedness and infrastructure to
reduce risks of disasters and to cope with the increasing adverse impact of disasters
in mountain regions, such as flash floods, including glacial lake outburst floods, as
well as landslides, debris flow and earthquakes and, in this regard, to take advantage
of opportunities provided by International Mountain Day on 11 December 2009,
which is dedicated to disaster risk management;
14. Calls upon Governments, with the collaboration of the scientific
community, mountain communities and intergovernmental organizations, where
appropriate, to study, with a view to promoting sustainable mountain development,
the specific concerns of mountain communities, including the adverse impact of
climate change on mountain environments and biological diversity, in order to
elaborate sustainable adaptation strategies and subsequently implement adequate
measures to cope with the adverse effects of climate change;
15. Underlines the fact that action at the national level is a key factor in
achieving progress in sustainable mountain development, welcomes its steady
increase in recent years with a multitude of events, activities and initiatives, and
invites the international community to support the efforts of developing countries to
develop and implement strategies and programmes, including, where required,
enabling policies and laws for the sustainable development of mountains, within the
framework of national development plans;
16. Encourages the further establishment of committees or similar
multi-stakeholder institutional arrangements and mechanisms at the national and
regional levels, where appropriate, to enhance intersectoral coordination and
collaboration for sustainable development in mountain regions;
17. Also encourages the increased involvement of local authorities, as well
as other relevant stakeholders, in particular the rural population, indigenous peoples,
civil society and the private sector, in the development and implementation of
programmes, land-use planning and land tenure arrangements, and activities related
to sustainable development in mountains;
3

A/RES/64/205

18. Underlines the need for improved access to resources, including land, for
women in mountain regions, as well as the need to strengthen the role of women in
mountain regions in decision-making processes that affect their communities,
cultures and environments;
19. Encourages Governments and intergovernmental organizations to integrate
the gender dimension, including gender-disaggregated indicators, in mountain
development activities, programmes and projects;
20. Stresses that indigenous cultures, traditions and knowledge, including in
the field of medicine, are to be fully considered, respected and promoted in
development policy and planning in mountain regions, and underlines the
importance of promoting the full participation and involvement of mountain
communities in decisions that affect them and of integrating indigenous knowledge,
heritage and values in all development initiatives;
21. Underscores the need to take into account relevant articles of the
Convention on Biological Diversity;6
0H

22. Recalls with satisfaction the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to
the Convention on Biological Diversity of a programme of work on mountain
biological diversity, 8 the overall purpose of which is a significant reduction in the
loss of mountain biological diversity by 2010 at the global, regional and national
levels, and its implementation, which aims at making a significant contribution to
poverty eradication in mountain regions;
7F

23. Invites States and other stakeholders to strengthen implementation of the
programme of work on mountain biological diversity through renewed political
commitment and the establishment of appropriate multi-stakeholder institutional
arrangements and mechanisms, and in this regard notes with satisfaction the
collaboration established between the secretariat of the Convention on Biological
Diversity, the Mountain Partnership and the Mountain Forum to mobilize concerned
Governments and other stakeholders for more effective cooperation and to assist in
building capacity for implementation of the programme of work;
24. Recognizes that many developing countries, as well as countries with
economies in transition, need to be assisted in the formulation and implementation
of national strategies and programmes for sustainable mountain development,
through bilateral, multilateral and South-South cooperation, as well as through other
collaborative approaches;
25. Emphasizes the importance of exchange of best practices, information
and appropriate environmentally sound technologies for sustainable mountain
development, and encourages Member States and relevant organizations in this
regard;
26. Notes that funding for sustainable mountain development has become
increasingly important, especially in view of the greater recognition of the global
importance of mountains and the high level of extreme poverty, food insecurity and
hardship mountain communities face;
27. Invites Governments, the United Nations system, the international
financial institutions, the Global Environment Facility, all relevant United Nations
conventions and their funding mechanisms, within their respective mandates, and all
_______________
8

4

UNEP/CBD/COP/7/21, annex, decision VII/27, annex.

A/RES/64/205

relevant stakeholders from civil society and the private sector to consider providing
support, including through voluntary financial contributions, to local, national and
international programmes and projects for sustainable development in mountain
regions, particularly in developing countries;
28. Underlines the importance for sustainable mountain development of
exploring a wide range of funding sources, such as public-private partnerships,
increased opportunities for microfinance, including microcredit and microinsurance,
small housing loans, savings, education and health accounts, and support for
entrepreneurs seeking to develop small- and medium-sized businesses and, where
appropriate, on a case-by-case basis, debt for sustainable development swaps;
29. Encourages the further development of sustainable agricultural value
chains and the improvement of access to and participation in markets for mountain
farmers and agro-industry enterprises, with a view to substantially increasing the
income of farmers, in particular smallholders and family farmers;
30. Welcomes the growing contribution of sustainable tourism initiatives in
mountain regions as a way to enhance environmental protection and socio-economic
benefits to local communities and the fact that consumer demand is increasingly
moving towards responsible and sustainable tourism;
31. Notes that public awareness needs to be raised with respect to the
positive and unaccounted economic benefits that mountains provide not only to
highland communities, but also to a large portion of the world’s population living in
lowland areas, and underlines the importance of enhancing the sustainability of
ecosystems that provide essential resources and services for human well-being and
economic activity and of developing innovative means of financing for their
protection;
32. Recognizes that mountain ranges are usually shared among several
countries, and in this context encourages transboundary cooperation approaches,
where the States concerned agree, to the sustainable development of mountain
ranges and information-sharing in this regard;
33. Notes with appreciation, in this context, that the Convention on the
Protection of the Alps 9 promotes constructive new approaches to the integrated,
sustainable development of the Alps, including through its thematic protocols on
spatial planning, mountain farming, conservation of nature and landscape, mountain
forests, tourism, soil protection, energy and transport, as well as the Declaration on
Population and Culture, 10 the Action Plan on Climate Change in the Alps, 11
cooperation with other convention bodies on relevant subjects and activities in the
context of the Mountain Partnership;
8F

9F

10F

34. Also notes with appreciation the Framework Convention on the
Protection and Sustainable Development of the Carpathians, 12 adopted and signed
by the seven countries of the region to provide a framework for cooperation and
multisectoral policy coordination, a platform for joint strategies for sustainable
development and a forum for dialogue between all involved stakeholders;
1F

_______________
9

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1917, No. 32724.
Available from www.alpconv.org/theconvention/index_en.
11
Available from www.alpconv.org/climate/index_en.
12
Available from www.carpathianconvention.org/text.
10

5

A/RES/64/205

35. Further notes with appreciation the work of the International Centre for
Integrated Mountain Development, which promotes transboundary cooperation
among eight country members of the Himalaya Hindu Kush to foster action and
change for overcoming the economic, social and physical vulnerability of mountain
peoples;
36. Notes with appreciation the contribution of the Sustainable Agriculture
and Rural Development in Mountain Regions project of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the statement of the Adelboden Group in
promoting specific policies, appropriate institutions and processes for mountain
regions and the positive, unaccounted economic benefits they provide;
37. Stresses the importance of building capacity, strengthening institutions
and promoting educational programmes in order to foster sustainable mountain
development at all levels and to enhance awareness of challenges to and best
practices in sustainable development in mountain regions and in the nature of
relationships between highland and lowland areas;
38. Underlines the importance of higher education in and for mountain areas
in order to expand opportunities and encourage the retention of skilled people,
including youth, in mountain areas, recognizes, in this context, recent and important
initiatives at the regional level, such as the creation of three university campuses, in
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, and the creation of the Himalayan
University Consortium, and encourages similar efforts in other mountain regions
around the world;
39. Encourages the development and implementation of global, regional and
national communication programmes to build on the awareness and momentum for
change created by the International Year of Mountains in 2002 and the opportunity
provided annually by International Mountain Day on 11 December;
40. Encourages Member States to collect and produce information and to
establish monitoring systems on biophysical and socio-economic data devoted to
mountains so as to capitalize on knowledge to support interdisciplinary research
programmes and projects and to improve decision-making and planning;
41. Encourages all relevant entities of the United Nations system, within
their respective mandates, to further enhance their constructive efforts to strengthen
inter-agency collaboration to achieve more effective implementation of the relevant
chapters of Agenda 21,1 including chapter 13, and paragraph 42 and other relevant
paragraphs of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,2 taking into account the
efforts of the Inter-Agency Group on Mountains and the need for the further
involvement of the United Nations system, in particular the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations Environment Programme,
the United Nations University, the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United
Nations Children’s Fund, as well as international financial institutions and other
relevant international organizations;
1H

2H

42. Recognizes the efforts of the Mountain Partnership implemented in
accordance with Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/61 of 25 July 2003,
invites the international community and other relevant stakeholders, including civil
society and the private sector, to consider participating actively in the Mountain
Partnership to increase its value, and invites the Partnership secretariat to report on
its activities and achievements to the Commission on Sustainable Development at
its eighteenth session, in 2010, including in regard to the thematic issues of
6

A/RES/64/205

transport, chemicals, waste management, mining and a ten-year framework of
programmes on sustainable consumption and production patterns;
43. Notes with appreciation, in this context, the efforts of the Mountain
Partnership to cooperate with existing multilateral instruments relevant to
mountains, such as the Convention on Biological Diversity,6 the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious
Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa,7 the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change,5 the International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction and mountain-related regional instruments such as the Convention on the
Protection of the Alps9 and the Framework Convention on the Protection and
Sustainable Development of the Carpathians;12
3H

4H

5H

6H

7H

44. Also notes with appreciation the ongoing efforts to improve strategic
cooperation among the institutions and initiatives dealing with mountain
development, such as the Mountain Forum, the Mountain Partnership, the Mountain
Research Initiative and the International Mountain Society;
45. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution under the
sub-item entitled “Sustainable mountain development” of the item entitled
“Sustainable development”.
66th plenary meeting
21 December 2009

7
