S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7505th meeting

Tuesday, 18 August 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Nigeria

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Correia
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Cabezas
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Dabouis
Mr. Khair
Ms. Birštunaitė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Cimarra Etchenique
Ms. Delleur
Mr. Klein
Mr. Chavarri Cabello

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Regional organizations and contemporary challenges of global security
Letter dated 5 August 2015 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/599)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-25925 (E)
*1525925*

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representatives of Benin and Uganda to
participate in this meeting.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their statements in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank you, Madam
President, for taking the initiative to convene this open
debate on such an important topic. I also wish to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing this morning.
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union (EU) and
would like to add a few remarks in its national capacity.
As pointed out by Nigeria in the concept note
circulated for this meeting (S/2015/599, annex), the
contemporary global security system increasingly
hinges on cooperation between the Security Council
and regional and subregional organizations. Regional
organizations can at times be better positioned to
respond to emergencies and crises. The United
Nations — and the Security Council — should use its
comparative advantage in ensuring coherence in the
response of the international community, and should
avoid duplication.
While the partnership in peace operations between
the United Nations and some organizations, such as the
European Union, is already well established, we think
that it could be further intensified. On the operational
level, for instance, cooperation in support and logistics,
in enhancing the exchange of information and analysis,
in the rule of law and in defence and security sector
reform may prove beneficial.
The same is true in regard to cooperation between
the EU and other regional organizations, such as the
African Union (AU). We welcome and support the
efforts of the African Union to strengthen its capacity
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacekeeping, as well as its active role in defining and
implementing African solutions to African problems.

2/31

18/08/2015

We are also ready to promote and support other regional
and subregional initiatives in this field.
We know that the scheme for cooperation on security
between the United Nations and regional organizations
is built on three pillars: peacekeeping, accountability
and peacebuilding. With regard to each pillar, Italy
is strongly committed to further strengthening those
relationships, in conformity with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. Today we would like to
focus on five related challenges.
The first challenge is achieving coherence. While
today we can say that coordination has improved, United
Nations mandates are still rather general. That can lead
to a decentralized decision-making process, which
sometimes overlaps, or is not properly coordinated
with, United Nations Headquarters. We should strive
to ensure clarity on respective mandates at the highest
political level.
The second challenge is to create a common culture
in the field through training and guidance. Training
is crucial to ensure the success and the reputation
of a mission. Italy has a strong record in training
national personnel for peace operations. Respect for
human rights, the protection of civilians and a gender
perspective are embedded in national military training
curriculums. Since 2005, the Center of Excellence
for Stability Police Units (CoESPU), in Vicenza, has
trained over 5,000 police personnel from different
countries to be deployed in peacekeeping operations.
That reality represents a common training platform with
other regional organizations, including in the Middle
East and Asia. Leadership training is key as well. To
that end, full use should be made of in-house training
opportunities and tools, considering the extensive
offerings by the United Nations System Staff College,
in Torino, the Global Service Centre, in Brindisi, and
the Regional Service Centre, in Entebbe, Uganda.
The third challenge involves protecting civilians
and ensuring justice. Italy has signed the Kigali
Declaration on the Protection of Civilians, a document
that is setting a standard that should be followed by
the international community. In order to ensure the
effective protection of civilians, strong unity of intent
among the United Nations membership is needed.
We must strengthen our support for the International
Criminal Court by ensuring appropriate follow-up to
Security Council referrals.

15-25925

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Fourthly, we must ensure a comprehensive approach
through coordinated support for the justice and security
sector. Rule of law and security sector reform (SSR)
activities have been at the core of both United Nations
and European Union missions over the past decade. The
cooperation in place in Mali might set a good precedent
for future endeavours. The EU’s SSR mission — the
European Union Capacity Building Mission for the
Sahel and Mali, has been prepared in close collaboration
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. We
should also work for a standing working group on SSR
and the rule of law that serves regional organizations
and the United Nations.
Fifthly, we must invest financial and political
capital in the prevention of conflicts. Preventing
conflicts means affirming the primacy of politics,
dialogue and mediation as essential tools to address
global contemporary challenges of global security. In
that framework, the role of civil society is crucial. We
believe that engaging with civil society works best if
it is a two-way process. It is important that regional
organizations strengthen civil society’s role, including
through the promotion of human rights, support for the
role of women and access to health care and justice.
Lastly, let me also briefly mention the issue
of migration — a question that is transnational by
definition, and therefore simply cannot be adequately
addressed without consistent and close cooperation
among States and international and regional
organizations, such as the League of Arab States and
the African Union.
Italy is today at the forefront of efforts to deal with
migration flows in the Mediterranean Sea and will
spare no efforts to keep saving the lives of hundreds of
migrants every day — but solutions must be sustainable.
Therefore, humanitarian interventions to save lives must
be coupled with a comprehensive approach capable of
dealing with the root causes of migration, and they must
do so in partnership with all the stakeholders involved.
That is why Italy is actively supporting the efforts to
underpin new regional cooperation frameworks in that
sector — for example, with the establishment of the
Rabat and Khartoum processes. Italy is committed to
accelerating as much as possible the implementation of
concrete projects that will show the tangible benefits
of that cooperation both in African and European
countries.

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We thank
the Nigerian presidency for convening this important
open debate today, especially in the light of the highly
tense political situations and armed conflicts in certain
regions of the world. We also commend the SecretaryGeneral for addressing these important debates and for
his leadership in fostering dialogue with regional and
subregional organizations.
The past years have been marred by such alarming
transnational and global security challenges as terrorism
and radical extremism, the presence of foreign fighters,
transnational organized crime, human trafficking,
illicit drug trafficking, illegal migration and other
serious threats. No country can fight those alone, nor
can the United Nations do so by itself. Hence the call
for closer cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations.
Today, as 80 per cent of all Blue Helmets are
deployed in Africa, the collaboration among the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union is
particularly important, especially between the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union. All three are working on building on
security cooperation mechanisms established since
2006, while developing more multidimensional and
solid relationships than in the past. Kazakhstan
encourages this positive progress towards greater
common ground among the three entities through
capacity-building for the AU in administrative, logistics
and financial dimensions, and a greater convergence
of political agendas. Hybrid and support missions,
co-deployment and transitions all require their specific
approaches in tandem with ensuring safety and
security for all peacekeepers. The engagement of a
larger number of African countries — through troop
and financial contributions, following the principle
of “non-indifference” — is a commendable trend that
must be supported.
We would like to commend in that regard the
activities of African subregional entities, including
the Southern African Development Community, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, among
others. We believe that such subregional organizations
complement the role of the African Union. The
experience of economic integration in the different

15-259253/31

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

parts of the world is of high interest for my country,
as the founding member of the newly created Eurasian
Economic Union.
The benefits of United Nations cooperation
with the vast range of regional structures are well
known. However, the crux of that cooperation lies
in enhancing our mutual understanding of the root
causes of local disputes and other security challenges
and drawing on the insights of regional structures for
their prevention and peaceful settlement. We have to
seek ways of improving our early-warning system,
effective prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and, most of all, recovery in the post2015 developmental phase. Likewise, the United
Nations and regional organizations can work towards
more effective implementation of Security Council
sanctions and resolutions.
To achieve effective collaboration, my delegation
proposes expanding organizational dialogue and
strengthening representation in the respective
capitals. Equally critical are more distinct mandates
for coordination and improved arrangements, joint
planning, fact-finding and analysis, joint assessment
missions, mutual organizational learning and
harmonization of administrative borders, among others.
But let us be aware of other regions too. Central
Asia is an example. Although it is a bridge between the
East and West, it also has its geographic disadvantages.
To ensure security in the entire Asian region, in 1992
Kazakhstan initiated the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence Building Measures in Asia (CICA), a unique
security forum pan-continental in nature, to implement
confidence-building measures and forge political
dialogue and interaction to promote peace and stability
in Asia. Today, CICA, which extends from Cairo to
Seoul, unifies 26 countries from all the subregions of
the continent, including Western, Northern, Central,
Southern, Southeastern and Eastern Asia. Kazakhstan,
as one of the founding members, hosts the Central
Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre
on narcotic drugs, a body that exemplifies the region’s
cooperation with United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. My country is also one of the founders
and the major initiator of the Shanghai Corporation
Organization’s (SCO) regional counter-terrorism
structure, which includes six member States.
In addition, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force — assisted by CICA, the

4/31

18/08/2015

SCO and others — adopted in 2011 a joint plan of action
for the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia. That plan
became the first model document, setting an example
for implementing similar United Nations strategies in
other regions of the world.
To date, Kazakhstan is a member, observer or
partner of 15 regional organizations in various regions
of the world, and my country is proud to hold observer
status in two continental associations, namely, the
African Union and the Organization of American
States. We also signed a cooperation agreement with
the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe.
Kazakhstan is committed to the implementation of
the transformative post-2015 development agenda and
has proposed, therefore, that the new United Nations
regional hub, which my Government offers, should
promote sustainable development, humanitarian
assistance, disaster-risk reduction and building
resilience. That is particularly crucial in the light of
the withdrawal of the International Security Assistance
Force from Afghanistan and the growing disturbances
witnessed within the region.
Kazakhstan has also been a pioneer in creating
the Islamic Organization for Food Security, with its
headquarters now established in Astana, our capital.
My country was instrumental in fostering human
rights protection while chairing and serving as the
coordinating country of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and other regional entities.
Those initiatives resulted in a number of successful
events under our leadership, such as the establishment
of the OIC Independent Permanent Human Rights
Commission and the convening of the first CICA Highlevel Seminar on Sustainable Democratic Development.
Finally, given the far-reaching implications and
effects of enhanced regional-global partnerships,
Kazakhstan remains committed to achieving greater
coherence, complementary synergy and dynamism
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Ms. Kassangana-Jakubowska (Poland): Let me
add my words of appreciation to you, Madam President,
for selecting such an important topic for today’s
open debate and for your delegation’s excellent and
comprehensive concept note (S/2015/599, annex) on the

15-25925

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

subject. This demonstrates once again your constant
dedication to the issue before us today.
Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union (EU). Given the detailed
EU statement, I would like to share with the Security
Council just a few additional thoughts from our national
perspective.
We share the view, as presented in the concept note,
that profound changes in the security environment and
the many new challenges linked to it have led to the
increased relevance and role of regional organizations.
Cooperation at the regional level can very often be
the most effective way of addressing many of today’s
challenges, such as irregular migration, human
trafficking and smuggling, internal conflicts, energy
shortages or cybercrimes.
Regional organizations are often much better
positioned and equipped to understand and react to
the root causes of armed conflicts in their regions.
Many recent examples have shown the importance of
the involvement of regional organizations in conflict
prevention and resolution, as well as in mediation. The
role of the African Union in the resolution of the Mali
conflict, the positive engagement of the Economic
Community of West African States in finding a
peaceful solution to the political crisis in Burkina Faso,
and the continued efforts of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development to bring to an end to the
crisis situation in South Sudan are only a few examples
of the involvement of regional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
In that context, we see the need to develop closer
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in fields such as early
warning, conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Let me recall that establishing strategic
and operational partnerships between the United Nations
and such organizations was recognized in the 2005
World Summit Outcome. Also, two important reports
published this year — by the High-Level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and by
the Advisory Group of Experts on the 2015 review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture — have
shown that the United Nations cannot succeed alone. We
should now do our best to turn their recommendations
into practice.
Europe has the longest and greatest experience in
building collective security institutions at the regional

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

level. This year we celebrate the fortieth anniversary
of the signing of the Helsinki Final Act, which laid the
foundation for the establishment of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
The Ukrainian crisis has presented one of the
greatest challenges in the region in the field of security
issues. During that crisis, the OSCE has showed a solid
degree of efficiency and relevance and proved that it
is still worth a substantial investment to make it even
more effective. Poland would like to emphasize the
special role of the OSCE in the process of de-escalation
of the conflict in Ukraine. Unfortunately, not all parties
members of the OSCE have adequately supported the
efforts aimed at the success of the peace process. It is
also important that the safety and security of OSCE
personnel engaged in those activities be guaranteed by
all parties involved, and supported by the Members of
the United Nations, as is the case with peacekeeping
operations.
We recognize that sustainable development is
an important factor in addressing the root causes of
conflicts and tensions. Poland is the current President
of the Council of the Baltic Sea States. One of the
priorities of our presidency is to develop a new agenda
for sustainable development after 2015, which will pave
the way for the regional implementation of the global
sustainable development goals being elaborated in the
framework of the United Nations.
Finally, let me conclude by emphasizing the
importance of coordination and cooperation both
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
and among regional organizations themselves. I am
convinced that only by acting together, with the United
Nations at the centre of the multilateral system, and
with effective regional organizations having properly
developed capacities in the fields of early warning,
mediation, conflict prevention and resolution, can we
tackle the complex security challenges we are facing
today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): On behalf of my delegation,
I would like to thank Nigeria for convening this
important meeting of the Security Council. I also wish
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
and insightful briefing this morning.

15-259255/31

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

We meet at a time of unprecedented and complex
global and regional challenges. Large parts of the Middle
East are in flames, afflicted by multiple inter- and
intra-State conflicts, the spread of terrorism, external
intervention and power struggles and massive human
dislocation and suffering. Confrontation between the
major Powers has returned to Europe and threatens to
encompass Asia. Poverty stalks Africa and persists in
South Asia. Global threats to peace and world order
from diverse sources are also multiplying — climate
change, poverty, unemployment, especially among
youth, water scarcity, a record number of refugees and
forced migrants, and gross violations of human rights.
Yet this is also a time of opportunity. Today, an
interconnected and interdependent world possesses
the financial, scientific and organizational capabilities
to address those imposing and myriad challenges.
What is needed is political will, especially among key
global and regional Powers, to utilize those capabilities
effectively and cooperatively, and to rise above their
narrow interests and competing agendas.
Regional organizations can contribute to addressing
many of those challenges, especially their economic
and social dimensions. They can also promote the
greater and closer political consultations that are
essential to addressing the security dimensions of those
challenges. In the realm of security, the role of regional
organizations and mechanisms has been recognized as
well as circumscribed in Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. Regional organizations and
groupings can serve effectively to promote mediation,
arbitration and other peaceful means of conflict
resolution. But in this sphere the United Nations, and
especially the Security Council, has absolute primacy.
Any enforcement action and any use of coercive means
to implement international decisions can be authorized
only by the Security Council.
Each regional organization is unique and different
in its historical origins, mandate, membership, evolution
and capabilities. Some have proved their worth and
made valuable contributions, among them the European
Union, the African Union, the League of Arab States
and the Gulf Cooperation Council. Others, such as the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC), have much potential but have yet to fulfil
their promise. SAARC has been constrained because
of the deep differences among its members and efforts
to utilize it for regional domination. Some regional
organizations have great and untapped potential. The

6/31

18/08/2015

Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) is one of
them. That relatively newer grouping can advance the
goals of economic development, stability and security
across the broad swath of Euro-Asia.
Among those organizations, the Organization of
Islamic Conference (OIC) is in a unique position. It
includes 57 United Nations States Members — almost
a third of the membership. It spans four continents.
Its members are directly or indirectly involved in
the numerous security challenges that bedevil the
Middle East, Africa and beyond. Collectively and in
cooperation with the United Nations, the OIC has the
capabilities to address and overcome those challenges,
including Palestine and other Middle East conflicts,
as well as the Jammu and Kashmir dispute. The OIC
can also contribute to the promotion of global peace
and prosperity. The United Nations should actively
promote cooperation with the OIC in areas such as
mediation and conciliation in disputes, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, humanitarian assistance, especially
to refugees and displaced people, and in addressing the
root causes of conflicts and extremism.
Cooperation between regional organizations can
also be very useful. For instance, in the context of
the current challenges in West Asia, cooperation and
consultation could be most valuable between the SCO
and the Gulf Cooperation Council. Equally, regular
consultations between the Gulf Cooperation Council
and key countries of West Asia can be timely, among
other things, to deal with the shared threat from violent
extremism and to devise common strategies on related
issues.
Finally, the Pakistan delegation looks forward to
the concrete follow-up that we hope will emerge from
this important deliberation of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the States members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and my own country,
Viet Nam.
We commend the initiative by the Nigerian
presidency to hold this important open debate. In the
year in which we celebrate the seventieth anniversary

15-25925

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the United Nations, a year that will set new directions
for the Organization in many areas of its work, it is
indeed important to reflect on the challenges ahead and
the critical role that regional organizations can play in
addressing these challenges.
Our collective efforts in the maintenance of
international peace and security are now faced with
increasingly complex threats, in both the traditional
and non-traditional sense. Conflicts are taking new
forms with the rise of extremist groups in control of
a large swath of territories. Intra-State conflicts are
not winding down, while inter-Sate tensions remain a
major source of concern. New non-traditional security
issues also pose serious challenges to global security, as
highlighted in recent debates of the Security Council.
Comprehensive approaches, which should include a
prominent role for regional organizations, are required
so as to achieve tailored and sustainable solutions to
such challenges.
In this connection, ASEAN member States are
pleased with the efforts by the United Nations, including
the Security Council, to engage with and promote
the contribution of regional organizations. With the
adoption of relevant resolutions, the partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
and among regional organizations themselves is
being strengthened, especially in conflict prevention,
mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We
commend the efforts made by the Secretary-General
and the Security Council in this regard.
ASEAN has strived to strengthen its own ability to
address regional security challenges in accordance with
its Charter. ASEAN has made significant progress in
making an ASEAN community a reality, including the
advancements made under the political-security pillar.
ASEAN works closely with our dialogue partners in
various ASEAN-led mechanisms such as the ASEAN
Regional Forum, ASEAN Plus Three, the East Asia
Summit and the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting
Plus, and leads efforts to build a regional architecture
conducive to regional stability and prosperity. We are
intensifying ongoing efforts by the State parties to the
Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free
Zone and the nuclear-weapon States to resolve all
outstanding issues in accordance with the objectives
and principles of the Treaty pertaining to the signing
and ratifying of the Protocol to that Treaty. We are also
working with partners to develop tools for conflict

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes,
including a code of conduct in the South China Sea.
ASEAN continues to attach great importance to our
partnership with the United Nations. ASEAN and the
United Nations have been partners in addressing issues
of common interest and concern within the region and
beyond. The ASEAN-United Nations Comprehensive
Partnership continues to be advanced with the
implementation of the work plan of 2015. ASEAN
member States have deepened their engagement with
various United Nations efforts, including United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Cooperation between
the two secretariats has been regularized through a
number of consultations, workshops and dialogues.
ASEAN welcomes the appointment of a United Nations
liaison officer to the ASEAN secretariat.
Moving forward, ASEAN believes that regional
organizations can do more to address new security
challenges.
First, ASEAN’s own experience has shown that
the ASEAN way of consensus-building, sustained
engagement, respect for the views of all parties concerned
and the fundamental principles of international law,
including respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, non-interference in their internal
affairs and the peaceful settlement of disputes, is the
best way to address common challenges. As the Chair
of ASEAN put it at the forty-eighth ASEAN Foreign
Ministers’ Meeting, ASEAN history is built upon the
twin pillars of dialogue and diplomacy.
Secondly, it might be necessary to adequately reflect
on the role of regional organizations in the ongoing
reviews of United Nations peacekeeping, peacebuilding
architecture and other important exercises. The
forthcoming reports of the Secretary-General on this
important work could provide assessments and, most
importantly, recommendations on how to further
promote the engagement of regional organizations.
Thirdly, ASEAN is supportive of enhancing
consultations
and
dialogue
among
regional
organizations with the United Nations to share best
practices, expertise and resources, so that we can fully
utilize our collective capacity to meet new, complex
challenges. In particular, regional organizations have the
comparative advantages of geographical proximity and
a better understanding of the context of the problems.
ASEAN looks forward to closer engagement with the
United Nations and with other regional organizations,

15-259257/31

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

including during the upcoming high-level week of the
General Assembly.
Fourthly, no two regional organizations are the
same. Each has its unique characteristics, objectives
and functions. In working to address any international
security challenge, the partnership between the United
Nations and a regional organization must build upon
an accurate understanding of each other’s nature and
strengths as well as limitations.
I would like to conclude by underscoring that the
partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations
has been beneficial to regional peace and stability. We
look forward to continued United Nations support for
ASEAN centrality in our regional security architecture.
ASEAN reiterates its commitment to contributing to
the work of the United Nations and stands ready to
work closely with the United Nations and other partners
in our joint efforts to address the new challenges of the
day.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): Indonesia congratulates
Nigeria on its presidency for the month of August and
expresses its appreciation to you, Madam President, for
having convened this open debate.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statements made earlier
by the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran
and Viet Nam on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
respectively.
There is no denying that the role of regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security currently reflects
significant progress. Their growing contribution and
particularly their cooperation with the United Nations,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter, is
commendable. As a consistent and robust supporter
of regional organizations, Indonesia is pleased that
today’s theme has been discussed on a regular basis by
the Council.
My delegation has always underlined the value
of the capacities of regional and subregional entities
to foster peace and security through strong and
regionally owned frameworks for conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

8/31

18/08/2015

Indonesia, during its presidency of the Council in
November 2007, organized a debate with a similar topic
to focus on existing and potential capacities of regional
organizations and to identify and develop modalities
by which to enhance cooperation between these
organizations and the United Nations, including the
Security Council. The presidential statement adopted on
that occasion (S/PRST/2007/42) stressed, among other
things, developing an effective partnership between the
Council and regional and subregional organizations, so
as to enable an early response to disputes and emerging
crises.
The more complex, multidimensional and
interlinked threats posed by contemporary challenges to
global security, as also rightly mentioned in the concept
note (S/2015/599, annex), demand a creative approach
from regional and subregional actors, an approach that
puts greater primacy on cooperation and synergy and
that can incorporate the holistic nature of threats while
dealing with the unique factors present in each situation.
Such an approach is undoubtedly a challenge for the
United Nations, which needs to sharpen its response in
dynamic situations and must actualize it in such a way
that regional and subregional views are appropriately
reflected and the intergovernmental system can fully
own those United Nations responses.
Regional organizations are uniquely positioned
to advise and contribute to peacemaking and
peacebuilding, because they often share bonds of
history and fraternity that give them insights into how
to resolve local conflicts. In that regard, Indonesia
emphasizes the significance of enhanced consultation,
trust, cooperation and collaboration for optimizing
the comparative advantages of the United Nations and
regional actors. Within South-East Asia, it has been
our policy to maintain peace and stability together
with other ASEAN member States by strengthening
our capacities and upholding shared norms aimed at
consolidating peace and at actively preventing and
resolving conflicts. The dividends have been many.
Today South-East Asia is one of the most dynamic
regions in the world. Peace and stability in South-East
Asia have been critical not only for global trade but
also for larger global peace and security. It is important
for Indonesia that ASEAN continues to become a net
contributor to peace, development and prosperity. To
that end, in 2011, under Indonesia’s chairpersonship,
ASEAN adopted the Bali Declaration on ASEAN
Community in a Global Community of Nations, which

15-25925

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

serves as a common ASEAN platform for addressing
key global issues of shared interest in multilateral
forums, including the United Nations.

will, we hope, help to strengthen cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.

Outside South-East Asia, we have also worked
hard to promote a new regional architecture in the
Asia-Pacific region, one capable of yielding greater
and more durable peace and in which the relations
among the major Powers can remain peaceful and
cooperative. We hope that it will help emerging Powers
to find their proper place without triggering mistrust.
Furthermore, Indonesia is one of the countries that has
been actively supporting and developing a framework
of cross-regional consultations and cooperation linking
and coordinating various regional and subregional
organizations, such as the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation, the Asia-Europe Meeting and the
Forum for East Asia-Latin America Cooperation, so
that they can confront common global challenges. In
April we initiated and hosted the 2015 summit of the
Asian-African Conference, aimed at strengthening
partnerships among Asian and African nations, while
also emphasizing synergies among various regional
and subregional organizations on the two continents.

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
recognizes that cooperation with regional and
subregional bodies can improve collective security.
For its part, the African Union (AU) has established,
as part of the African Peace and Security Architecture,
the African Union Peace and Security Council, which
is, among other things, a standing decision-making
organ for the prevention, management and resolution
of conflicts on the African continent. Despite the
challenges faced by the African Union and its
subregional organizations, such as a lack of predictable
sources of funding, they remain a reservoir of critical
knowledge about the nature of conflicts on the
continent. They have a distinct comparative advantage
in addressing conflicts in often complex environments
and are usually able to deploy troops to areas of conflict
without delay. Regional and subregional organizations
also have the distinct advantage of being able to
respond rapidly to conflicts that arise, as evidenced by
the various African-led international support missions,
such as those in Mali and the Central African Republic.
Such rapid response missions have acted as bridges
to the more sustainable United Nations peacekeeping
missions.

Our shared global challenges will be best tackled
when we all act responsibly and in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law, and
when we enable and support regional and subregional
organizations in their efforts to fully perform their
roles. While the various regional and subregional
actors are certainly at different levels of development,
each possesses particular strengths and has great
potential to contribute to the work of the Council. We
are positive that, through discussions such as today’s
and by ensuring that tangible follow-up steps are
taken, the strengths of the various regional actors can
be harnessed more effectively for the common good.
Indonesia, for its part, is fully committed to continuing
to contribute to that end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): I would like to
begin by joining previous speakers, Madam President,
in congratulating you and your delegation on your
assumption of your important role, and in wishing you
success in steering the work of the Security Council
during your presidency. South Africa commends you for
giving special attention to this important topic during
your presidency, and we welcome today’s debate, which

In 2012 South Africa piloted the adoption of
resolution 2033 (2012), which built on resolution 1809
(2008), adopted during the April 2008 South African
presidency of the Security Council. The two resolutions
encourage the strengthening of regular interaction,
consultation and coordination between the two bodies
on matters of mutual interest. Moreover, their strategic
thrust is aimed at promoting political and legislative
coherence between the Security Council and the AU
Peace and Security Council in dealing with African
peace and security challenges.
Since that time we have seen the benefits of the
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union and its subregional organizations. At the
operational level, the United Nations Secretariat has
been active in supporting the AU’s Peace and Security
Architecture through the implementation of a 10-year
capacity-building programme. Both organizations also
benefit from the deployment of joint technical assessment
missions. Further examples of such cooperation are the
hybrid model of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the assistance provided to

15-259259/31

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

the African Union Mission in Somalia and, recently, the
robust mandate developed for the Intervention Brigade
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Such
collaborative efforts, benefitting from the experience
of the more robust mandates espoused by regional and
subregional bodies, illustrate the importance of closer
collaboration between the United Nations and Chapter
VIII bodies.
We must also be aware that the principles of national
ownership and the sovereignty of States, which should
be respected if we are to create lasting peace, are central
to the sustainability of peace initiatives. Steps, however
minimal, taken by those directly affected by a conflict,
including regional and subregional organizations,
should be taken into consideration and, where possible,
built upon. South Africa believes that, given the
scarcity of financial and human capital, a clear division
of labour and productive burden-sharing between the
United Nations and regional organizations is critical to
sustainable conflict resolution and prevention efforts.
We also believe that regional organizations could
benefit from flexible and predictable financial support
from the United Nations and other international
institutions and stakeholders.

18/08/2015

environment has been undergoing profound and rapid
changes that challenge the Organization and the
international community and make it necessary to
act in a coordinated and effective way to tackle those
changes. In that regard, the nature of the new global
security challenges cannot be addressed in the same
way that they were even a decade ago. Increasing threats
and their transnational character, such as pandemics,
organized crime and various forms of terrorism,
require States to act together, because individually
they do not have the ability to control those threats.
Therefore, the role they play in regional and subregional
organizations under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations can be a key element in the fight against
such global threats. Uruguay, as a member of the Union
of South American Nations (UNASUR), finds in that
organization a framework for regional cooperation that
seeks to collectively confront the challenges of our
region.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.

Today we are witnessing multiple conflicts that
have progressively deteriorated and cause growing
concern that the world is far from seeing the purposes
and principles essential for peaceful coexistence,
development and cooperation among peoples and nations
fulfilled. To be able to enforce those purposes and
principles and ensure the maintenance of international
peace and security, regional organizations should
work from the outset to include conflict prevention
and resolution and to generate other initiatives that
contribute to safeguarding regional peace and security.
They must work in an ongoing and tireless way, while
being creative and resourceful in response to such
global challenges, and they must support conditions that
ensure political stability and democratic governance in
their regions and institutions so as to ensure the rule
of law, the promotion and protection of human rights
and the defence of the territorial integrity of States and
their right to inclusive and sustainable socioeconomic
development.

Mr. Ceriani (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank and congratulate Nigeria
on its conduct of the presidency of the Security Council
for August, and also for its timely choice of subject for
today’s open debate, which enables the Council and the
international community to advance the Organization’s
essential task of maintaining international peace and
security.

In that task, UNASUR has, for example, been able to
develop a strategy that has managed to solve problems,
using good offices and mediation in situations of
tension between its members, even in the internal crises
of some of them. That has been possible because the
work has been based on the view that democracy serves
as a beacon to guide actions for adoption whenever a
threat had emerged.

As the concept note (S/2015/599, annex) circulated
for today’s debate clearly highlights, the international

Moreover, the main security body accountable to
UNASUR is the South American Defence Council,

In conclusion, in South Africa we believe that
cooperation between the United Nations and the region
and its subregions can further enhance capacity so as to
ensure complementarity and minimize the duplication
of efforts. Ultimately, however, we must draw on the
strengths of each organization and be prepared to adopt
more flexible and sometimes more robust approaches
to addressing conflicts in a more effective manner. The
United Nations needs to adjust to an environment that
requires a more nuanced approach rather than rigid
procedures that have proved ineffective.

10/31

15-25925

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

established at the end of 2008 and the main objective
of which is to serve as an active forum for political
dialogue with the aim of defusing potential conflicts in
the region. The South American Defence Council does
not seek to create a South American armed force, nor
does it wish to develop a joint operative capability or a
common defence policy. Rather, it seeks to achieve the
consolidation of the South as a zone of peace capable
of shaping a South American identity with regard to
defence and of generating consensus to strengthen
regional cooperation on such issues. Today we can say
with satisfaction that Latin America and the Caribbean
is a zone in which there are no serious conflicts between
States that threaten international peace and security.
In line with that fact, and continuing with the
example of UNASUR, we note that the work of the
organization, of which we are a part, is based on lessons
learned in the region at different times of tension. We
believe, without wishing to export models, that they
can also be applied in those areas where the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter are today being
violated. The need to adapt to new problem situations
and the challenges they present can be the basis for
providing a new dimension to regional organizations on
cooperation in matters of peace and security. Similarly,
coordination and cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations should be addressed
so as to ensure the validity of the principles and values
enshrined in the Charter of the Organization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate you, Madam President, and
the Government of Nigeria on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August and for convening today’s important debate.
As we celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations, we also pay tribute
to the visionaries to whom we owe much gratitude for
formulating the Charter of the United Nations with
such wisdom and foresight.
I join others in praising the insights enshrined in
Chapter VIII of the Charter, which foresaw the need
for the United Nations to establish deeper cooperation
with regional organizations. Seventy years later, we are
witnessing a trend whereby regional and subregional
organizations are becoming more prominent features
in the global peace and security landscape. Today the

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

international community faces a vastly different set of
security challenges and threats. In coping with them,
regional organizations play an increasingly important
role.
We have seen the instrumental role of regional
organizations, especially in the crucial stage of
early response, in situations in Somalia, Mali, the
Central African Republic, South Sudan and Burundi.
Furthermore, the successful response of the African
Union in countering the Ebola epidemic in West Africa
highlights the convening power, political leverage and
outreach of a regional organization. In recognition of
the role that can be played by regional and subregional
organizations, the Republic of Korea was one of the
sponsors of resolution 2167 (2014). We appreciate
the report by the High-level Independent Panel in
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), which calls for
closer cooperation with regional organizations in
addressing present and future conflicts. As a member
of the Peacebuilding Commission’s Organizational
Committee, the Republic of Korea will seek ways to
further develop close consultations with regional and
subregional organizations and arrangements.
Coming from a region where the role of regional
organizations is not as prominent as in Africa or Europe,
the Republic of Korea is nonetheless actively engaged
in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
processes, including ASEAN+3, the ASEAN Regional
Forum and the East Asian Summit. Last December, we
hosted the Commemorative Summit on the occasion of
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the ASEAN-Republic
of Korea dialogue relations. Furthermore, the Republic
of Korea has promoted the Northeast Asia peace and
Cooperation Initiative. Inspired by the experiences
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe in making Europe whole and free in the
aftermath of the Cold War, the Northeast Asia Peace
and Cooperation Initiative seeks to build a consensus
on softer, yet critical, issues such as climate change,
the environment, disaster relief and nuclear safety.
We hope gradually to strengthen cooperation among
regional players with a view to eventually addressing
the region’s more difficult issues.
Today, as we speak of how best to implement
regional cooperation, we need to be as imaginative as
the Founding Fathers of the United Nations so that we
can effectively address threats to peace and security of
all kinds around the world.

15-2592511/31

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Panama.
Ms. Franceschi Navarro (Panama) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, let me thank the presidency of
the Security Council, in the person of the Ambassador
and Permanent Representative of Nigeria, for convening
this debate on the nature of current challenges to global
security and the role that regional organizations and
subregional organizations can play in the maintenance
of international peace and security. This debate could
not be more relevant. The global economy is more
interconnected than ever, making global security a
particularly relevant issue. What is therefore required
is a certain minimum of security, stability and
predictability at the global level so as to ensure that
the flow and interconnectedness of the economy can
guarantee well-being and prosperity for all.
In that context, regional conflicts or tensions
resulting from interreligious or intercultural disputes,
or drug trafficking, loss of lives as a result of terrorism
and infectious diseases such as Ebola, and natural
disasters, among others, affect the supranational flow
of goods, services, people and capital that characterizes
the global economy of our times. Allow me to share
just two figures that reflect that impressive flow and
interconnection. In 2005, the number of migrants,
globally, was estimated at 191 million people. In terms
of capital flow, global remittances were estimated at
$406 billion in 2012.
In that context, the maintenance of international
peace and security are key factors and prerequisites for
the progress and prosperity of humankind. As Tavares
has said, peace seeks to manage violence, while
security seeks to manage threats. Therefore, the post2015 development agenda, “Transforming our world:
the 2030 agenda for sustainable development”, which
will be adopted in September, envisions that its goals
and targets will lead to a world free of poverty, hunger,
disease, free from fear and violence, where all people
can realize their potential. In particular, the target of
goal 16, on promoting peaceful and inclusive societies,
is to substantially reduce illicit flows of weapons,
promote the return of seized assets and combat all
forms of organized crime, inter alia, by 2030.
We therefore reaffirm that peace and security will
be strengthened to the extent that there is inclusive
development to support the health of our ecosystems
and promote equality and respect for all human rights,

12/31

18/08/2015

democracy, human development, gender equality and
the participation of women. Facing that challenge
requires a commitment to conflict prevention,
constructive dialogue, cooperation and collaboration,
mutual respect and education as the primary tools for
guaranteeing the international peace and security that
we all desire.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
as has been mentioned by several speakers, notes that
Member States shall make every effort to peacefully
settle local disputes through agreements or regional
agencies or arrangements. To that end, regional
agencies and organizations can play an important
role in prevention and early warning of situations that
undermine global peace and security in different parts
of the world.
In the Latin America and Caribbean region, we
highlight the role played by regional entities in the
struggle for security and peace among neighbours. It
is important to clarify that in this region, sustainable
economic and political progress is threatened not by the
existence of weapons of mass destruction and nuclear
weapons, but by inequality, the unmet needs of people,
insecurity and the presence of organized criminal
networks that are strengthened by drug trafficking
networks in the region. According to the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, 36 per cent of homicides
globally occur in the Americas.
We note, for example, that the Organization of
American States, the longest lasting regional entity,
consisting of 35 States members, is a robust advocate
of democracy, strengthening electoral systems and
modernization of the State. With respect to crisis
management, it promotes dialogue among the parties.
We also stress the role of the States members of the
Caribbean Community in decisively supporting United
Nations efforts to stabilize Haiti, the only country in
the Americas with a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. We further note the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, which was created
in 2011, has 35 member States, and represents a new
political dialogue and integration mechanism, with the
primary objective of integration and peace. We also
point to the Union of South American Nations, which
is composed of 12 South American States, whose South
American Defense Council is an innovative space for
coordination and cooperation among South American
countries in the field of peace and security.

15-25925

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Overall, we believe that there is no single model
for relations between the United Nations and regional
organizations in promoting peace and peacebuilding.
Some regional institutions focus primarily on
cooperation for security, yet not necessarily on peace.
They should take into account the experiences of each
region and the various decision-making processes,
which point to the need to strengthen cooperation with
the United Nations within the purview of each regional
organization.
It is important to build capacity in those
organizations and to strengthen both their conflict
prevention mandates and their capacity to implement
solutions within the aforementioned principles of
non-intervention and national sovereignty. They must
have the tools, funding and expertise to implement
their mandate. Above all, they should strengthen their
legitimacy and credibility in the region.
The Security Council enjoys pre-eminence in the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
a mandate to consider measures and promote closer,
more effective cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations in the areas
of early warning and conflict prevention. The daily
reality of emerging conflicts and the demands facing
multilateral organizations are in constant flux. Threats
to international peace and security have changed in form
and substance from those that led to the establishment
of the Security Council in 1946, when the first meeting
was held.
That is why we consider it timely to resume the
discussion on the reform of the Security Council, and
to integrate a broader representation of nations to
enrich our understanding of the threats to international
peace and security. I reiterate that the cost of not
doing so is too high for the sustainability, legitimacy
and effectiveness of the multilateral system. Panama,
like other Member States, has created a proposal to
gradually achieve, in two successive stages, coinciding
with the centenary of the United Nations, a Security
Council of 25 members. In that Council, all members
would be equal and elected for three years, with the
possibility of consecutive re-election.
Finally, we need to work together to halt the spiral
of insecurity that is buffeting the world. Highlighting
the interests of all of our societies will ensure our
ability to build a future of peace and security for all.

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset I wish to thank Nigeria for its initiative in
organizing a public debate on the relevant topic of
regional organizations and contemporary challenges of
global security.
Currently the international community faces an
unimaginable number of challenges to international
peace and security through an unprecedented
exacerbation of terrorism, intra-State conflicts and
threats to peace posed by climate change, pandemics
and poverty. Terrorist groups, including Daesh, Boko
Haram, Al-Qaida and their affiliates, control vast
territories. Meeting those challenges requires the united
efforts and cooperation on all sides, which highlights
the relevance of the topic of today’s debate.
The authors of the Charter of San Francisco assigned
the primary role for the maintenance of international
peace and security on the United Nations, but they
also called for cooperation between the Organization
and regional and subregional organizations. The
strengthening of partnerships to meet global challenges
to peace and security, in particular the peaceful dispute
settlement and the resolution of multiform crises that
threaten to destabilize entire regions and affect millions
of people, complements the efforts made in recent years
by regional and subregional organizations, provided
that the measures taken by these organizations are
consistent with the goals and principles of the United
Nations Charter. That means that all action undertaken
must respect the provisions set forth in resolutions
and be consistent with the mandates of the Security
Council, and that the Council should be fully informed
of activities undertaken or planned by these agreements
or regional entities in maintaining international peace
and security.
The Kingdom of Morocco sets great store by
bolstering multilateralism and the expansion and
enhancement of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional institutions in
line with the Charter and pursuant to the parameters
established by Security Council resolutions. Morocco
therefore confirms the principles set out in the Charter
of the United Nations regarding the peaceful dispute
settlement as set out in Chapter VI, and firmly supports
the ongoing role played by the United Nations as the
universal Organization responsible for resolving

15-2592513/31

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

and ruling on issues pertaining to the maintenance
of international peace and security, the promotion of
human rights and sustainable development.
Similarly, Morocco reiterates its commitment to
multilateralism that respects the rules and principles of
international law within the framework of the United
Nations with a view to creating an international society
that is based on equality and legality, enjoys peace and
security, and respects human rights and sustainable
development. Those goals must be achieved through
the adoption of a comprehensive multidimensional
approach based on the rule of law in all aspects of
international relations, especially through respect
for the United Nations Charter, the peaceful dispute
settlement, respect for the sovereignty, national unity
and territorial integrity of States, and non-interference
in their internal affairs.
While the main role falls with the United Nations
in this field, close cooperation based on effective
communication and coordination between the Security
Council and regional and subregional organizations can
be a major asset in our collective efforts to maintain
international peace and security. Over the years and with
the experience that they have gained, the subregional
organizations have demonstrated their ability to make
a key contribution to international peace and security
with their enhanced knowledge of the sensibilities of
their subregion and social cultural aspects that can add
value to the peaceful conflict settlement. Regional and
subregional organizations have profound knowledge,
original ideas and solid local networks in place. These
elements are essential to mediation and planning for
peacekeeping operations and to helping countries to
establish lasting peace.
Some of these organizations even have a proven
capacity for rapid reaction to crises by drawing on a
whole set of instruments in the short or long term in
the fields of development, humanitarian assistance,
security or politics. In Africa, which faces serious
security, humanitarian and socioeconomic challenges,
subregional organizations are best placed in terms of
geographic proximity, political and cultural knowledge
of local situations, and common experience in order to
act most effectively for peace and security.
To that end, we welcome the scale and diversity
that are increasingly a hallmark of the role played
by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) in its subregion. In addition to its

14/31

18/08/2015

contribution to maintaining the stability and unity of
countries in the region, as was the case in Mali and
Burkina Faso, or through the deployment of troops or the
election of observers, as in Nigeria and Togo, ECOWAS
continues to expand the scope of its interventions to
cover areas as varied as they are complex, as reflected
by its contribution to the recent successes made in the
struggle against the terror group Boko Haram, or its
participation in eradicating the Ebola virus in Liberia
and the disease’s overall regression in Guinea and
Sierra Leone.
Other subregional organizations stand out for their
capacities to mobilize to combat the destabilizing effects
of terrorism and the degradation of the humanitarian
situation in their respective subregions. That is the case
with the Lake Chad Basin Commission, which seeks
to operationalize as soon as possible the Multinational
Joint Task Force to take on the Boko Haram terrorist
group, which continues to rage in the subregion. In the
Central African Republic, the efforts of the Economic
Community of Central African States to ensure a
peaceful political transition through its support for
the holding of credible and transparent legislative and
presidential elections have been admirable.
At this point, we note that while subregional
African organizations have worked actively to settle
conflicts in Africa, they face huge obstacles, such as
the absence of lasting and flexible financial support, as
well as a lack of military expertise and equipment and
appropriate civilian competence.
Finally, despite the growing proliferation of threats
and challenges to international peace and security, which
could justify closer cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
with a view to improving the international collective
security system, the central role of the Security Council
in matters of international peace and security remains
unchanged, as defined in the United Nations Charter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Guilherme de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil):
I should like to thank you, Madam President, for
presiding over this open debate. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
Coordinating the aims and activities of regional
and international actors reinforces multilateralism and
increases the prospects for sustainable peace. It can play

15-25925

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

a decisive role in preserving stability and preventing
the escalation of crises. Indeed the potential for
regional arrangements to confront challenges to global
security should not be restricted to or mainly focused
on peacekeeping. Article 52 of the Charter emphasizes
the crucial role that regional arrangements play in
the pacific settlement of local disputes. Initiatives in
the areas of conflict prevention, mediation and postconflict peacebuilding, as well as measures to foster
sustainable and inclusive patterns of development are
also vital to achieve durable peace.
Regional and subregional organizations have
achieved different levels of institutional development.
While some of these institutions have comprehensive
mandates, which include developing and implementing
their own security and defence policies, others are much
more limited in scope and ambition. Today’s debate
should reflect this institutional diversity. It is important
that the United Nations be attentive to and respectful of
the specificities of each regional arrangement, avoiding
the simple replication of practices.
In the Americas, the purpose of the Organization
of American States is to guarantee continental peace
and security. That is to be fulfilled through peaceful
processes. In extreme cases, this could lead to the
suspension of a member State whose Government has
been overthrown by force. This means resorting to
political pressure but not to arms. In South America,
the Union of South American Nations has built an
institutional architecture to contribute to the promotion
of stability in the region. The South American Defence
Council has established an innovative mechanism for
coordination and cooperation among South American
countries in matters of peace and security. In parallel,
the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
has proclaimed Latin America and the Caribbean as a
zone of peace and recommitted to promoting nuclear
disarmament and the proscription of weapons of mass
destruction globally.
Brazil recognizes, in line with the report of the
High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/446) that African regional and subregional
organizations are main players in combating security
challenges in their respective jurisdictions. We praise
the stabilization efforts by the African Union with
the support of subregional organizations in Somali,
the Central African Republic, and West Africa. We
also commend the constructive role played by the

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

East African Community and the African Union in
mediating Burundi’s electoral crisis.
While welcoming a more active engagement of
regional organizations in Africa or elsewhere, Brazil
reiterates that the primary responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of international peace and
security should be strengthened, not hindered, by the
action of those organizations. The Council’s authority
should not be outsourced to or superseded by these
entities. The tenets of Chapter VIII of the Charter are
of paramount importance in this regard.
Brazil also believes that contemporary challenges
to global security will be better tackled if regional
and subregional organizations are more involved in
and focused on issues in their respective areas of
jurisdiction. Moreover, financial constraints should
not drive policy. We disagree with the tacit reasoning
that regional entities should be more engaged in facing
contemporary security challenges as a means of
achieving budget savings for the United Nations.
Finally, let us not forget that regional involvement is
not a panacea. There will be cases in which differences
regarding a certain situation will exist within the region.
Overframing a certain challenge as a regional question
may further aggravate the situation. The results of
the efforts of regional and subregional organizations
to tackle contemporary security challenges will be
elusive if unaccompanied by real political will at the
global level to face those challenges. No administrative
arrangement between global and local institutions can
replace political consensus building. Brazil reiterates
its readiness to contribute to the task of forging
convergence among different entities and promoting an
enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations.
Last but not least, Brazil is convinced of the urgent
need for a reform of the Security Council that includes
new permanent and non-permanent seats. Such reform
would render the Council more representative and
would truly enhance the relationship between the
United Nations and regional organizations in matters
of international peace and security.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): Turkey has aligned itself with
the statement delivered today by the observer of the
European Union. I now wish to make a statement in my

15-2592515/31

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

own capacity, and I should like to thank the Nigerian
presidency for organizing this timely debate. In our
view, the role of regional organizations in meeting the
contemporary challenges of global security is crucial
and needs to be further highlighted.
Today, threats characterized by their transnational
nature — such as terrorism, organized crime,
sectarianism, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, climate change, poverty, and the
uncontrolled and involuntary mass movement of
people — are constantly evolving. Thus, peace and
security can no longer be achieved solely through
military means, since some of these challenges are
not necessarily of a military nature. We need to
employ a broader combination of policies to confront
contemporary challenges. We believe that regional
organizations have a significant contribution to make
in this regard.
As stated in the excellent concept note (S/2015/599,
annex) prepared by your presidency, Madam President,
regional organizations are increasingly focusing on
contemporary challenges that have a direct impact on
regional and global security. Aware of this fact, Turkey
has been promoting and actively taking part in the
activities of regional organizations in its region such as
the European Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia,
NATO, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the
Black Sea Economic Organization, the Organization of
Economic Cooperation, the Council of Europe, the D-8
and the Turkic Council.
In line with our objective of contributing to stability,
security and prosperity beyond our neighbourhood,
we have also strengthened our relations with regional
organizations throughout the world, in Africa, Asia
and Latin America alongside the enhancement of our
bilateral relations with countries in these regions. In
Africa, Turkey as a strategic partner of the continent
since 2008 actively supports various United Nations
and African Union peace operations by providing funds
and personnel. We also contribute to the United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund and the Commission’s work.
The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) contributes greatly to democracy, peace and
stability in West Africa through its efforts in Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Burkina Faso and other countries.

16/31

18/08/2015

We support the peacekeeping activities of ECOWAS
and other regional actors in Africa. In this regard, we
have provided grants to the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali Trust Fund and the Mali Peace
and Security Fund. We have also made a donation to
the projects developed by the United Nations Office on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
in Africa for the Central African Republic, ECOWAS
and the African Union.
In East Africa, we follow closely the integration
process in the East African Community (EAC). We
believe that full integration of the member countries of
EAC will boost the development in the region and unfold
new potentials. We consider the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development to be a key factor in attaining
peace, stability and sustainable economic development
in the region.
In Asia, establishing more institutional ties with the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which we view
as the key regional organization, is our priority. We also
enhanced our relations with the Shanghai Cooperation
Organisation as a dialogue partner. In Latin America,
in addition to the Organization of American States, the
Association of Caribbean States, the Central American
Integration System and the Pacific Alliance, in which
Turkey has observer status, we have institutional
relations with the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community and the
Common Market of the South.
As regional organizations are more and more
active in the international scene, the enhancement
of cooperation among the regional organizations and
coordination between regional organizations and the
United Nations are crucial in order to create synergies
and to achieve better results, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter. We are glad to observe
the positive developments in recent years concerning
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union to find solutions to several conflicts in
Africa. Turkey, whether through bilateral, regional or
international channels, will do its utmost to contribute
to peace and security in its region and beyond.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I thank Nigeria for
organizing this event and bringing this very important
issue to the attention of the Council. I also want to thank
the Secretary-General for his insightful remarks earlier

15-25925

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

today. Georgia aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union, and in my national
capacity I should like to add the following.
Throughout the years we have witnessed fruitful
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. At the same time, we remain mindful of
the serious challenges in designing a comprehensive
peace and security architecture that would rapidly
respond to security threats in different corners of
the world, including the region I come from. The
global and European security environment has
changed exponentially in recent years. The conflicts,
threats and instability in many regions across
the globe, together with old and newly emerging
security challenges — affecting, among others, Iraq,
Libya, the Sahel region, Syria and my immediate
neighbourhood — are significantly impacting
international peace and security and challenging our
fundamental values and principles.
We fully acknowledge the growing asymmetric
threats posed by transnational terrorism and its
new forms, such as foreign terrorist fighters, to the
viability and efficiency of regional and international
organizations. And we believe that the entire
international community at all levels must stand and act
unitedly to effectively counter them. In the meantime,
the more traditional threats posed by expansionist and
irredentist State actors remain at the core of regional
and international instability and insecurity.
Taking into account the universal nature of the
fundamental principles upon which the European
security architecture rests, we are confident that the
main problem is rather related to the unwillingness of
some States to comply with commitments undertaken
within the regional organizations than with the
imperfection of the system itself. The disregard for
obligations is a major challenge to our common security
and has resulted in the crisis that we are facing today
in the region.
Unfortunately for all of us, regional security in
Europe is being significantly challenged by Russia’s
aggressive behaviour against its neighbours — especially
Georgia and Ukraine — in particular through the
ongoing illegal military occupation of integral parts
of our sovereign territories. This worrisome pattern
to alter international borders arbitrarily and by force
poses a deadly threat not only to the strategic vision of

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

a Europe whole, free and at peace, but also to the notion
of amicable relations between all peoples in our region.
It should be noted that the first signs of erosion of the
modern European security system emerged quite long
ago. A lack of willingness to fulfil the commitments
in good faith undertaken during the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Istanbul
Summit in 1999 must be considered as one of the clear
signs of the beginning of this erosion process.
Regrettably, OSCE participating States failed
to demonstrate enough resolve and unity adequately
to respond to this dangerous tendency at an early
stage. The imposition of an illegal moratorium on the
implementation of the obligations arising from the
Treaty on Conventional Forces in Europe in 2007 was
the next perilous step towards the deepening of the
security crisis. The full-scale aggression committed
against Georgia in 2008 and the consequent ethnic
cleansing, occupation of 20 per cent of my country’s
territory and ongoing steps towards its annexation by
one of the founding Members of the United Nations
were a logical continuation of this process.
Allow me to express my profound disappointment
that, as a result of Russia’s opposition, we have
lacked opportunities to restore a meaningful and
comprehensive OSCE mission in Georgia, which would
serve as an impartial monitor of the existing situation in
Georgia’s occupied regions. This issue is of particular
concern given the absence of international monitoring
mechanisms on the ground, a rueful consequence of
the terminations not just of the OSCE mission but also
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia in
2009 by exercising the power of veto of a permanent
member.
Unfortunately, inadequate assessment by the
international community of the above-mentioned
erosion of the security architecture, and hence
the inadequate response to the tragic events that
unfolded in Georgia, led to another grave violation of
sovereignty and territorial integrity of a United Nations
Member State, this time Ukraine in 2014, resulting in
the annexation of new territories and the creation of
grey zones in the OSCE area. We believe that close
cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE
and other regional organizations and full exploitation of
their potential in early warning and prevention as well
as crisis management and post-conflict rehabilitation,

15-2592517/31

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

is indispensable for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
I should also like to stress the particular importance
we attach to the partnerships between the United
Nations and the Organization for Democracy and
Economic Development — GUAM. There is no need to
remind those participating in this debate that all GUAM
member States — Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and
Moldova — have grave security challenges arising
from conflicts, including occupied and annexed
territories. Therefore, the United Nations engagement
is crucial to preserving stability in this region with a
population of more than 60 million. To this end, we
once again welcome the recent consensual adoption
by the General Assembly of the second resolution on
cooperation between the United Nations and GUAM
(resolution 69/271) and look forward to strengthening
the partnership between these organizations.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) in my capacity as the Chair of the
OIC group.
At the outset allow me to express to the delegation
of Nigeria, a fellow State member of the OIC, both
congratulations on presiding over the Security Council
and gratitude for holding an open debate on such a timely
and important topic as the role of regional organizations
in meeting the evolving challenges of global security. I
should also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing.
In my statement, I will focus on the challenges
arising from the continuously evolving threat posed
by terrorism and violent extremism, and highlight
the critical role played by the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation towards countering it.
As our world has become more interconnected
and interdependent, so too have the challenges we
face, requiring us to enhance our collective efforts to
tackle these global threats. Having said that, it is not
enough for these security challenges to be tackled at
the country-to-country level; more importantly, they
must be addressed throught the coordination and
cooperation of regional and subregional organizations
in a concerted effort to ensure the collective peace and
security of our peoples. The Security Council is to

18/31

18/08/2015

encourage the aforementioned, as clearly stipulated in
Article 52 of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations.
Terrorism and violent extremism remain two of
the most serious threats to every society, as well as to
international peace and security as a whole. Regardless
of its ethno-religious identity, geographical location,
socioeconomic conditions or political stance on the
world stage, every nation is more or less susceptible to
the growing threat of terrorism. Therefore, never before
in history has a comprehensive and concerted response
to terrorism been needed as much as it is today.
However, there seems to be fundamental differences
within the international community on how to handle
the issue of terrorism.
The Organization of Islamic Cooperation is
committed to fighting terrorism and countering violent
extremism. To that end, the OIC works to delegitimize
violent extremist ideology, develop counter narratives
to such extremist ideologies and propaganda, provide
appropriate pathways to vulnerable groups — especially
youth and women — elevate credible and authentic
religious voices that support tolerance and non-violence,
counter the use of cyberspace, including social media,
by extremist groups.
As part of its ongoing efforts, the OIC Ministerial
Executive Committee held an emergency session on
15 February to review and invigorate its actions against
terrorism and violent extremism. Similarly, on 5 May the
General Secretariat organized an expert level workshop
on countering threats of terrorism and extremism in
cyberspace implementing one of its deliverables.
Moreover, on 27 May in Kuwait, the forty-second
session of the Council of OIC Foreign Ministers
had a special brainstorming session on developing
an effective strategy to combat terrorism, violent
extremism and Islamophobia, thereby strengthening
the OIC’s commitment to the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism. The OIC member States will
deliberate on and consider a proposal for establishing
an OIC fund to combat terrorism. Additionally, the OIC
General Secretariat will organize an intergovernmental
expert group meeting to finalize the strategy to combat
terrorism and violent extremism in cyberspace.
The United Nations and the OIC continue to work
together in order to counter incitement to terrorism and
violent extremism. In this regard, within the framework
of the ongoing United Nations-OIC cooperation, the OIC

15-25925

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

held a workshop in Jeddah in May 2013 on countering
incitement to terrorism and enhancing cultural dialogue
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1624 (2005).
Similarly, after the forthcoming session of the General
Assembly, the OIC looks forward, again in close
consultation with the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate, to holding a meeting of OIC member
States on national practices in countering incitement to
terrorism and violent extremism pursuant to Security
Council resolutions 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014).
The OIC remains an important partner of the United
Nations in peace, security and fostering a culture
of peace at the global level. The OIC stands ready to
make meaningful contributions to the aforementioned
initiatives, and reiterates its cooperation to working
with the United Nations in conflict prevention and
resolution, mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
the promotion of good governance at national and
international levels, combating international terrorism,
fighting extremism, countering religious intolerance,
including Islamophobia, promoting and protecting
all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
humanitarian assistance and capacity building.
Regional organizations have a greater role to
prevent, manage and resolve crises and to ensure the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
is imperative and incumbent upon us — States and
regional organizations — to work more closely, more
collectively, in order to contribute to the promotion
of the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Botswana.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): Let me at the very outset
congratulate the delegation of the Federal Republic
of Nigeria on its assumption of the presidency of this
Council for this month. We pledge our full support to
you, Madam President, as you lead the activities of this
Council.
This debate on regional organizations and
contemporary global security challenges is indeed
timely and pertinent, particularly at this historic
moment in the calendar of the United Nations. We
therefore appreciate your initiative, Madam President,
in convening this important debate.
Botswana reaffirms its commitment to peace and
security issues, as well as to human rights. Seventy

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

years after the founding of the United Nations, when
the founders pledged to settle disputes through peaceful
means, the United Nations, and in particular the
Security Council, remains the only hope for humankind
to live in peace.
The world community continues to face
unprecedented levels of threats to international
peace and security, and at a frightening pace. Above
and beyond those, there is the proliferation of armed
conflict, radical extremism and racial and religious
intolerance, which have taken root in most regions of
the world. No single country is immune from those
threats, and no single country can counter them alone.
The threats come in different forms and manifestat
themselves in many ways. One thing is clear: they are
deadly, sudden and they leave ruin and destruction in
their wake for families, communities and nations, big
and small.
The growth and continued existence of the Islamic
State, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and many other brutal
terrorist groups continue to pose serious threats to
global security. They kill, maim and unleash brutal
terror on innocent people with impunity. Apart from
those global terrorist networks, there are those who
engage in drug trafficking, trafficking in wildlife and
wildlife products, money laundering and the illicit
trafficking and trade in arms and light weapons. In
essence, they destabilize regional governance structures
and inflict a sense of insecurity in our communities.
The continued violations of human rights perpetrated
against vulnerable populations, especially women and
children, with millions displaced, calls for regional
bodies to work together to stem the rising tide of terror.
In addition, climate change continues to unleash
havoc on our planet — triggering humanitarian
crises, robbing populations of their natural capital and
compromising food security. As a result, millions of
people face hunger as a result of drought, starvation
and diseases such as Ebola and malaria.
The United Nations — in particular the Security
Council as the custodian of international peace and
security — must continue to display exemplary
leadership in addressing threats to peace and security. It
is therefore imperative for the international community
to work in unison and make concerted efforts to address
those challenges. To that end, we call on influential
members of the Council to refrain from the use of
the veto, especially where genocide and atrocities are

15-2592519/31

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

18/08/2015

concerned. Any attempt to frustrate the ends of justice
by those members constitutes an insult, especially to
victims.

of global security. I am also grateful for the concept
note (S/2015/599, annex) prepared on such an important
subject. We fully support it.

Threats posed by armed conflicts require that
the United Nations and regional organizations work
together in a complementary manner to bring justice
to people. In taking the lead, regional organizations
can help, as they possess valuable advantages, such
as a clearer understanding and knowledge of regional
dynamics, cultures, sensitivities and perceptions. They
are also better placed to address conflict prevention
through mediation, arbitration and reconciliation, as
well as handle differences between warring groups.

The founders responsible for the Charter of the
United Nations showed foresight in drafting Chapter VIII
of the Charter as the basis for a partnership between the
United Nations and the Security Council, as that body
responsible for international peace and security, on the
one hand, and regional and subregional organizations,
on the other. Given their important role in managing
and preventing conflicts, the seventieth anniversary of
the signing of the Charter is an opportunity to consider
these issues in the light of the increase in the number
of challenges and threats, which no party on its own
can face up to. Therefore, we need collective efforts
of a strategic nature to confront them. Egypt, which is
a founding Member of the United Nations and of two
major regional organizations — the African Union,
which is the largest in terms of membership and the
challenges it faces, and the League of Arab States,
which is one of the oldest regional organizations — has
always insisted on partnerships between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
order to face challenges. I would like to underscore the
following:

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations recognizes that important role for regional
organizations with regard to global peace and security.
It is therefore Botswana’s belief that the engagement of
regional organizations at an early stage of conflict helps
contain it before it manifests itself, or even spreads and
becomes out of hand. In playing our part, my delegation
has engaged in intervention and mediation efforts at the
political level by using the experience and wisdom of
our former leaders, especially within our subregion.
At the regional level, we operate in the context of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
troika. At the continental level, we engage and continue
to work through the African Panel of the Wise. Having
just assumed the chairmanship of SADC, we pledge to
continue to live by the values, traditions and culture
of SADC as a cornerstone of regional cooperation.
In that connection, we shall remain steadfast in our
commitment to the principles of democracy, inclusive
development, the rule of law and the promotion and
protection of human rights for all. We continue to
strongly support action against all forms of threats to
international peace and security, as well as action for
the strengthening of institutions of accountability at
national, regional and international levels.
To conclude, Botswana reaffirms its unwavering
support to the efforts of regional organizations in
promoting and protecting international peace and
security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Nigerian presidency
of the Security Council for holding this debate on
regional organizations and contemporary challenges

20/31

First, past experience has shown the comparative
advantage of regional organizations, including their
deep understanding of the underlying causes of
conflicts. That means that they play an important role
in terms of mediation and the peaceful settlement of
conflicts. They also have the capacity to take difficult,
even very difficult, decisions, to end conflicts at an
early stage when the international community may
be hesitant to intervene. The African Union and
subregional organizations in Africa cooperate on
Somalia, Darfur, Mali and the Central African Republic.
That demonstrates the capacity that Africa has to pay
the highest price to establish peace and security, while
respecting the need for there to be African solutions to
Africa’s problems.
Secondly, the contemporary challenges to peace
and security, such as terrorism, organized crime,
piracy, arms and drug trafficking and trafficking in
natural resources are all cross-border in nature. They
are not limited to one single country, and they all pose
a threat to international security. Therefore, all those
problems need to be dealt with in a global manner,
as well as locally and internationally, in order to deal
with their security and humanitarian consequences. We

15-25925

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

must also deal with the underlying causes. The post2015 development agenda could establish a proper
framework in that area.
Thirdly, the role of regional and subregional
organizations is not limited to peace and security. They
also play a role in the economic collective strategy
for sustainable development in order to ensure the
establishment of peace and stability. The report of the
High-level Independent Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446) shows the importance
played by regional organizations in preventive
diplomacy. The Panel has made a number of important
recommendations for cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in that context. The
report also servese to illustrate the importance such
bodies play in establishing and consolidating peace in
countries emerging from conflict.
In the light of all that, we must enhance the
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations — headed by the African Union and the
League of Arab States — so that everyone can benefit
from the respective comparatives advantage, while
duly allocating responsibilities through a plan of work
that enhances regional capacities and consultation
mechanisms. That would allow for the establishment
of a joint strategy that brings together the efforts
of the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. Accordingly, we reiterate the importance
of the support provided by the United Nations to regional
organizations, including the African Union through the
Ten-Year Capacity Building Programme, which will
end in 2016. Such support includes that provided for
the African Standby Force to help develop a vision for
the future. We therefore emphasize the importance
of the the current recommendations and those set out
in the 2008 Prodi report (S/2008/813) with regard to
peackeeping operations in which the African Union
participates via a Security Council mandate, while of
course taking into account the United Nations and the
Security Council’s responsibility with regard to peace
and security.
I would like to point to the Sharm El-Sheikh
declaration adopted last year on establishing a joint
Arab peacekeeping force for Arab countries in order
to confront any challenge faced by them, including any
threat to Arab national security coming from terrorist
and other groups. We were among the first to establish
such a force.

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

With regard to the efforts being made to settle
problems faced by the Arab region, the same Sharm ElSheikh summit adopted a resolution that conferred upon
Egypt the chairmanship of a committee to do whatever
necessary to halt the Israeli occupation and come up
with a solution to the Palestinian question. Given the
changing nature of the security problems faced by the
world today, Egypt would like to reiterate the fact that
a deeper and broader partnership at the regional level is
of vital importance.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba commends the Nigerian presidency of the Security
Council on guiding our work, and especially, Madam
President, your presence here throughout the day.
We support the statement made by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Cuba welcomes and supports the holding of this
open debate of the Security Council on an issue as
important as the one before us. Maintaining international
peace and security is the primary responsibility of the
Security Council, and one of the purposes of the United
Nations. Therefore, all States Members have the duty
to promote it.
Cuba has the honour — alongside 32 other States of
the Latin America and Caribbean region — of belonging
to the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States (CELAC). It is a mechanism for dialogue and
consultation that is becoming a political forum and
actor in promoting the process of political, economic,
social and cultural integration, thereby achieving the
necessary balance between the unity and diversity of
our peoples.
In its short history, CELAC has already reached
a major milestone, which is the proclamation of Latin
America and the Caribbean as a zone of peace — in
the context of the second Summit, held in Havana. That
proclamation confirms our region’s commitment to the
principles of international law and enhances the culture
of peace, with the aim of removing forever the threat
or use of force, promoting the peaceful resolution of
disputes and promoting the commitment of the peoples
of Latin America and the Caribbean to encourage
friendly relations and cooperation among themselves
and other nations, regardless of their differences.

15-2592521/31

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

We believe that CELAC is a tangible example of how
regional integration can lead to ongoing dialogue and
be based on the principle of complementarity, in order
to work towards achieving the inclusive development of
its member States on the basis of solidarity. In facing
contemporary challenges to global security, regional
and subregional organizations and their member States
must always uphold decision-making on the basis of
consensus and through framework of multilateralism.
Those elements will always form the foundation of
an effective international order — one that rejects
unilateral steps that are extraterritorial in nature
and contrary to international law, and may endanger
multilateralism.
The role of regional organizations and associations
in no way reduces the responsibility of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security. However, for the United Nations to become a
standard for transparency, democracy and participation
of the entire international community in resolving
serious global problems, it is urgent to reform the
Organization. That includes having a Security Council
that is democratic and transparent, in which none of
its members should promote armed confrontations
or the philosophy of regime change. That contradicts
the purposes and principles that should guide the
Organization.
The General Assembly must also be revitalized. It
should assume its key role in achieving the rights of
peoples and every individual to have a fair, democratic
and equitable international order that supports the
efforts of States to build a future that each nation
decides for itself.
We are convinced that, despite the positive
contribution made by regional and subregional
organizations, international peace and security will
continue to be threatened as long as we do not have a
common view of what are the actual threats to peace
and security.
International peace and security will continue to
be threatened in the absence of the total elimination
of nuclear weapons, which threaten the survival of the
human species. Cuba will continue to work actively in
its national capacity and as a member of other groups
of States — such as the Non-aligned Movement and the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean — to
achieve the elimination and total ban on those weapons.

22/31

18/08/2015

International peace and security will continue to
be threatened as long as there is no defined concept
of the terrorism that we are fighting — because we
cannot define terrorism as good or bad depending
on who perpetrates it. We must all commit ourselves
to combating terrorism, whatever its forms or
manifestations, wherever it takes place and whoever its
author. But in that battle, we must neither forget nor
violate the principles that underlie the Charter of the
United Nations.
To prevent conflict and maintain peace, it
is necessary to have solidarity, cooperation and
international assistance. And we must work together to
eliminate poverty, unemployment, hunger, inequalities
and the causes of those inequalities.
In our view, international peace and security can
be maintained only if we all respect the principles of
the Charter of the Organization, as well as international
law, which enshrine the principles the sovereign
equality of all States, the peaceful settlement of
international disputes, political independence, the
non-resort to the threat or use of force against any State
and non-intervention in the internal affairs of States.
Cuba will continue to contribute its modest
resources to the welfare of other peoples, especially
the most vulnerable. It will remain committed to
supporting international cooperation to achieve
sustainable, inclusive development and to the defence
of international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Mialkovskyi (Ukraine): I thank you, Madam,
for convening this important thematic debate.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union (EU). At the same
time I would like to make a statement in my national
capacity.
Numerous conflicts throughout the world have
created an environment in which the United Nations
alone cannot respond effectively to emerging threats to
international peace and security. In that regard, I would
like to underscore that Chapter VIII is as relevant today
as ever. Regional organizations, with their experience
in the peaceful settlement of disputes, including
through conflict prevention, confidence-building and
mediation, are strengthening the capacity of the United
Nations.

15-25925

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

Deep cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations is a vital element in
the contemporary world, where the international
community is facing such complex challenges. We
firmly support the efforts of the United Nations to
strengthen its relations with regional organizations,
with the ultimate goal of achieving a concrete, positive
impact on the political and socioeconomic development
of the regions.

In the current circumstances, we believe that the
capacity of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
should be strengthened, including by increasing the
level of cooperation with the United Nations. In that
respect, we look forward to hearing from the SecretaryGeneral on how the United Nations can assist the OSCE
in contributing to the implementation of the Minsk
agreement, in particular with regard to his idea to
establish a relevant United Nations office in Ukraine.

In 2015, we are marking the seventieth anniversary
of the end of the Second World War and of the signing
of the Charter of the United Nations. Throughout
these 70 years, the United Nations has faced numerous
and complex challenges, including terrorism and
extremism,
conflicts,
poverty,
unemployment,
inequality and climate change. Unfortunately, today we
can add to that list a brutal violation of the Charter of
the United Nations by one of the permanent members of
the Security Council.

The development of a strong partnership between
the United Nations and the European Union is
increasingly critical as global crises intensify in
complexity and multiply in scope. In the case of the
EU, that might be achieved by making effective use of
the existing common security and defence policy tools,
including by better linking them to the EU’s foreign
affairs, humanitarian assistance and solidarity.

Soon it will be a year and a half that Ukraine has
been subject to Russian aggression. The Council is
well aware of the outcomes — Crimea and Sevastopol
have been forcibly annexed, while the Donbas has
been plunged into violence, with thousands killed,
over 1 million displaced and regional infrastructure
destroyed. The contribution of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has been
an important part of the international community’s
response to the threats arising from Russia’s aggression
against Ukraine. We highly appreciate the work of
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, in line with
the agreed mandate covering the entire territory
of Ukraine within its internationally recognized
borders. The Mission enjoys Ukraine’s full support
in the implementation of its tasks, in particular those
related to monitoring and verification under the Minsk
agreements.
We regret the fact that, despite significant
international efforts, the situation on the ground remains
tense and volatile, with casualties among Ukrainian
servicemen and civilians on the rise due to a surge in
the activity of Russia-backed militants. Although we
have made active use of the crisis mechanisms of the
United Nations and the OSCE, that has not prevented the
illegal occupation of Crimea and Sevastopol, or direct
Russian military involvement in the Donbas. Moreover,
Russia continues to consolidate its aggression despite
its own commitments to de-escalation under the Minsk
agreements.

In terms of the Russian aggression in Ukraine,
we still think that the EU Common Security and
Defence Policy crisis management operation could
be one of the appropriate solutions, not only allowing
for the maintainance of peace and security, but also
facilitating political processes, protecting civilians and
human rights, and assisting in restoring the rule of law.
We believe that if our suggestion were implemented, it
could enhance the arsenal of measures already in place
to make Russia abide by the rules and live in peace with
its neighbours.
I would like to underscore that Ukraine fully
recognizes the important role that OSCE plays in
observing the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
At the same time, achieving a comprehensive settlement
and lasting peace in certain areas of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions requires additional efforts, including
the involvement of available international means and
tools.
In recent years, cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization for Democracy and
Economic Development—GUAM, which Ukraine
chairs this year, has developed with General
Assembly resolution 69/271 on United Nations-GUAM
cooperation. One example I could mention is the ongoing
projects with the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), such as the Afghan Opiate Trade
Project of the UNODC and the joint GUAM/UNODC
project in combatting money-laundering, as well as in
seizing and confiscating criminal proceeds. GUAM
also plans to develop cooperation with the United

15-2592523/31

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Nations Economic Commission for Europe and the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
The political cooperation of GUAM member
States is based on their common vision and wellrooted traditions. The statutory documents and summit
declarations of GUAM are in line with basic United
Nations approaches to regional cooperation, creating
political stability and economic prosperity, allowing
universal values to take hold and establishing a peaceful
and promising civil society that enables personal
fulfilment.
All our member States suffer from unresolved
conflicts, some of which have existed for decades. Those
conflicts undermine peace, security and cooperation
and generate impacts both at the regional level and in
their trans-Atlantic dimension. Triggered from outside
and accompanied by foreign military interference, such
conflicts can find a peaceful resolution exclusively on
the basis of the generally accepted norms and principles
of international law, particularly those related to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the States
concerned within their internationally recognized
borders.
The activities of GUAM during the ongoing
Ukrainian chairmanship have encompassed a number
of projects and programmes aimed at the creation of
a zone of stability and cooperation in the region. As
already mentioned, since the occupation of Crimea
Ukraine has faced an expanded Russian aggression of
hybrid character on its eastern borders, accompanied by
an unprecedented media campaign. Therefore, we look
forward more than ever to obtaining further support for
GUAM efforts, which would be aimed, first of all, at
building the capacities of its member States. It is also
a matter of crucial importance to keep pace with and
increase the dynamic of projects that would energize the
economic sector as well as enhance security measures.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Armenia expresses
its appreciation to the Nigerian presidency for initiating
this debate and for providing an excellent concept note
(S/2015/599, annex). We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his detailed briefing earlier today.
No country can be effective in pursuing its
national agenda without engagement with others.
That is particularly obvious for countries with modest

24/31

18/08/2015

capacities. The regional and subregional levels of
cooperation provide an effective platform for pursuing
specific common objectives for countries bound by
common security goals, common values, or mere
geographic proximity. In the context of the present
debate, the global level of cooperation here in the United
Nations, inter alia, is a critical form of interregional
engagement.
As a member of numerous regional organizations,
including the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO), Armenia benefits greatly
from the institutional strength and effectiveness of
the European regional and subregional landscape of
cooperation, including in the fields of political dialogue,
security, human rights, democratic transformation and
the strengthening of the rule of law, trade and economy,
culture and youth.
In our national context, the peaceful resolution of
conflicts on the basis of the norms and principles of
international law without exception are of particular
significance, given the ongoing negotiations for the
peaceful settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict
within the internationally supported format of the
OSCE Minsk Group co-chairmanship. This format is
by far the most effective one in our particular case for
several reasons, not least its capacity to sustain focus
on a compromise solution, to defuse tensions and to
prevent escalation. Consolidated support for these
negotiations by the international community, including
this body and the Secretary-General, is critical in
deflecting attempts to pursue mediation shopping and
lopsided, often highly biased interpretations of the
causes and consequences of the conflict.
Armenia welcomes the unwavering and continued
support of the United Nations system and the SecretaryGeneral for the established format of negotiations and
for the OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairs.
As a member of the CSTO, Armenia will continue to
deliver on its commitment to forge stronger cooperation
with the United Nations in order to contribute to
international peace and to United Nations peacekeeping
capacities. As a troop-contributing country, Armenia
has acquired considerable national experience in its
engagements in NATO-led peacekeeping operations
in Afghanistan and in Kosovo. Previously, Armenian
peacekeepers have also been engaged in Iraq. Over
the past year Armenia also has acquired new and

15-25925

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

valuable experience in a United Nations-led operation
in Lebanon. Armenia has been investing its experience
in the strengthening of preparedness for peacekeeping
within the CSTO. In this context, we welcome the
expanding cooperation of the United Nations with the
CSTO, including between their respective secretariats.
We look forward to the United Nations presence at
and observance of a combined exercise of the CSTO
peacekeeping forces entitled “Cooperation 2015”, to be
held in Armenia in early autumn.
Armenia attaches equally high importance to
its work within all other regional and subregional
organizations of which it is a member or with which
it has close cooperation. The present international
agenda, with proliferating threats, disagreements and
conflicts, makes it particularly urgent to redouble the
efforts made towards seeking common solutions and
sustainable dialogue. Smaller States are particularly
vulnerable and sensitive to situations in which
disagreements at the regional and global levels pose a
risk of the emergence of dividing lines. Armenia is not
an exception to such vulnerabilities and sensitivities.
Civil society is an important contributor to the
effective addressing of security challenges globally and
regionally. For decades, non-governmental organization
representatives and human rights activists have been
playing an indispensable role in promoting peace,
reconciliation, mutual trust and understanding. That
function remains a critical supporting and consolidating
factor for all peace processes, wherever they might
take place, not least in the peaceful settlement of the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict. Such efforts must be
continually supported.
In conclusion, Armenia believes in the viability
and efficiency of both the United Nations and regional
mechanisms in enhancing trust, confidence-building
and dialogue among nations. Regional and subregional
organizations have an essential role to play. They often
have a better understanding of local circumstances,
tailored approaches and effective tools, as well as their
own resources and financing. Cooperation and dialogue
among States from the subregional to the regional to
global levels has been and remains the modus operandi
for the sustainability of peace, security and cooperation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

for organizing this important open debate. Let me
also thank you, Madam President, for being here with
us at this late hour and doing us the honour of being
personally present here.
In view of time constraints, I will read out a
shortened version of my statement. The full version
will be available on my Twitter account.
I align myself with the statement made earlier
by the observer of the European Union (EU), which
gave an extensive overview of the ways in which the
EU is playing its role as a regional organization and
as a partner in confronting contemporary challenges to
global peace and security.
Only by forging stronger partnerships can the
international community effectively address current
challenges to peace and security. These partnerships, in
our view, should include cooperation not only between
international, regional and subregional organizations,
but also between Governments, civil society, business
communities and development organizations.
Regional organizations play an essential role in
addressing issues of peace and security. This applies
to the prevention of conflict, the containment and
resolution of conflict and rebuilding in the postconflict phase. It is the ambition of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands to be a partner for peace, justice and
development in all these three phases. Let me touch on
each of the three.
First, on prevention, we believe that regional
and subregional organizations are well positioned to
understand the root causes of armed conflicts. They are
often aware of emerging conflicts very early on, and
they are well placed to use tools such as mediation for
conflict prevention, a point just made by our Armenian
colleague. An interesting example is the Organization of
American States Mission to Support the Peace Process
in Colombia, implemented with the support of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands. As many here are aware,
Colombia is one of the neighbouring countries of our
Kingdom. Our Kingdom consists of four autonomous
countries, three of which — Aruba, Curaçao and Sint
Maarten — are in the Caribbean,
(spoke in French)
and we also consider Haiti to be a neighbouring country.

Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me first
express my appreciation to the presidency of Nigeria

15-2592525/31

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

(spoke in English)
We are intensifying our Kingdom’s cooperation
with the the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
regional organization to address current regional
security challenges, and therefore CARICOM is also a
very important cooperation partner for us.
The third example relates to the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, of which the
Netherlands is a founding member State. It usually
follows a multidimensional approach, focusing on
the politic, economic and human dimensions of
conflict, and is therefore able to play a crucial role in
monitoring and verifying the implementation of the
Minsk agreement, which is the basis for a sustainable
solution to the conflict in full respect of Ukraine’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Also during conflict, regional organizations are
crucial. In that phase, the international community must
do its utmost to contain and mitigate the consequences
of conflict and to resolve it. Peacekeeping is often
needed to protect civilians and to create the conditions
for peace. In Mali, the Netherlands is proud to be an
active partner in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali to that effect.
Of course, a political process is crucial to achieve
peace. On the African continent, the Kingdom of
the Netherlands pays tribute to the increasingly
important role that the African Union (AU) is playing
in maintaining peace and security. Great progress has
been made in recent years in implementing the African
Peace and Security Architecture. The Peace and
Security Council has proved to be a key force behind
the increased action and visibility of the AU. Today,
AU missions are increasingly deployed ahead of United
Nations missions, making them important instruments
for stabilizing conflicts and guaranteeing security.
In the political process, subregional organizations
are often the best placed to help steer countries in
conflict back onto the road to peace. Important recent
examples in Africa are, of course, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the East African
Community and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). In very tense and complicated
situations, their efforts need to be enhanced and
supported by the international community, for example
by the IGAD-Plus formula. As was said earlier today,

26/31

18/08/2015

the European Union takes pride in our close cooperation
with the African Union.
My third point concerns the importance of regional
organizations in the post-conflict phase. There, timely
and coordinated efforts are needed to prevent a relapse
into conflict. If exit strategies are nothing more than an
afterthought, countries are at great risk of falling back
into conflict. In our view, therefore, peacebuilding
must be an essential element of every mission. It must
be included in initial planning, and it must be part of a
comprehensive vision for peace, justice and sustainable
development for conflict situations. The United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations have to
make that shift together in order to save lives and
prevent cycles of violence.
In conclusion, I would like to quote from the
report of the High-level Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446), which says:
“We have truly entered an era of partnership
peacekeeping, indeed of partnership in all aspects
of the international peace and security agenda.”
Now is the time for the United Nations to reach out
and strengthen those partnerships, developing mature
and productive relationships based on trust, mutual
responsibility and accountability. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands is committed to remaining a partner in
peace, justice and development for that worthy purpose.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would first
like to commend the Security Council’s decision to
organize this debate, which fits well with its mandate
and the essential role it plays in international peace
and security. It is to the Council’s credit that it has
invited Member States to further reflect on this vital
topic, and particularly on the place and role of regional
organizations in establishing a more balanced world.
Even if the concept of a threat to peace, as stated
in Article 39 of the Charter of the United Nations, is
still regarded by some as ambiguous and elusive from
the point of view of international law, threats to peace
and security are no less real and have continued to
multiply and increase in intensity. That is why the
scope of United Nations interventions in the area of
peacekeeping has continued to expand. From the Palme
Commission to the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) via
Boutros Boutros-Ghali’s Agenda for Peace (S/24111),

15-25925

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

there have been many United Nations initiatives aimed
at establishing an international consensus on the key
aspects of global security.
In recent decades, alongside traditional threats such
as the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, we have witnessed the development of a
whole range of new threats to peace. Whether they are
military, political, economic or in the areas of health or
the environment, whether they are inter-State in nature
or stem from non-State entities and actors working in
the international arena, there is no denying that these
new threats occupy an ever-growing place on the
international security agenda. They include the rise
of international terrorism, the proliferation of local
and regional crises, crimes against civilians, mass
atrocities, the expansion of organized crime, massive
population transfers and other global challenges such
as poverty and environmental crises.
The Charter of the United Nations enshrines
the political primacy of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
However, recent history has shown that in national
conflicts the Council’s actions are often subject to
multiple political and strategic constraints that in some
major regional crisis situations have left it virtually
paralysed even when the circumstances warranted an
urgent intervention. Faced with this barrage of new
threats, the international community can only gain
from the closer involvement of regional organizations
in every possible effort to reduce threats to peace and
security, whether by preventing or slowing the arms
race, stemming the threat of nuclear proliferation or
resolving problems and conflicts that could jeopardize
strategic balances in various regions.
In the spirit of its fundamental responsibility,
and given the principle of subsidiarity that is implicit
in the Charter, the Security Council is called on to
encourage the peaceful settlement of local disputes
through regional organizations, either on the initiative
of the States concerned or by reference from the
Security Council. The Council is therefore taking a
new approach to peacekeeping operations based on
a comprehensive, coherent and integrated vision of
what is needed to fight threats to peace and security.
It reflects a growing awareness that no stabilization,
peacekeeping or peacebuilding mission, however wellintentioned, can have an impact in resolving a conflict
it is asked to settle or produce lasting results if it does
not address the fundamental problems, including

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

poverty, that are at the root of the crisis. That is why the
Republic of Haiti welcomes the convergence of actions
by the Security Council and regional organizations, in
which development assistance and poverty reduction
combine with policy initiatives in the areas of security,
the protection of human rights, good governance and
the strengthening of the rule of law, with the aim of
increasing the effectiveness of United Nations efforts
on the ground within the framework of post-conflict
stabilization and reconstruction activities.
My country also believes that development is
an essential response to the myriad threats that are
fuelled to a great extent by situations of poverty and
despair. In that regard, we believe that since sovereign
States must be the first responders in the face of
threats to peace, we should provide more substantial
international support to them, particularly the poorest
countries, which are often ill-equipped to exercise their
sovereignty responsibly and address their immediate
security challenges effectively.
In conclusion, by organizing today’s meeting, the
Security Council has sought to reaffirm the importance
it attaches to the role of regional and subregional
organizations and to its cooperation with them in
order to maintain peace and international security,
in conformity with Chapter VIII of the Charter. I
am convinced that today’s dialogue will make a
considerable contribution to achieving that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
Mr. Muhumuza (Uganda): I would first like to
congratulate you, Madam President, on Nigeria’s
accession to the presidency of the Council for this
month and on your successful conduct of its affairs, and
to thank you for holding this debate on the important
topic of regional organizations and the contemporary
challenges to global security. I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing earlier today.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Article 52 of the Charter of the United Nations makes
provision for the existence of regional arrangements
or agencies for dealing with matters relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security as
are appropriate for regional action, consistent with

15-2592527/31

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

18/08/2015

the purposes and principles of the United Nations. It
was therefore appropriate that when Secretary-General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali issued his June 1992 report “An
Agenda for Peace” (S/24111), at the end of the Cold
War, he highlighted the role that regional organizations
could play in preventive diplomacy, early warning
systems for crisis prevention, peacekeeping and postconflict peacebuilding.

received in its Burundi political intervention or the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development in the
South Sudan civil war. However, we would like to
partner with the Security Council in those initiatives.
The Council needs to work hand in hand with affected
countries on procedural issues and the drafting of press
and presidential statements and resolutions that concern
areas of operation. I will briefly state why.

In 2002, African Heads of State recast the
objectives of the Organization of African Unity and
transformed it into the African Union (AU). Part of the
objective was for Africa to respond to various conflicts
on the continent and to reestablish sustainable peace
and security, not just for individual Member States, but
for the region as a whole. Africa further came up with
its own system to address a broad spectrum of matters,
including peace and security, by launching the African
Peace and Security Architecture, leading to the creation
of the African Union Peace and Security Council.

My delegation would like to emphasize the
importance of strengthening the United Nations-AU
partnership. The concept of a United Nations-supported
regional force, like the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), is simply an evolving construct
that can be traced back to the United Nations Mission
in Liberia takeover from the Economic Community
of West African States Monitoring Group in Liberia
in 1990, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur in 2004, the Force Integration
Brigade in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali and
the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic.

My delegation believes that global security
cannot be achieved without cooperation with regional
organizations. Given their in-depth understanding
of respective regions as well as their geographic
proximity to challenging environments, regional
and subregional organizations are often uniquely
positioned to understand the particular local dynamics
and root causes of those challenges. Ugandan President
Museveni has said that in some cases, even before
the international forces acquaint themselves with
the names of the protagonists in a conflict situation,
regional actors might have made an impact in the early
stages of such a conflict.
Regional and subregional organizations are at
the centre of promoting cooperation and integration
in such areas as trade and investment, infrastructure
development and critical sectors, in the case of Uganda,
such as agriculture, energy, water and security, as well
as the fostering of private-sector partnerships. Uganda
believes that, due to the leverage regional and subregional
organizations have had within our respective countries,
they can, and often do, provide useful forums for policy
coordination and harmonization on various important
multilateral processes.
My delegation is of the view that regional and
subregional organizations require the political support
of the United Nations and international community for
successful preventive diplomacy and crisis management,
not unlike what the East African Community has

28/31

The implementation of peacekeeping mandates
has, in some cases, also been severely hampered due
to a variety of factors, including insufficient troop
numbers, challenges faced by the Council in overseeing
the management of integrated operations, difficulties in
generating and quickly deploying well-equipped troops
and competent civilian capacity. Further challenges
to global security include the issue of resources for
regional organizations. Whereas the African Union
has shown willingness to participate in peacekeeping
operations, those initiatives lie largely in the hands
of under-resourced regional countries. In the past, the
Security Council has hesitated to provide the degree
of practical and material support in the peacekeeping
context that the AU Peace and Security Council has
requested. That is a major area where consistency and
predictability are required for regional partnerships to
be successful.
Allow me to give an example of a successful
partnership which has led to greater global security.
Following the establishment of AMISOM, the Security
Council requested the Secretary-General to provide a
United Nations logistical support package to AMISOM,
including equipment and services, until 1 June 2009 or
until the Council reached a decision on establishing
a United Nations force. By that time, it was clear to
the AU that the troops were operating in an untenable

15-25925

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

situation and required an adjustment in their mandate.
The Ugandan Government therefore requested that the
Security Council strengthen the mandate of AMISOM
to a more robust one so that it could dislodge militants
who had increased attacks on the Somali Government.
In our statement to the Security Council at that time
(see S/PV.6068), my delegation argued that the wording
of the mandates rendered AMISOM an observer in
an active conflict. This is a place where partnerships
between the African Union and the Security Council
can come in the wording of such mandates. AMISOM
had become a peacekeeping force in an environment
that was not peaceful. In addition, there was a need for at
least 16,000 troops in Somalia if the situation obtaining
then was to be contained and for the relevance of the
troop presence to be felt.
In our view, Madam President, resolution 1863
(2009) marked the turning point for AMISOM’s
tangible successes. The Council responded positively
by renewing the AMISOM mandate for another six
months and authorizing the Mission to take all necessary
measures to protect key infrastructure in Somalia as
well as to create the appropriate security conditions for
the delivery of humanitarian aid. It also requested that
the African Union maintain the AMISOM deployment
and reinforce the original 8,000 troop deployment
in order to enhance the Mission’s capability to carry
out an unfettered peace enforcement mandate and to
protect key installations around Mogadishu.
AMISOM has transitioned beyond Burundi and
Uganda, and now we have Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya and
Sierra Leone also providing troops. Ghana and Nigeria
are among the police contributors. The peace dividend
from joint efforts within the AMISOM family cannot
be overstated. We now have businesses flourishing
in Mogadishu and investors have the confidence to
venture into Somalia. The seaport is also vibrant and
airlines have reopened their flight routes into Somalia.
In conclusion, even though Africa seems to have
the greatest security challenges, it is also the place
where a partnership has the highest potential to make
an impact. The United Nations needs to fast-track its
efforts to broaden the contributor base by working with
partners at the regional and subregional levels. It should
take advantage of those capacities and we welcome the
efforts so far taken in that regard.
In order to foster that relationship further, the
United Nations needs to familiarize itself with the AU

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

institutional design, its working methods, practices
and capacities and vice versa. Both organizations
need to commit to exercising diligence, transparency
and good-will towards a workable partnership. The
United Nations should take maximum advantage of the
strengths and roles that regional organizations such as
the African Union and subregional organizations such
as the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the Southern African Development Community and the
Economic Community of West African States can play.
We should build on the lessons of our past and current
experiences to create ever more innovative and flexible
partnerships that draw on respective strengths, while
encouraging expanded cooperation and dialogue.
While Uganda commends the United Nations
system for coping with various African situations, with
varying degrees of success, it has been done mainly
through political and peacekeeping tools. United
Nations peacekeeping has been the most visible tool and
in several cases it has been very effective. By contrast,
United Nations conflict prevention and mediation
efforts have been less visible and United Nations
coordination of integrated programmes to address the
root causes of conflict has been even less effective.
That can clearly be seen by analyzing the resources
allocated to the new peacebuilding architecture. It is
incumbent upon us to find ways of ensuring predictable
and sustainable financing for regional and subregional
organizations, especially in cases where they carry out
not just peacekeeping but also peacebuilding initiatives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Benin.
Mr. Adoumasse (Benin) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to join previous speakers
who have extended to you, Madam President, sincere
congratulations over the accession of your beautiful
country, Nigeria, to the presidency of the Security
Council and to express the full support of my country,
Benin, in fulfilling that noble mission. I express the
deep appreciation of my country to New Zealand,
Nigeria’s predecessor in that role, for their leadership
in discharging their task.
Benin aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The concept note (S/2015/599, annex) prepared by
Nigeria as a guide for this open debate and the briefing
made this morning by the Secretary-General provide

15-2592529/31

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

highly relevant analyses of the situation. In the view of
the Government of Benin, the topic of today’s debate
is particularly important because of the great interest
it holds for the future of the African continent, as we
believe that regional organizations are the appropriate
instruments to confront contemporary challenges to
global security. Moreover, that approach is fully in line
with the collective security system established by the
Charter of the United Nations.
While the Charter of the United Nations does not
impose an obligation on Member States, it implicitly
assigns them the responsibility for first-response
measures in situations that represent a threat to
international peace and security. That is the deeper
meaning of Chapter VIII, which recognizes that regional
organizations have the role of addressing matters
related to the maintenance of international peace and
security that manifest regional characteristics. It is
therefore fortunate that several regional integration
organizations, initially geared towards promoting
the economic development of their member States,
have now acquired competencies in matters of peace
and security in response to the significant impact of
political and military crises that have gravely affected
the environment in which they carry out their original
statutory activities.
Contemporary challenges in peacekeeping and
international security are many and complex, and their
resolution holds the key to the survival of humankind.
Those challenges include terrorism and violent
extremism, as embodied by Boko Haram, the Islamic
State, Al-Qaida and affiliated networks and entities,
and the multiple crises and conflicts that have plunged
our peoples into mourning. The role of regional and
subregional organizations must be taken seriously into
account in responding to and meeting those challenges.
This debate allows us to gather the varied perspectives
on ways to implement the crucial cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, particularly in Africa, to deal with
threats to international peace and security.
The most advanced regional organizations with
significant financial means, material resources and
proven expertise, should, in our view, be fully brought
to bear in actions to strengthen the capacities of
African regional and subregional organizations in the
prevention of conflicts, crisis management and postconflict stabilization. Benin supports the provisions

30/31

18/08/2015

of resolution 2167 (2014), which clearly lays out the
guidelines to be followed in that context.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union in most peace operations of the African
Union has proven its worth and relevance. Such
cooperation has led, inter alia, to operations such as
the African Union Mission in Somalia and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
and enabled remarkable progress in combating the
terrorist group Al-Shabaab in Somalia and the gradual
stabilization of the situation in Darfur. We must draw on
the lessons learned from those successful collaborations
to continue to improve the strategic partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations, using the
most pragmatic formulas to address the challenges
by ensuring the funding of operations undertaken by
regional organizations with the approval of the Security
Council, in accordance with its mandated powers.
My delegation believes that successful cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
lies in greater coherence of action through regular
consultations between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council, with a view
to a more flexible use of Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations and taking into account the intrinsic
realities of each crisis and conflict.
It is important to address the outstanding issues
in the development of the strategic partnership of the
United Nations with the African Union and the regional
economic communities in matters of peace and security,
with a forward-looking view to making the most of
such partnerships for the benefit of the effectiveness
of the collective security system established by the
Charter of the United Nations. The Security Council
must assume its full, primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Member States should work towards the emergence of
credible regional organizations throughout the world
to guarantee their effectiveness in managing situations
and finding solutions to the multifarious complex
challenges of today.
I conclude my statement by commending
the European Union, whose commitment to the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly those regarding cooperation
with African regional and subregional organizations,
represents an example to follow. Through its training
of thousands of African soldiers, its capacity-building

15-25925

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

projects and its financial and material support, the
European Union is on the frontline of cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations as a way of
resolving conflicts and creating conditions conducive
to peace and security on the continent, with a view to
the sustainable development of its States.
However beyond military action, the search for
peace must attach greater importance to interreligious
and intercultural dialogue to promote peaceful
relations among peoples. That dialogue must involve
all components of society acting collectively to
address the root causes of conflict and establish
healthy relations between grass-roots communities.

S/PV.7505 (Resumption 1)

That was the overriding goal of the symposium held in
Cotonou from 26 to 28 May, which adopted the African
Initiative for Education on Peace and Development
through Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue. The
manifesto strongly urged, inter alia, the development
and implementation of national peace policies through
dialogue by working together to conceive, plan and
manage development projects broadly, embracing
religious and cultural sensitives at all levels within all
countries.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

15-2592531/31
