UNITED NA3[1oNS / NATtlONS UNZES

NINETEENTH
YEAR
th MEETING: 17 MARCH 1964
dme SJ!hNCE: 17 MARS 1964
DIX-NEUVIIiME
ANNiiE

1104
CONSEIL

DE S&URIT&

DOCUMENTS

OFFICIELS

NEW

YORK

TABLE

OF

CONTENTS

Provieional agenda (S/Agenda/ll04). . , , . . , . , , . , . . , . . . , . . . .
Adoption of the agenda .I.l..,.....,.....C........,..*.
The India-Pakistan question:
Letter dated 16 January 1964 from tbs Minister of External Affairs
of Pakbtan addressed to the Prerrident of the Swurity Counoil

PW

1
1

(S/5617) i

dated 24 January 1964 from the Permanent Representative of
India addrermd to the Preaidcnt of the Seourity Counoil (S/5622) .

Letter

TABLE

DES

1

MATIERES

Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/l104) , . . . . . . , . . . , . , , . , , .
Adoption de l’ordre du jour . . . . . . . . . . . . ..~.....~...~....
Question Inde-Pakistan:
Lettre, en date du 16 janvier 1964,adrem&eau
Prhsident du Conseil
de s6ourit6 par le Ministre
des affaireEl extdrieures du Pakistan
(S/6617);
Lettre, en date du 24 janvier 1964,adress6eau
Pr6sident du Cons&L
de s6curit.6 par le repr6sentant permanent de 1’Indo (S/5622) . , . ,

1
1

1

Pferkbnt

The rep]
BOWa, Bracil, CM
Cord, MoroooO, h
Ftepubllor, United
NorthernIreland aa
Prerenb

NOTE
Relevnnt
supplemmb

@oumentr
to the OffioW

Symbols
of
oombined
wfth
a United Nations

United
figures.
fboument.

of

the

Seaurlty

Counoll

are

published

In quarterly

Reoordk
Natfous
Mentfon

dooumenta
of suob

are composed
of
a symbol
hdioates

capital
latter~
a reference to
Proviriona

l
+

+

Lea dooumrnte
pertlnentr du Con&l de r6ourlt6 ront publl(5e
ruppMmentr trimertrtelr aux lhoumenh
offfofek

dunr

doe

Ler ooter
des cboumenta
de I’Organbatlon
&a Nations
Unies se oompoaent
de fettres
majusoufes
et de oblffr’es.
La simple
menUon
d’unc tote dans un
texte sfgnffie qdil
~‘agft d’un document
de 1~Organisa~ion.

1. Adoptionoi the I
a The India-Yak!1
Letter
datedI
of External tifl
Preridsnt af the

L&or dated :
nent Repreren
Prarldent of the
Ado1
lBe agenda

wan

at

Tha

Im

Lottw
datul
16 Ja
Extrrnal
Affairs
a
drnt of tha Socurit
Lottrr
dated
24 Jc
Roprwmtutivr
of
of the Security
Co

1. The PRESfUEN
drotrlonr of the Ccn
wnt of the Counoi
India and Plklrtan
oonrlderattonof the
At the fllvfhmll
kmarfy
(hfla)
MI
plaoea at tbe Coun01

2. The PRESIDEN
Fabrunry ,1004 [lo!
Counoil laflt dlsoue
agenda, the meetin
date for further disc
the ropresontntivo
his government, rc
a meeting
of the .%I
ta roaumo lta oona
after, on 8 Maroh
of India expreaaed
early meating.

ELEVEN

HUNDRED

AND FOURTH MEETING

Held In Now York, CKI Tarrday,

17 Mar&

MILLE CENT QUATRliME
Tonw

b Now York,

a9snda

lo mart

Prdrenh:

Ordrr

(S/Aglnda/llO4)
1.

Quo&ion

du [our

provlsoirr

(S/A&a/l

104)

lnds-Paktatsnt

en date du 15 janvter 1954, adrurC
au Prbident du Came11de rburW
pax lo
Minirtre der affairea ext6rieurw
du Pakirtan
LoWe,

(s/5517)!

Latter dated 24 January lQ64from tbs Permanent Ftepxwentative of India l ddrerred to %a
Prerident of the Seourlty Counoil(S/5522).

Lettre,

en date du 14 Janvler 1964, l drerab

nu Prdrldont
du Conaeil de r6aurlU3
par
rentant prmsnent
do PIndo (S/5522).

of the a9onda

Adoption

Tb6 a#oadr wan adopted.
India-Pahistan

ouiranta:

1. Adoptlonde l(ordre du Jour.

~ttor dated16January 1964from the Mini&W
of Ext8rna.l Affair@ 08 Pakirtan PddIWMKlto the
Preaidsntaf the Seuirlty Ccunoil(S/5617)1

Ths

Pr&yMt:
w. L&l chiob (Chim).
Lsa repr&ait#nta
du
Et&

Bolloie, Brbil, Chins, C6twl’Ivoln,
Etata-Unb
d’Am6riqua, Franoe, Maroo, Now,
RoyaumrUni
de OnndcBreta~e
et dYrlande du Nerd, ToMoorlovaqufe ot Union drr Fl6publtquoa
rooiallrtw aovl@t1qusr.

1. Adoption of the wnda.
a The Indta-Yak!rtan question:

Adoption

SiANCE

I7 mar8 1964, a IS heuror.

Prerldent: Mr. LIU Chieh(China).
Pmrent: The rsprerentatiosr
of thefollowingStaterr
Bolivia, Bracil, China,Caeohoalovakta, Fraaoa, Ivory
Coast, Moroooo, Norway, Uaioa of Ilovlrt
Soolallot
Republtor,
United Kingdom of Groat Britain and
Northembland and United staba of Amerloa,
Provlslonal

1964, d 3 pm.

do I’ordrr

lo reprb

du iour

L’ord+odujouferta&ptd.
quostlon

Question

Mr-Palclstan

datr
du 16 janvtrr
1964,
adrorsbo au
du Cons011 do rburit6
par lo Minlatrr
l xt6rIourrs
du Pahlrtan
(S/5517);

Lottor
datwi
16 January
1964 from
tha Mlntstrr
of
External
Affairs
of Pdtistan
oddrossad
totho Prrstdent of thr Socurlty
Councll
(S/5517);

Lottro,
on
PrMdont
drs affairrs

Lottrr
dated 24 Jonuary
1964 from
Roprosmtativr
of India oddrosod
of the Socurlty
Council
(S/5522)

Lottrr,
on A -* du 24 lonvior
1964, odrorsk
au
PrMdont
du <onso
do &wit6
por IO mphsmtont
pormonmt
ds I’M0
(S/5522)

the Pormanont
to the Prosldont

1. Le PREBIDBNT (tradult do l’uylair)~ Canformb
l wt dbirionr
prlrer snt6rlrurrm~t
par lo
Conreil, jr vati mahhmant,
l voo l’aooord duCoaroll,
inoltar lrr ropr6rentantr
de PIndo et du P&Wan
A partioipor, mae drolt de vote, A l’oxamaa de la
quortial Iado4aklrtaa.

1. The PRESIDENT:In aaoordana
with prsvlour
daolrlonr of the Couaoll,I prop000 now, with the amrsnt of thr Couaofl, to tnvita the repnrentatlvor of
India and P&Wan to partiofpata without vok in the
oonaidrraMoa

mont

of the question.

At tbo hvftatftm af the PmMant,
Mr. 8. N. C&akmnrty
(Mfa) and Mr. 2. A. Bhutto (P&Man)
took

plaossat the colmofl table.

SW I’fnvftatia
&I Pnhfdsat,
Y
(If&)
et M. 2. A. Bhutto (W8t8n)
d la table da Conseff.

2. The PIUWDENT: It will be reoalled that on .L’r
Fehrunry
JO04 (1093rd meeting], when the Seoudty
Counoll last disoussed the Item now lnoluded in our
agenda, the mooting wa8 adjourned without fixing n
date for further disoussiou. On 4 Maroh 1964 [S/6676]
the representntivo
of Pakistan, on instruotlone from
his Oovernment, requested the Prealdent to oonvene
a meeting of the Seourity Cow011 a8 soon as posslble
to resume its oonsldarntion of the question. Thereafter, on 8 Mnroh 1964 [S/GG32], the representative
of India expreseed his objeotion to the request for an
early meeting.

2. Le PlUISIDENT (tmduit de l’anglois): Les membres du Conseil se souviendront
que lorsque
lo
Conseil de seourite
a exnmln& oette question pour
1~ derniQre fois, la X7 f8vrler [10938me s&moo],
11 nla pas fix6 de date pour In reprise dee dbbnts.
LB 4 mars 1964, la reprk3sentnnt du Pakistan a,
d’ordre de aon gouvernemeut, demondo au Prbeldeut
de oonvoquer le Conseil de sbourit8 aussit8t que
possible on vuo de roprondre l’exnmen de la question
[S/6576]. LB 8 mars 1964, le repr6eentnnt de 1’Inde
[L fnit objeotion h oe qua le Consell de s6ourltcJ solt
oonvJqu& & une dnte rnpproohbo [S/6682].
1

8. N. C-rub,
pronnont

ptaoe

I

7

de o&ta dlrrrgenor de vu08 entro
u deux partier lntbrerrbu,
j’al ON derolr oonrulor ler membremdu Conrull, et o’e#t pQurquo1
nou8
~oum
trouvanr rbunir oet l prba-mldi.
thtr moottngIr oonmnodthh aftorn~
L. hf. BHUTTO (Pakirtan) [&adult da l’urglalr]:
4, Ma BHOTTO (Paktrtan): Mr. Prerldent, I e
lonmlwr lo Prhldsnt, je voua remeroh alnrt quo
,OI l utren membrsr du Conrail, d’avolr oonvoqub
10Conroil de r6ourit6 pour reprendre l~examande la
aonrIdoratlon
of the rltuatinn
in Jammu andKuhmtr
Iltuation au Jammu et Caahemlrr et dei graver r6and ita grava roporourrionr on the m31auonr
ktweuI
mrousrlonr
qu%lle a our lee relationo entre I’Inde
India and Paktrtan, At the 109Srdmeetiagofthe
CaunIt 1s Pakiatu.
A la 1093bmer&anoe du Conrell,
all, I requested po&ponemmt
of a few dayr in the
1’ai demendbquol’on ruapandsler dbbatrpour quelCoUnOil’r p-w@.
My QoVWIUnOnt deeply Q&WOolatu tbat thlr requut WII granted by the Council,
@en Jourr. Mon gouvernemsnt ert profondbment
reoonnairrant au Conroll d’avotr aoobdbI o&ta demade.
5, My plrpoae in l ddrudng the coluI0i1 again la,
3. 81Joprendrrdenouveaula paroledevant1sConrell,
Yut, tout d’abord, pour lui donner un brsi aperpu
flrat, to gtva a brief a-t
of the rituation in Kuhmir
lo la rttuatlon au Caohemireet de @onbvolutiondeu it bar &volojW
dnoa our lart maettng urd,
;;riu notre dernibra rbunlon et, en mooand
UN, pour
woondly, to oldfy my Qovunmonttr podtlon in
prboitirr la porltion de man gouvernrment quant
nlatton to tha prrpeotlvu
that rmorged during t&
bux perrpeotive@qu’ont fait apprraftre leu dbbak
Counoll9 dirourrion In February.
k Con0011
en fbvrisr.
6. It will be reoallad that the rituation whloh we 6. Vour voua rnppellerez.quela rituation our laquelle
braught to the Councdl’rl ttenUonhadaaitr immediate now avonr appelbl’attentlon du Conneilde oburlth
baokgraundthe anncunoed
intentionof theGovernment Walt direotementron origlne de ltintentlon dblarba
du Oouvernement indien d’intbgrer lo Jammu et
ad India to integrate Jammuand Kashmir with the
Caohemire au territolrr de Wnion indienne, en
terrktory of tho Indtln UnionIn vtolatlon uf the interviolation de ltaoaord international oonoenrantoet
national mnient
tbg the Stat+an~ment
binding upon both paF OL tothe dtrpute. Theannamoo- Etat, l ooord qul a form obllgatoirepcur ler deuxparmrnt of thir polloy OSthe Oovesmment
of India evoked tier au litigs. Cette polltique du Qouvsrnementde
bvelllb lo plur
the utmort rewntmrnt of the peopleof Jammuand l’lnde a, lokqu*elle a-btb tionobe,
vii rerrantimrnt danr la population du Jammu et
Kashmir. The reeult WI@an outbreak of openrebe!lion
Caohemirr, Au Caohemlre,0110a donnb lieu B una
agalnrt India in Kalmtr.
rbvolte ouverte oontre 1’Inde.
7. Aprbr avoir entendu ler dew partler, tour 108
7. After the Cuunoil had heard both partier, every
memher l xpruud deep anxiety for a prompt and membrer du Conroll ont exprlmb leur profondslnpro&l aolutlon of the dirplb. An appealto the two quibtude et lrur dbrlr de- parvenir rapidsmentA
partier to refratn from moanurea whiohmight aggra- une rolutlon prolfique du litlpe. Danr lrurr dbolavata the rttuation warnokar in the rtatementr made ratlonr, tour isnr &oeption oit olalrrment demand6
aux dew wrtlrr de r*abrknir de touter melurem
i$ iho mimkn
of the Camoll without oxooption.It
rlrquant diaggraver la rltuatlon. Or, je doir, Amon
tr mv tinful duty to report that thtr appealhar not
urand remt. rlgnaLr quo lo Oauvernrmentlndlen
ban-hiubd
by b Clove~inment of Indlai -On the oon%a par kt&du %t app61.Blan plur, danr unedbtrary, the Mlnider
of Eduoaion of bdla, in a dateolantion qu*il a fake lo 24 fbvrler 1064devant lo
merit d 24 February 1964,made In the Iedian ParliaParlrment Indian, 1sMini&e de l*bduoatlonde PIndo
ment, 0-n trhd to dlrtort the rtakmontr
of the
a ohrrohb A fauarer lo renr drr dbolaraUanrdw
mrmbera ai Uw Soourlty Camotl andintorpretedthem
amoonvoytng a twit aoorptanoe of further mrarurer
msmbrrr du Carrot1 de rburitb en lrr interprb
tant oommr d 0110sranotionnalenttaoltrment but0
&&&waUon of UN Stata d JammuandKaahmlrinto
nouvello trrtatlve d~intbgrattonde 1’Etat de Jammu
et CaohomlreAPIndo.
8. Trolr faoteurr me rant dono fait Jour pendant
8. Tlnu Theo faotr ham rmrrgad during the interval
Nntervalle aui Vut booulbdruuir la drmlbre rbanoe
dno our lad mootIns; firat, the movementof protest
ta tiw 8th of Jamlfiu an&Kaahmir hamootitlnued; du Conneildb rbowltbt preml~rement,lo mouvsmant
da ~rotutatton
r’ert nourrulvi danr l*Etat de Jammu
moody, India lur &own no dgnr of rrlrnting In Ik
polloy of mprerdon again& the peopleof the State: et ~aohemlre: deuxl~mement,Nnde n’a manlfert6
thirdly, the Qovernmentof India hasshownitself to bc auouneintention de renonoerII oa polltlque tie rBbent on adopting those vary measure8towards the preselon n 1’6gn1ul de la population de oet Etnt;
annexation of the St& ngainot whioh Wcistan had troiP!amement, le aouveruement lndfonaparuvoulolr
speolflonllyprotestedto tie Ccunoil.Thus, duringthe adopter lea mesure mbmes d’nnnexion de PEtat de
I. En prbrmoe

S, Faced with thou oonflIotik.q views of the two
inWdOd
puller,
I felt 0bUgOd t0 OOIWilt ths mrmkrr of the Camall on the ma-r, and aa a retit,

Jnmmu at Cnohemlre oontre looquelles lo Pnkiet.1111
n exprees6ment prnteotd dovnnt le Consail. Comma
on le voit, la grnvit6 de la sltuntlon qul exlste entre
1’Inde et le Palcistnnn’a en rlen dimInu6 pondnnt
l~ictervnlle qui &eat 600~16.
9. Jo voudrnis mnlntenant mentionner oertalno 6v6nements importnnts qui ea sont produits depuisla
dorniibro shnoe du Consell. Lo 20 f6vrier 1964,
M. Ckdenrllnl Nwdn, ministre de l’intfhieur de

intervnl, thexe has been no mitigation of the gravity
of the eltuntlon betwoen Indin rind P&Wan.

9. Let me olte some lmportnnt developments that have
ooourred einoe our last meetlng. On 20 February 1964,
India’s Mlnleter
of Home Affairs, Mr. Chdznrilnl
Nanda, Indicated In the Indlnn Parlinmeht
that @the
2

8peohl

OoMtlhl

JMmU rad Ku
Unionwouldaoru
amthy hadden

10. On the aan
of London, repa
would “oobbk I

arrangement thy
a new -muwet
__ Pr

a8 Fobmary 19

in dsflanoa of tl
within India itu
Parliament, Mr.

that WplaaIng 1
u Prime Minlrl
the 8th for lo
rtalled Wan thou
ry that “remI
lmporlq
him hu

11, It 10 evider
headthe Indian-r
he had beende;1
red afIndtaandt
Hofulfilled the e
i on 1 MarohlI
iif barrierr
to I
rut of ImIlan. T
rbgimr In Kaahn
Stats Auemblv

11. Indla’m new
and ham
Qovernor of India
ofIndiainrbad of
lature~. Tha new
further

to an etremlrt

object Ir to oonva

roil0 tmmlgratla
mrlorlty
arm E

andpolio. admta
have bean turnod~

inoludathe port 0
a( tha Oovmlmrn
powerr to fill 0th
the omrnment 0
13. It is hardly

effoot which the
Their meaningis
oarry out the an
Knehmir to the
destroy the idonti

mlr. As I enld
questionat issue
retain in, or el!
queetionat iosue
the exeroiee of fr
Kashmir or work
at nn early stage

apecbl ooMuhltlwul pmvlulonnr that dlffemltiatod
Jammu and Kaalunir from other rtabr of the man
Union would mm dlrappoarn.He addedthat Vondltlonr
l
they had dwolopaJ oallal for rpeedler aotlonnown.
10.

On

the

l me

day,

a 0orrerpoaQat 08 The

7lmrr

ai London. renortina from Srtnwar. raid that Delhi
would %obble~ some’ •rrangeman~m tin Kuhn&.
The
arramement that wau oobbled waothe tnatallation of
8 new’plppetPremier in fndlan-oooupid
Karhmlr on
a8 February 1964. Xt la rtgnifloant that thl~ WII done
in dsflanoa ad the warn!ngl given by saner ebmentr
wtthtn India itulf. A prominent member of the Indian
Parliament, Nr. M. R. Mauni, rtated on 1 February
that ~mplaolngMr. Shamruddin with Mr. CLM. Bad&
u Prime Mlnirtor oould not rtablliw the rltuatlon In
the State for long”. Indeed, the new puppet wau inrtalled even thrn@ The Timer reported on 96 February that Qwentmcii

lrnpolh

Dolhilr

inrlrt4nce

on

htm hadinorsarod OonBidOrablyin KaDhmW.

11. It ir evldent that Mr. Sadiq war nominated to
head the Indian-ownrored r6gtme In Kamhmlrkoawe
ha had been dema&ing complete integration wtth the
mrt of India and the ending of KaahmlV~ #peotal rtatur,
Ho iulftlled the expeotatlonr of htr patron@by announo1 on 1 Maroh 1964that hlr Government would remove
3 barrlerr
to the territory~r
integration with %a
rut of Indian. To thir end, the now I&an-rponrored

r4gims tn Kashmir Intr&uc@J a bill In the ro-oalled
State Auembly on 10 March 1964, whioh aeekr to
ohm the LIlnnaMon af the Head of State and the
Head 08Qovetient of Indian-oooupld Kalhmlr, and
~$wIvI~# for replaoement of the Stab flag by the flag

Wde, a dlt oe qui rutt dw8nt lo hrlem@nt tndlan:
“18~ dlrporltlonr
oonrtibutlamellerrp9olrlw qui Alff6lwrolart 10 Jammu et CadremIre dw l utru Et8ta
de PUnloo lndlenne seront blartOt abrog&M, et 11 a
ajaut& qua V&olution de la rltuation obligerit dbormat8 A agtr plur raptdomentfl.
10. Ls marno Jour, un oorrerpoedant du Timer de
Loadron &orivait de Srina~~ QUODelhi Woiiiiiiatt
quelqur 0hoW au Caohemlre.Co qut R bM oombin6,
o’ut lit mlrs en plaoe,IO 98 fhrler
lQ(H, d*un nouvuaupnrnhr

11. lndia’a new writ in KWmIr
bar gone even
and bar oallad for the appolntmmt of the
Qovemor
ai Xndtan-oooupled Kashmir by the Prerldent
of Indlainr~rddhirkinOalookdby,yths
State %+@aIaturs~.
Tbu new Cabtnet inoluder a Mlnirter belongIng
to an sxtremirt
Hindu organbation, whew rvowul
ohjrot ia to oonvwt by munr of vlolenoa and by largenoalr tmminratlon from India. Kashmir into a Htndumajority ah, FurWrmore~
key port0 in the oivll
md wllae admlniotration
of Indian-ooouplrd
KaWnlr
hati km turnodover tonon-Karhmiri
ofiloialr. Them
Inoluda the port of Chtof boretay, to whiohan offlotal
adthe Oovor3unontof Inda bar boon appointed with full

powerr to ill other rrnriflrr poatrby the offtoialr
(ho oovornlnmt of Indir.

of

fantoohsau Caohemiraoooup6

~)urea 9t6 prlre en d&pitdw averttrrementr don&
par lea 919msntaplw luoldeade l%de mhe. Le
96 f&rier, un membre dmlnent du Parlemcnt Mien,
M. M. Ft. Ma~anl, a d6olrrb quo “10 remplaoemart
de M. Shunruddin p&r M. 0. M. Sadlq au post41 de
premier minlrtm no pouvait rtablllrer la rltuation
danl PEtat de fagon durable% Male lo nouveau fantoohe a aunnd m8me 4t6 mtr en plaoe au moment
m8ms op ie Timer de Lomdre8rdt~ 1b~fQvrlsrl lgnalalt

quo *lo rarr~ent
susoit8 par l~aoharnemant quo
l%M mettait A l’impoaer r’itait oonrldbrablem(vnt
aooru au Caohemire”.
11. I1 ert 4vfdent quo M. Sadiq a 8tO plao6 Ala
t&e du gouvernrm& mlr aa plaoa par 1Vnds au
Caohemire Daroe qu’il a auparavant demand6 l wio
inalrtanoe q\ \ le Caohemlre roit oompl9tement In
au r&e de IVnde et oe#ue dtavolr UII rtatut rp9o
T al.
I1 a ldpondu A l’attente de •~# maftxw en anonpant,
lo ler marr 1964, quo Kn gouvernemant ~llmtneratt
tour lea obrtaolsr A l’tnt&ratlon du brritoire au
“rode de 1’Inde”. A oette fin, lo nWv8(;u Wvernb
merit mlr en plaoe par Nndd a d6por6, 16 10 mm
1994,un projet da 101devant la prbtwdw arrrmbl&e
@Et& tradrnt h ohM@E k titn &I 0h.f dr l’Bt&t
et du ohef du Qouvernement du Caobemire oooup6
par Flndo

further

mlnlrtrr

par Nnde. I1 eat int8remeant de noter quo oetta me-

rt h remglroer

b drapeau

ck oatttat

par orlui de l*Indc.
11. La noutrrl Mnt de 1’Inde au Caohomlra ert
m&no all& plur la&t 11a demand8 quo lo Clouverneur
du Caohomirr wit nomd mr lu Prbidont de IcInbr
au lieu d’&re 81~ par 11*A<rembYe l~rlatlve~ de
1’Etat. h nouveau Cabtnet oomprend tm rnhbtra
qul l ppartiant A une oqaniratlon extr6mirte hkdoue
et dont lo daraetn a-6 out ds transformer 10 Caohemire an une r&gin A majorlti hlndoue, en noounnt
A la violenoo rt t&m A uno Immtqrrtton maorlw
d’bl(menntr venantde l*Inde. De plw, dw poetu olef~
de l~admlnirtrrtlon
olvllr et da la poller ont 4t9
attrlbu6r A drr fonotlonnairor
non origtnairer du
Caohrmlre, notamment oslui de reolbtrir~ prlnotpal,
auqurl a OU nommb uu fonottanntira du Qouvornemrnt lndlrn qut a tout pouvoir pour cmfier @au&or
porter l trat4glquea A der fonotbnnalrer du Cbuvw-

nsment indtsn.
13. It is hardly neceesary to explain at length the
effeot whioh those measure8 are designed to have.
Their menning ie unmistakable. They are deelgnsd to
oarry out the annexation of the Stata of Jammu and
Knngmir to the Indian Union. They are designed to
deetroy the idontlty of the people of Jammuand Knehmlr. ke I said in my stat&meats in February, the
ciuestlon at iesue le not whnt provlsion Indin should
retain tn, or eliminate from, ite Conetitution. Tko
queetion at iosue irr whether India intends to fnoilltate
the exeroise of free ohoice by the people of Jnmmu and
Kashmir or work8 !o prevent it. Innomuok tl~ Indin,
at nn enrly stage, sought to give a symbolic reoogni-

13. Point n’est beeoln de pr6oiser h quo1 tendent
oe8 mesures. Leur but eat evident. Llles vlsent II
nnnexer PEtat do Jntnmu et Caohemire h PUnion
Indienne. Elles viscnt B supprimor l~idontit~dupeuple
du Jnmmu et Cnohomlre. Comme Jo l’ai dit en EBvrier,
la qrstltion n’est pas de snvoir quelles diepositlouo
de an oonstitution PInde devrnit maint0nir ou nbroger, mais de snvoir al 1’Inde a l~lntention de fnoiliter
A In population du Jummu et Cnohemire l’exeroioo
do EIO.llbert6 de oholx ou, au oontralre, de le lul
interdire.
Si PInde n, au cXbut, en adoptant Particle 370 de an oonstitution, oheroh6 I reoonnnnre
aymboliquement
l’identlt6
du peuple du Jammu et

,

tion to the identity of the people of Jammu and Kaahmir ta artiols 370 of its Constitution, the abrogation
of thts artiole OM be underrtood in noother light than
Indta’a intention to present the United Nation8 with a
fait aooomplt and to try to oloro all avenuea of escape
for the peopleof JammuandKarhmir.

Caohemire, 0110ne peut avoir d’autre intention, en
abrogeant oet artlole, que de plaoer lee Nations
Unies devant un fait aooompliet d’esaayerde fermer
toutee lee issueaau peupledu Jnmmuet Caohemlre.

14. Wehave protestedto the Securtt :ounotlagalnrt
India keeping the aocredited leader8of the peopleof
Jammu andKaehmir in gaol. Butwhatweam witnerahg now is the wholeealelmprieonmentof an entire
people and an attempt at rslnforoing andmultiplying
the bars of steel behindwhlohtheyhavebeenenoaged.
Permit me to say that no aot of the Qovernmentof
India oould be more oalculatedto serve aa a grave
Drovooationto Paktstanandto demo&rate oomplete
heflame of the wishesof the United Nation6 f&r an
amloablerettlement of the dispute. Consideringthe
timing and the rapidity of the exeoution of these
measure8for the integration of Indian-occupiedKarhmlr with India, how ie it possible, I aek, for uo to
under&and them except a8 evidenceof India’s determinationto bring matters to a headandstagea showdown?This la the eituation that we arebrfnging to the
Counail’eattention.

14. Nousrrvonaprotest6devant leConsei1dee6curit6
oontre l’emprisonnement
par 1’Inde de dirigeants
aoorbditir de la populationdu Jammuet Caohemtre.
Maie, aujourd’hui, nouavoyone met&e aux fere ILL
peuple tout entier, nous aeeislone fl une tentative
pour renforoer et multlpller les barreaux d’aoisr
derrlbre
leequele oe peuple est enfermb. Auoun
aote du Qouvernementindlen, Je orols pouvoir
le
dire. ne pouvait Btre mieux oaloul6 pour provoquer
grnvement le Pakistan et montrer en mame tempe
que 1’Indefait oompl&ementfl de8 VOBW
manifest68
par lee Nations Unieetouohantle rbglementamiable
du lit@. Etant donn6lee oiroonetanoeeet lea dt3lais
tree brefe dane leaquelelea meaurestendantB in&
grer le Caohemlre.¶ 1’Indeont 6th ex6out6es,
oomment pouvons-noueles interprbter, sinon oomme
tzadulsant la volont6 de 1’Inde de provoquer une arise
et d’&aler son jeu? Telle est la situation quenoue

signalonsau Coneeil.

l’attention du Coneeilsur l’explosionde oolbre pcpulaire oontre 1’Indequi s’est produite au Caohemire,
le reorbeentantde 1lIndea affirm6 oat&roriauement
que 1;s manifestations

qui avalent eu 1ie’G au-cache-

‘mire %alent dirig6ee or.tre l’administrationlooalem

“Intenre feeling in the Valley again& the ruling
in tbe Stab, the NationalConfermoo,har been
projeoted againat Delhi 86 well, and feeling there
haa probably never been more rtrongly againrt
integration with India than It is now.”
party

17. I might rsoall here that in my rtatementr before
thr Counoil in February, I had raid that It waethe
revslationr brought aboutby the Iiaaratbal inoident,
rather than the tnoident ltrelf, to which we were
reeking to draw the Counoil~s
attention. All rubsequent
developmentsIn Kashmir have borne out the truth
of our submlsslor.. Here. for exr.m?lnle. is a reoort in
The New York Times of 2b Fobruar;lD&,
whlci says:

&rated in t
demanding
Pakistan, I
Bahdur Sha
Kashmir v

The oorrespc
anddespair”
binationof ar
tratore”, and
ing spell to I‘I
time to absor

19. This tes
Kashmir Is
Indian Prere
of 20 Februs
remained010
given by the
general atdk
venlng of the

rien a voir aveo lee relations entre le
Cachemire et 1’Inde ou le Pakistan, Ce qul oblige

representatlv
Kashmir” by
aamenewspa

16. 9’11 exietait un organieme d’enquete relevant du
Coneeil de s&ourlt& il pourrait l’&ablir,
oette v&it&,
et mon gcuvernement n’auratt pas B lneleter davan-

“Whether
set up by M
has within
becomethe
. . . It appc
anyother p
oalled for
ChoudhuryI
these dema
the State A
of the peep
objeotivea(

et n’avaient

B sedemanderOPest la v&it&
16. The truth could be found out by an independent
faot-finding agenoy of the Security Camoil, if one
existed, and my Qovernment would be under no
neoerrity to elaboratethe point further. In theabrence
of suoh an agency, however,oneoanonly turn to the
reporta of impartial fomfgn
obrervcra Cut of the
manywhich have appearedreoently, I shall quoteonly
a few. The Timer of London,of 13 February 1964,
for example,reported:

Washingtona
“India m
dlreoted al
did not ex
Weeke afte:

15. It wtllbe reoalledthat, whenwedrewthe Counoll~s 115.Cn 138rappollera que, lorequenousavonaattire

attention to the upsurgeof popularfeeling in Kashmir
against India, the Indian reprosentatlveemphatically
replied that “the demonotrationsin Kaohmir were
aimedat the looal administrationnandhadno bearing
upon Karhmir’s relation with India or Pakirtan. The
questionnaturally arisen: what irr the truth?

16. Here in

tage. Mais oomme il n’exiete pas d’organtsmede
oe genre, nousdevonenounen remettre aux oomptes
rendus d’observateure &rangers impartlaux. 11en
a paru beauooupoea dernierr
tempo, maie je
n?en oiteral que quelquee-una.Ainei, le Ta
de
Londresdu 13 f6vrler 1964Bortvait:
nL’hortllit0 quela populationde la Vall4eBprouve
B l’endroit du parti au pouvolr dane 1’Etat, la
Conf&renoe

nationale,

elle

1’0prouve egalement

B

l*Qgard de New Delhi et elle n’a jamais Btb plue
vlolemment oppoe6eP l’lnt&gration B 1’Indequ’elle
no Pest aujourd’hui.”
17.

JU

dit ioi en fhbr,

Jo tienr

I lo rap@er,

que 0’6tait our la rituatlon r6velbe par l’tnoident
d’liatratbal,
bien plur que our l’tnoident
lul-m&me,
que noun oherohionra appelerl’attentlon du Conrell.
Tour les Bvbnementequi se ront produitsultbrieure-

ment au Caohemire ont oonfirm6 no8 all6gations.
Jo clteral, A oe sujet, un article du New Yorl~Tlmes
du 2D fbvrler, selon lequel:

mittee
nature

beoc

of
thoughits I
meaningful
la r&wed
Kadhmlr’s
lrrevooable

Then The
Tli
-“It la now (IL

oolleaguason
accessionlss

“The riots that followed the theft from a mosque
of a halr revered as a relic of”-the
ProphetnMohammed brought to light strong anti-Goveniment
feeling in Kashmir . . .

“Lea Bmeutes qul ont sulvl le vol, dam3 une
mosqu6e, d’un cleveu qul &nit r&&r6 comme
une rellaue du proph8te Mahomet ant rbv616 les
violent8 sentiments Hitlgouvernemel,taux
de !a population du Cachemire. , .

20. What oh
from India ltl
sentatlve of
Kashmir werl

“New Delhi was alarmed by the pro-Pakistan sentlmerits of the people, which continued to be expressed
after the relic hud been restored.”

“New Dolhl a 6t6 alarm6 par les sontlments prcpzkistanflls de la population,
qul ont contlnub clc
so manlfeeter nprbs que In rellyue eut 6t6 retrouv6c.”

21. As n m8
la no doubt a
in Kashmir.

18, Here is another report in The Evening Star of
Washington of 14 Maroh 1964, whloh says:
Yndia maintained that the popular uprldng was
dlreoted against the looal puppet government and
did not express resentment against India itself.
Weeks after tens of thousands of Kaehmlrls demonstrated in the streets of Kashmir’8 oapltal, Srinagar,
demanding a plebieolte, independence or to join
Pakietan, Prime Minister Nehru’s new deputy, La1
Bahdur Shaetrl, told Parliament that the people of
Kashmir weloomed fu!l integration with India.”

Dana un l utre uuole, paru le 14 mars danr
1’EveningStar de Warhlngton,on lit:
* L’Inde a eoutenuque le soulevementpopulalro
dtalt dlrlge contre le Gouvernementfantoohedu
Caohemlreet ne tradulealt auoun m6oontentement
B 1’6gardde PIndo elle-m6me.Plusieuresemalnee
aprbe que des milllere d’habltantedu Cachemire
eurent manifest6 dans les NOB de Srinogar,
In
oapltale, endemandant
l’organlsatlond’unpl6bleolta,
Pindbpendanoeou le rattaohement au Pakistan,
le nouveaurepresentantduPremier Mlnletre Nehru,
La1 Bahdur Shastrl. a d6olar6devantle Parlement
que le peuple du Caohemlre&alt en faveur de
Plnt6gratlonoompl&e& 1’Inde.”
Le oorrespondant6voqueeneulte le %uagede trlstesse et de d6seepolr” que fait peeer sur la Vallee
de CachemireVaotlon oonJugu&de la pollee armhe
et des adminletrateursVenusde :.‘Inde”,
et 11poursuit en 08s termes: *LVnde oherohemaintenantB
atassurer un moment de &pit pour reprendre en
main le Caohemire,qui eat en train de lui (chapper,
et elle veut se dormerle tempsdel’absorber graduellementet de l’lnt6grer a 1’Inde.”
19. Ces t6molgnagessur la situation de fait au
Caohemiresont oonflrm6e par la preese indienne
elle-m6me. Selon le Times of India du 20 Yvrler
1964, la plupart deemagaslne
de Srinagar sontrest68
ferm6s le 19 fbvrler, en r6ponee B un appelBla
grbve g&Wale lano6 par le Cornit d’aotlon, en
slgnede protestationoontre la r6uniondel’Aseembl6e
dIEtat qul “n’est pas un organlame reellementrep&sentatlf”i. Danaun artlole lntltul6 “Inside Kashmlrn
paru le 26 f6vrler dansle m&mequotldlenaouala
signature du journaltste NandanB. Kagal, on peut
lire oe qui suit:
*Qu’on le veullle ou non, le Comlt6 d’aotlon
inetitu6 par MaulanaMaeoodlaprbs le vol oommis
& Haeratbal sembleBtre deveru,
en quelqueasemaines, le porte-parole du peupledanela ValUe
de Caohemlre. , . 11eat, aujourd’hul, eemble-t-11,
plus populalrequen’lmporte quel autre groupement
polltlque du Caohemlre,. . 11a demand6la lib&
ration du ohelk Abdullahet le retour au Cachemire
de ChoudhuryQhulamAbas. Sil salt que oea demandeevont de pair aveo l*afflrmatlon que l*Aseembl6edIEtat ne retlate pas r64lement la volont6
de la populationdu Jammuet Caohemlre,on oomprend fort blen quele eont les objeotlfa
polltiques
de MaulanaMaaoodlet du Comlt6d’aotlon. Unefolr
le oaraotbrerapr6sentatlf del’Assembl6eduCaohemire mie en doute, ses d6olslonr perdent de leur
polde our le plan des prlnoipes d+mratiquer,
m&me el ellee restent Jurldlquement valablw.
Maulana
Masoodlafflrme en fait que le rattaoheinent du Caohemtre B 1’Inde n’eet nl d~finitlf ni
irr&voonble, . ,”
18.

The oorrespondent then talks of “the oloud of gloom
and despair” in the Kashmir valley beoaure of “a oomblnationof armedpolloeandimportedIndianadministrators”, andthen he adds:Wxlia nowseeksa breathing spell to regainits shakyholdonKashmirandwants
time to absorbit gradually into Indian.

19. This testimonyaboutthe faots of the situationin
Kashmir is further strengthenedby reports in the
Indian Press itself. Aooordlngto The Times of India
of 20 February 1964, most of the shopsin Srlnagar
remainedclosedon 19 February in responrreto a oall
g&en by the Action Committeefor observanceof a
general strike as a mark of protest againstthe oonvenlng of the State Assemblywhloh “was not a true
representative body”. An artiole entitled “Inside
Kashmir” by a oolumnlst,Nandan8. Kagal, in the
samenewspaperon 26 February said:
“Whether onelikes it or not, theAotlonCommittee
setup by MaulanaMasoocU after the Hazratbaltheft
has within the epaoe of a few weeks seemingly
beoomethe voloe of the peopleof the Kashmirvalley
..* It appearsto have a wider popular basethan
anyother politioal groupin Kashmirtoday,. . It has
oalled for ShelkhAbdullah’srelease and also for
ChoudhuryCihulamAbas’sreturn to Kashmir. When
these demand8are coupledwith the allegationthat
the State Assembly does not truly refleot the will
of the peopleof Jammu andKashmir, the political
objeotlvesof MaulanaMaeoodiandthe Aotlon Committee beoomequite olear. Once the representative
nature of the Kashmir Assembly is ohallenged,
thoughits actionsmight remain legally vaild, their
meaningfulnessin terms of demooratlcprlnolples
is R&C& Maulana Maooodi in effeot says that
Kauhmlr’s aooesrlonto India Ir neither final nor
lrrevooable , , , W
Then The Times of India on 21 February said that:
“It is %%w quite plain that Maulana Masoodl and his
oolleagues on the Action Committee want to reopen the
accession issu~.~
20. What olearer refutation, I ask, could dmnnnl;o

from India itself of tbe tbeslsadvancedby the representative of India here that “the demonstrations
Kashmir were aimed at the local admInistration”.

in

21. As a matter of fact, the latest reports leave one
in no doubt about the nature of the popular movement
in Kashmir. According to The Statesman of Delhi of
6

L.e Times of Indin dcrivnit le 21 f6vrier: “11 est
maintenant Bvldent quo Mnulann Masoodi et 888
nmls du Comitb d’nction entondent rouvrir la question du rattaohement.”
20. Eet-11 possible de rBfutor plus olalrement
que
ne le fnit PInde elle-meme lo th8se avnnc6e 101 par
le repr6sentant de 1’Inde selon lnquelle “lee d6monstrntlons qul ont eu lieu au Caohemlre btalent dlrlg6eo centre l’ndministrntion
loonlen?
21. En fait, lea dernl.Gres Informatlons
reques ne
laissent nucun douto sur lfl nature
du mouvemont
populnlre
au Cncbemirc.
Yolon lo Statesman de

17 Maroh l&34, the Aotion Committee in S:lnagas,
whioh has elsewhere been deeoribed as “the voice of
the people”, affirmed in a resolution on 15 Maroh
that the people of the Stats would not aooept any solution of the Kashmir issue whloh is not based on the
freely expreseecl will of the people, and oalled for
immediate implementation in full of all pledges given
to the people. They demanded the resolution of the
dispute onoe and for all on the basieof a free and fair
vote. The Kaehmir Political Conferenoe issued a
statement on 16 Maroh 1064, demandingthat anappropriate atmosphere be established for the meeting of
the leaders of India and Pakistan to solve the Kashmir
question in aooordanoe with the wishes of the people
of Jammu and Kashmir.

Delhi du 17mara 1964,IeComltdd’aotiondeSrlnagar,
qul a et6 dborlt allleurs oomma&ant le “porteparole du peuple”, a affirm8 dans une r6solutlon
du 15 mars que la populationde VEtat n’aooepteralt
auoune
solution A la questlon du Caohemlre qul
ne fat fond&e sur la volont6 librement exprimAe
du peupleet demandaltla mlse en ceuvreimmediate
de -toutes lea promesses faltes A la population.
Le Comltf3d’aotlon exigeait quc lo differend solt
tranoh4 une fols pour toutes au moven d’un vote
libre et loyal, La Conf6renoepolitlque-duCachemire
a pub116
le 16 mars 1964uned&olaratlondans
laquelle
elie demandaitl’lnstauratlon d’une atmosph&-proploe A une renoontre des dlrlgennts de 1’Indeet du
Pakistan en we de la solution de la questiondu
Cachemire oonform6mentau d&sir de la population
du Jammuet Caohemlre.

‘,?a, The truth is that India knows full well the reality
of the people’s movement in Kashmir and the oause of
the oontlnued orlsls there. Yet what 16 the response
of the Government of India? It is to prooeed with
greater speed to integrate Kashmir into the Indian
Union. It is to threaten stern aotion against anyone in
Kashmir who stands in the way, When theQovernment
of India threatens dire oonsequences for it the people
of Jammu and Kashmir take the stand that they are
entitled to deolde their own destiny, it brings out the
explosive nature of the present situation more clearly
than it oan be desoribed. It shows that India, whloh is
a Member of the United Natlone, a signatory to the
Charter, pledged to respect the authority of the Seourlty Counoll. is prepared to persecute e people for
no-other aoi th& tcelr making manifest the demand
that a principle of the Charter, and the deolslone of
the Se&rlty Council based on it, ehouldbe implemented
in their ease. Even if there had been no other dlsquieting faotors in the present situation, this attitude
of the Government of India woald in itself be enough
justlfloatlon for Pakistan to seek the Council’s lnterventlon.

22. La v&it4 est que VInde ne salt que trop gull1
exlste effeotlvement un mouvement popuialre au
Caohemlreet quella est la oausede 1’6tat de orlse
permanent qul r&ne dans oet Etat. Et pourtant,
comment le Qouvernementde 1’Inde rbaglt-11711
essalede realiser le plus rapidementpossiblel’lnt&
gratlon du CaohemlredansPUnion lndienne.I1 menaoe de prendre des mosures bnergiquesoontre
quloonques’opposeau Caohexlre A 88s desselns,
Lorsque le Qouvernementde 1’Indemet en gardela
populationdu Jammuet Caohemlreoontre de grave@
oone6quenoes
si elle oontlnue A proolamer qu’elle
a le drolt de d&olderde son sort, 11revAle le oaraot&e exploslf de la situation aotuelleplus olalrement
quene pourralt le faire auoune description. 11montre
que PInde, qul est Membre de 1’Organlsatlondes
Nations Unies et flaure au nombre des sianatalres
de la Charte, et qui itest engageeA respeot& l’autorite du Conseil de s&ourlt& est p&e A per&outer
un peuple qui n’a oommls d’aitre or&e que de
rbolamer ouvertementl’applloatlonE aonpropre 08s
d’un prlnolpe de la Charteet de d8olalo.ns
du Consell
de &uritb
fond&essur oe prlnolpe. Cette attitude
du Qouvernementde llnde &fir&it B elle aeule,
et m&mes’il n’y avalt paad’autres Bl4mentsinqul&
tants en jeu, A justifier la demandepakistanalse
d’lnterventlon du Conselldo s6ouriM.

23. Aotually, there are other disquletlngfaotors whloh
I have already reported. They emphasice the orltloal,
oanoeroua n&are of the pierent rltuatlon between
India and Pakistan. The situation on the cease-fire
line, always uneasy, is today more troubled than ever
before. Seriour incidents have taken place in recent
weeks, leading to heavy exohanger of fire, resulting
in a number of deaths, The urgency of the situation is
am pronounced as it is poignant. There is no internntional agenoy but the Seourity Counoil whloh oan
meet it and thus help to avert the danger to peaoe,
which is otherwire being dangerously augmented day
by day.
24. The danger to poaca is indicated by the statements of responsible Indian spokesmen. On 15 Mnroh

23. En fait, I1 y a d’autres elements inqul&ntr
et J’en a1dejA parl6. 11~forAtapparafire le oaraotare
oritlque du differend, qul eat une sorte de plale
ouverte entre 1’Indeet le Pakistan.La situationsur
la llgne de oessez-le-feu, qul a toujours6th inntable,
est aujourd’hulplus troublee queJamals.De s6rleux
lnoldente se sont produlte au oours dee derniares
remaineset se ront sold&i par unefusllladenourrie
qul a fait plusieura morte. L’urgenoede la situation
cut aussi manlfestequedeeolante.Auouneinstitution
lnternationnle, ei oe n’est le Conreii de r&ourlt&,
ne peut y faire faoe et nous alder A eoarter oette
menaoeA la palx qul e’aggraveohaquejour.
24. Quo In pnlx solt en dunger, c’est co clue montrent
blen 10s dklarntlons
de porto-pn role lndlens nutox*~s~s. Le 16 mnrs 1964, tout rfkemmont
dono, le
Mlnistre des trsvnux publics
et= de in reconstruction
de l’Intle, M. Khnnnn, n dit que le Pnltlstnn &nit
“l’onnemi No 1 de I’Indel’ et il n instnmment demuntl6
flux
6tudillllts
indiens dil SUiVl~U “ln vole do Sl1lvnJI
8t da Govlnd Singh’l , co sovt ill doux guerr1ers
fnmoux de l’hlstoire
lndienno qul ant combuttu loo
musulmuns et qul ont BtB vninous par eux. C’est
leur nom que les Indlens invoqualent ~~endant Ic
confllt slno-lndten.
Lo Mlnistre
do III dfXenso do

1964, India’s Minister for Works and Rehabilltution,
Mr. Khanna, said that PaIdstan is “India’s enemy No,
1” and urged Indian students to follow %e path of
Shivajl and Govlnd Singhit. These were war-lords
in
Indian hIstory who fought ‘against the Muslims rind
who were defeated by the Muslims. Theee were the
war-lordo
to which the Indluns referred during the
Sine-Indian conflict. The Defence Minister of India
has addedto this statementthat Indtn will be “P&atan’s graveynrd”. Those are the words spoken by the

F

tall,
of oou
evidenttha

of the pres

25. The (

February
the issue
P just and
pronounce
showedagl
to those p
peacecan

26. The r
nounoeme
the sltuatl
the Couno
slty of res
tan. I neec
is not, ant
Throughou
mentof Pa
able methc
WhenMerr
betweenIr
to take Intc
lar methoc

27. There
Ministers
was broug:
oorrsapon
personal (
bothoountl
shouldgov
two oountr!
the two PI?
some dire
President
seourea J
by dlreot n
well awan
India and1
It oan, the
to explore
spurnedit.

26. Since

Pakistan I
neoemwy
Whenone
the eases
seeksthe

only to C(
expedite t1
8tall it, w
that the 1:
other. The
not only
futility,
fl
mediation
the medlnt

und to rel
ably precl
so111e cohe

!g:
lion
talt
wi

DefenoeMldrrter of India the other day. While Paklrtan, of oourae,remainsunafraidof thssethreats, it is
evidentthat they oannotbs disregardedinanappraisal
of the presentsituation.

PInde a ajout0 que 1’Inde serait l le otmetibre du
Pakistan’. Tela sontlea termee qu’aemploy6el’autre
Jour le Mlnlstre de la d6fensede 1’Inde.Le Pakistan
ne s’inquiete oertes pae de oea menaoes,mais 11
eet Evident que l’on ne peut lea ignorer lovaqu’on
analyeela situationaotuelle.

25. The Counoll~soonelderatlonof the questionIn
February helpedto bring out agaln thoseaspectsof
the insuewhloh, we believe, mustnot be obaouredlf
a just and psaosful settlernsnt 18to be aohieved. The
pronounoements
made by the membersof the Counoll
showed agaIn that the UnitedNatlonsis notInsensitive
to those prinolples upon whioh alone a structure of
peaoeoanbe enduringlybuilt,

26. Les debate du Conaeil en f6vrier ont mla en
lumibre de8 aspeotede la question qui, oroyonsnous, ne doivent pas rester dans l’ombre ei l’on
veut mettre au polnt un reglement equitable et
paoiflque. Lea d6olaratlonsdee membresdu Conaeil
ont moqtr6 une fois de plus que les NationsU~ies
ne se d6slnt6ressnlentpasdesprinolpesqul peuvent
seulsoonetltuer18saeeiscpd’une paix durable,

n4e

Late
ton.

kloit
‘rote
llre
lelle
ht du
r du
tlon
pl’ 11
au
rise
at,
? I1
nt&
hlOhtre
‘111s.
10la
1veti
elle
?80-

nent
ntre
des
irea
utouter
I de
08s
#3ell
tude
ky..’
‘alee
mts
tare
ilale
aur
.ble,
leux
3ree
rrle
klon
itlon
pit&,
kdte
I
rent
utoI, le
bt.iOll
‘Btait
and6

lvnJ1
‘lers
, 1eo
:’ ast
it
le

3 de

26. The problem, however, remainsthat thoeepro26. Cependant,il reste Ii reller oes d&olarations
nounoements
have to be broughtto bear in reality on sur le plan oor.oret R la situation A laquelle noue
the situation whloh oonfronts us. One of the trends of
avons 8 faire faoe. On a notammenteu tendanoe,
the Counoiltsdebatehasbeento emphasiee
theneoes- au ooursdes d6batsdu Consell,5 soulignsrla nboeselty of resumingnegotiationsbetweenIndiaandPakiseit6 pour 1’Inde et le Pakistan de reprendre lee
tan, I needhardly remind the Counollthat this advice
n@oolatIone. 11 eat A pelne besolnde rappeler au
is not, and oould never be, unweloometo Pakistan, Consellque le Pakistan n’oat pas et ne saurait Btra
Throughoutthe exfstenoeof the dispute,the Qovern- hostile B une telle reoommandation,Utrpuisque le
mentof Pakistanhasbeenanxioustoutiliee all roason- differend existe, le Qouvernementdu Pakistan aouable methodsfor its peaoefulandequitablesolution. haite utiliser toutes lee m6thodetlraisonnnblesperWhenMember Statesof theCounoiltalk of negotiations mettantd’arriver a unesolutionpaolflqueetBqultable.
betweenIndia andPakistan,I wouldmerely askthem Au%Etata membresdu Consall gut parlent de n&goto Lakeinto accountour longexperlenoeof this partiouoiatlons entre 1’Inde et le Pakistan, je voudraie
lar methodof trying to resolve the cllsnute.
seulementrappeler que nousavoneunelonbueexperienoe de oe modepartioulier de reglementdu lltlge.
27. There were oonversationsbetween the Prime
Ministers of India and Paklrtan evenbefore the issue
wasbrought to the Counoilin 1948.There wasa long
corrsspondenoein 1950 and 1961, pursotuatedby
personal oontaotsbetween the Prime Mlnlsters of
bothoountries,aboutformulating the principleswhioh
shouldgovern the settlementof disputesbetweenthe
two oountries.There were negutiationsagainbetween
the two Prime Ministers in 1963and 1954.There were
somedlreot talks in 1966. From 1958to 1961the
Presidentof Paklstan madeeustained endeavoursto
eeourea jurt ‘and peaoefulsettlement of the dispute
by direct negotiation.Thenagaln, astha membersare
well aware, six rounds of talks wefe held between
India andPakistanfrom Deoember1962to May 1963.
It oan, therefore, hardly be aaid that wehave failed
to explore the porsibllltles of this method, far less
spurnedit.

27. 11y a eu dee oonvereatloneentre lea Premier8
Mlnietres de 1’Indeet du Pakistan avant m6meque
la questionne soit port&edevant le Coneeilen 1948.
Une longueoorrespondanoe
a 6th Bohangeeen 1960
et en 1961et parallblementdeuoontaotepereonnelr
ant, BtB Btablis entre les Premiers Minietres dee
dew paye au sujet c’e la formulation dee prhoipe
sur la base desquele lea differends entre lee
dew pays devraient Btre r6gl6s. De nouvelleen&gooiations se sont ddroul6esentre lee dew Premier0
Mlnlstres en 1963et en 1964.Desentretiensdlreotr
ont eu lieu en 1965.De 1958B 1961,le Pr6sidentdu
Pakistan a fait dee efforts pere6v6rantspour trouver
un rbglemont juste et paolfique au differend par
voie de n&oolatluns direotes. Puie de nouveau,
oommelee membresdu Conaellle rave& rix s&lea
d’entretiens ont eu lleu entre 1’Indeet le Pakirtan
de dboembre1962A ma1 1963.Cn ne peut donopan
dire que n@usn’avons pas explore toutes les possiblllt&s offertelr par oette mt%hode,
et enooremolnr
quenoua avonsrefusb de l~utiliser.

25. Sinoe all direot negotlatlonr between India and
Paklrtan ao far have falled, we believe that it 1s
neoerrary to baar in mindtherearonfor their failure.
Whenone party refers to the governingprlnolpler of
the oaseand the other rellee on its might, whenone

28. PUhqUe,
juequ’iol, toutae lea n&oolationa dlreotee entre PInde et le Pakistan ae ront roldher
par un (oheo, noua ertimonr ndoerraire d*lnnrlrter
aur la rairon de oet Boheo.LoraquQnede8 partier
se rbolame dee prinoipes applioablesen l’espeos
et que l’nutre oomptesur on puiasnnoe,lorsquvune
despnrties d&ire einobr’ement
nbgooieretqual’nutre

seeks the reality of negotiation
and the other wants
only to contrive its semblance,whenone seeksto
expedite the prooess und the other is determined to
stnll it, what is the result? The inevitnble result is
that the parti 3 talk at croes purposes with enoh
other. There is then nothil!g to prevent negotiations
not only from being wasteful but, through their
futility, from worsening
n tense situation. Even
medintlon does not help greatly in suoh a case, unless
the medlntor is in a position to direct the negotintions
nnd to relate them to n frnmeworlc which is renaonnbly precise. Thnt ~10110
oan glvq the negotiations

someooheronceand purpose. l’o as1\a mediatorto

7

se oontonte de fnire semblnnt, lorequ’~e
doe pnrties
ohorohe A hflter les ohoses et ql;e llnutre est rbsolue
A lee f:dre trnlber en longueur, quo1 eet lo rBsult&?
Le rL,ultut
est fnWement un dlulogue de soupde.
Non nu monde ne peut empQohcr de telles ]&goolutlone d’6tre non ~3eulomonl inulllos, mnio m&no
nulslblos, du fuil que, par leur iuefficnollb,
ollos
ng@,uvenl uno situntlon d6jA tendue. M&no la m ,Wintion n’est pnb cl’un grnnd seooura en pnreil clue, A
moins quo le medintour ne soit on mesure do ~iriger
les n6goclntions et de les orientor drum uno dirootion

arslet in aohievlng a solution without a defined basis
is to plaoean unfair burdenon him.

suffisammentpr6oise. Celaseul peutdonnerau%n6gooiationsune oartalne ooh&enoe et une oertains
utilit6. Demandera un m6diateur d’aider & mettre
au point unerolutfon ssnslui fournir debased6finie,
o’est trop exiger de lui.
29. It was said in this Counoilin February that the
29. On a dit au Coneeil en f6vrler que les &gonegotiationsrequiredinthisdebateshouldbeoonstruo- olations B entreprendre en l’ooourrenoe devaient
tive andsincere. But the problemis, howdo wemake Btre oonstruotives et sinobres. Ma16 le problbme
the negotiationswith India oonstruotive and slnoere, if
est alors de savoir oommentrendre les nbgoaiations
the Indian position is that whioh was stated in the
aveo 1’Indeconstructive6 et sinobres si la position
Counoil? Witnt promise of suooet3s
oan we disoern indienne eat oelle qui a Bt6 exposbeau Consell?
whenthe Minister of Educationof India, reporting the
Quelle ohsnoede suoobsavons-noussi le Ministre
de l’eduoationde l*Inde, rendant oompteauParlement,
Council’sproceedingsto his Parliament on 24February 1964, said: “1 think we have laid the ghostonos le 24 fbvrier 1964,desd&baLs
du Consell,s’exprims
andfor all for the holdingof aplebisoitein Kashmir.”
en oes termee: “Je pense que nous avons oonjur6
fi jamais le risque d%n pl6bisolte au Caohem1re.n
SO. TM s kind of statementis probablyanaat reminder 30. Ce genre de d6olarationvient rappeler bien B
to the Seourity Cumoil that n&form& for negotiations propos au Conseilde 66ourit9 qu’uneinvitation a la
n6gooiation ne sert de rien si elle est vague et si
oan help if it is vagueandlendsitself easily to distortion, Given the authority of the UnitedNationsand elle p&e B de fausses interpr&attons.
Etant dorm6
his personalstanding,the mediator’s goodoffioeswill l’actorlt6 qui s’attaoheII 1~Organisatlon
de6 Nations
oerhinly ‘be a posit&e element.But ihis element,in
Unit36et vu se8 qualit pereonnelles,le mediateur
pourra oertainement,en usant de se6 bone offioes,
order to be constructive, needsa foundationand a
base, Stneedspreoiseterms of referencn that oanbe apporter une oontribution positive. Mats, pour oela,
objectively oommended,
il a besoin d’une base de travail. I1 lui faut un mandat
prbois qui puisse&re objeotivementapprouv6.
31. What point of depafture oa11
bs more objeotively
commended
than the prinoiplesof the Charter andthe
international agreementwhiohhasbeensolemnlyaoosptedby both parties? This agreementwasnot imposed by the Council. It is based on the oommon
*nominator betweenthe deolaredstandpointsof the
partles and, in iteelf, embodies acompromisebetween
their respeotive olnims. It is an agreementto whioh
the Security Councilitself is a party andto the olarifioation of which the thought and effort of scoresof
Member Statea and the eminentindividualswhohave
served as representatives
been devoted

in the Seourity Council have

31. Y a-t-i1 une base de depart qui soit objeotivement plus digne d’approbationque les prinotpes de
la Charte et l’aooord international qui a Bt6 solennellementaooept6par Ita deux parties? Gel aooord
n*a pas BtB impos6par le Consell. II est fond6 sur
lee 616ments oonmuns aux positions prisee offiolellement par les parties et oonstitue, en lui-m6me,

34. Suppose,in a mc
only of the ohanginge

we were to try to I
politioal settlement,Ir
settlementwill be oo~
by the peopleinvolved
goodwill shouldfeel t
a problemthat haspe
and here
is the oolc
approaohis likely to
dossnot have the IPI
Kashmir. That is vl
oonviotionthat any dc
the two retiolutlonsw
the problem,but oniy !

56. Wehavegrappled
andonethoughtabides
spongedolsar andyou
if it had arisen now
wouldhappen?In your
sn equitablesettleme
oonolusionthat there f
fikrding out what the 1
themselveswant, You
againthe substanceof

un oompromis
entre leurs pr6tentions respeotives.
Vest un aooord auquel le Conseil de s6ourlt6 lui-

m6me eat partie et dont un grand nombred’Etats
Membres et dl6minentespersonnaltt66qul ont repr6sent6 leur pnye au Conseilde s6ourit6ont travaIlI&
aveopatienoeet sagesse,B p&leer la portbe.

32. That the agreementembodiedthe pledgegiven
by India and Pakistan to the peopleof the State is a
foot whiohhasbeenoonstantlyaffirmed andredfirmed
by the Seourity Council. Thus, the agreementhashad
behindit the reoognitlonof all Membersof the United
Natioys. If anythingwaswantingin makingthis reoognition unfversal, that, too, hasnowbeendone.

32. Que oet aooordrenferme la promessefaite par
1’Inde et le Pakistan B la populationde PEtat, o’est
un fait que le Conseilde s&o&it& n’a oess6de r6affirmer. Ainsi, oet aooord a Bt6 sanotionn6 par tous
lee Membres de 1’Organisationdes NationsUnles.
?(I1 manquaitquo1queoe soft pour queoette sanotlon
aft un oaractbro universe& o’est maintenantohoss
faite.

33. I must, in this oontext, stressbefore the Counoll
that plebisoite in Kashmir is not just a sloganof
Pakistan,It is not any oonslderatfon of prestigewhioh
attaohss us to the in+Jrnationalanreementonths state
of JammuandKashmir, that is tiie two resolutionsof
the UnitedNaHonsCommissionfor IndiaandPakistan.

33. Je dols souligner 101q&en demandantl’organisation d?m pl6bisolte au Caohemire le Pakistan
ne se bornepai B lancer un slogan,Ce n’est paspour
den oonsid&ations de prestige que nous restons
fidbles B l~aooordinternational sur lIEtat deJammu
et Caohemire, o’est 9 oausedes dew r6solutions
de la Commlssiondes Natlons Unles pour 1’Inde

We invoke the principle of self-determinatlonbeoause
it is the only basic--I repeat, the only basis-on which
a solution of this problem can endure. Let us keep in
mind the nature of this problem. It Is not the problem
of a border. It is not a dispute over a piece of territory. It is not a clash of economic interests. It 1s
not a rlvolry between two systems. It 18 the problem
of the life and future of nearly 5,000,OOO people who
inhabit a territory six times RR large a8 Switzerland,
III this day nnd age, bow can we possibly dispoee of
this problem without impartially consulting the wishes
of theoe people7 Whether from an tithical or from a
politico1 point of view, there is no getting away from the
fact thnt no solution of this queotionwill be viable if

it is arbltrarg and’if i
by, the freely express

ot la Pakistan. Nous invoquons le prlndue du droit
des pcuplcs & disposer d’eux-m8mes
paroe que
c’eet, je le rbpbte, la seule base sur lnquellc puisse
&re fond& une solution durable. N’oublions pas en
quo1 consiste
le problbme. I1 ne s’agit pas d’un
differend de frontiQre; il ne s’agit paa d’un litigc
concernant une pnrcelle de territolre.
11 ne slagit
pas d’un conflit d’lnt6r&s Bconomiquee; il no s’agit
pas d’anhgonisme
entre deux aystBmes. 11 s’ngit de
la vie et du eort de p&s deoinq milliona de personnca
qui hnbitent un territoire
six fois plus Btendu qua
la Suisse. Comment pourrions-nous,
n notre Bpcque,
r6glbr un probl&me pm-oil Rnne consulter impnrtlnle-

36. At the Counoilts

oneof the stark state1
tive that the resolutic
raise two quertfons.
resolutionsare obsole
of JammuandKashmi
right of self-determl
secondquestionis on
tions and it needsto
Ssourity Counoil,on th
other. The question!I
of the Qovernment 0
resolutionsaa obsole
the oease-fire in Kas
there is no other sane
the validity of thesen
by India and Pakistan
rhetorloal westion an
soore a point. On the
extremely praotioal nc
that will

be given to 1

37. We have been gr
in the statements of
Counoil to the realitif
the suggestions that a
to these realitlee. So
nre not any less bf a
1949. Will this staten
reality of the situatic
of time notwlthstandln

oilad
their
ir tin
reasi

merit lea population6en oaum? Quo oe wit d’un
point de vue moral ou dQm point de vue politique,
11oat un fait auquelon no peut par @chapper:
auoune
rolution arbltralre qul no rerait par fond80 our la
vclont6 librement oxprim& dee populatlonr 1ntC
rerrr6ea et no reralt paaratifibe par oeapopulationa
no permettra de rbgler le problbmedWne manibre
durable.
34. Suppoee, in a mocd of real politio and mindful 34. Suppcronsqu’adoptantun point de vue r&aliste
only of the ohanqingexpedienolesdpolitior
andpower, et ne rongeant qu’aux ocntingenoerde la politlque
we were to try to hulrtls through what is oalleda
et du pouvolr ncua nousefforcions de faire aooepter
politioal eettlement.Is it a likely propositionthatthin
oe que l’on appelle un reglement polltique. Eat-11
settlementwill be conduciveto peaa, if it is oppolbd vrairemblable que oe rbglementaboutlore k la paix
by the peopleinvolved7 It 10natural that rome menof
0’11#e heurte k l’opporitlon de8 populationr intb
gccd will shouldfeel the needfor a frerh approaohto
reeeeee?Certain8hommeede bcnnevolont6 ertiment
a problemthat har perrirt8d for rixteen year& But- et oela ert nature1- quo ncua devonr aborder
and here is the oold faot of the matter-no freah
d%ne maniere nouvelle oe prohlemequi dure depuie
approach ie likely tc be anything but perverse if it.
I6 an& Mais, o’est un fait, aborder le probleme
doea not havethe Ipport of the peopleof Jammuand d’une manibre nouvello ne peut 6tre quo n&fart0 ri
Kashmir. That lo vhy we remain unrhakenin wr
on le fait aana l’appui de la populationdu Jammuet
convlotion that any deviation from the principle6 of
Caohemire.Cleat pcurquol noun rentone oonvainoua
the two retiolutlonewill result, not in aneasementof
que, ei nous noun doartons doe prinoipes 6nonoC
the problem,but oniy in ite aggravation.
dana lee deux r6eolutiono, le problbme,bien loin de
devenir plue eimple, ne fera queVaggraver.
36. Wehave grappledwith this questionall theseyear8
35. Durant toutes oea anndes,nous avons et4 aux
and onethoughtabideswith UI. Suppose
theslate were prisee aveo oe problame et nouanounaommY8aouspongedclear andyou weretc considertheprobleman vent pcr6 oette question:suppceontiquenounpaselons
if it had arieen now, not in 1946,but today. What PBwnue et aue nounexamintonele problbmeoomme
wouldhappen?In your Bearoh,howeverpragmatic,for
slli v&att diapparaftre et nonpairoommer’il datait
an equitablesettlement, you would be driven to the de 1946.Que 88 produirait-il? Nor efforts, 01 rbaconclusionthat there la only one 8ure way-the wayof
lirter role&110, Pour trouvor un rbglementWiitablr
fiuding out what the peopleof Jammuand Kashmir abcutiraientB la oonolurionqu’il n’exletequ’uneoeule
m&hode ebre, B aavoir determiner quele eont lee
themselveswant. You would thur be driven to write
vmux des population6 du Jammu et Caohemire.
againthe aubetanceof the reeolutiorm.
Cleat-&-dire qua nou8 serlonr amen& B r6orlre lea
r6solutionede la CommieeiondeeNationsUnieepour
1’Indeet le Pakistan.
I 36. At the Counoil~emeeti s in Fenmary, it wao 36. Lors des eeanoeaque le Consell a tenuesau
I one of the &ark statement8o
f the Indianreprerentamole de fbrier,
Pun den arguments fondamentaux
I tlve that the rerolutionr are obrolete. I wouldlike to
du reprerentant de 1’Indea btB que lea rOlrolutlonr
raise two quertions. The first ir general. If these avalent perdu de leur aotualit8. Jo vcudrair parer
~ resolutionsare obsolete,doesthat meanthat thepeople dew queetione,dont la premlbre eat d’ordre g6n@ral.
of JammuandKashmirare alro obroletaandthat their
91 oea rdsolutions ont perdu de leur aotuallt~, en
right of self-determlnatlon is alro obsolete?The
r&u&e-t-11 que 16 peupledu Jammuet Caohemire
secondquentlonis oneof evenmore urgent implioa- ert Ogalementune ohore du parr6, de m6mequoron
I tions and it needr to be ccnontely answeredby the droit B diaporesde lui-memo?La deuxibmequertion
I Security Counoil,on the oneride, andby India, on the
a der prolongementrenoore plru rbrleux et n&cowother, The quertion is thir: if we aoceptthe pcrition
rite une rdponre ocnor@&de la part du Conrell
of the Government of India that it regard@there
de rburit6 et de la part do 1Vnde.Sl nounadmettfmr,
) resolutions as obrolete, then doer it not follow that
avec 1s Qouvenement de VInde, queow r&solutionl
I the oeare-fire in Karhmir is alro obrolete,beoau#e ont perdu de leur aotuallt& no r’enrult-11 par quo lo
~ there is no other ranotionbehindthe ceare-fire than oerres-lcfsu au Caohemire a perdu toute valour,
the validity of there reaolutionr andtheir aooeptanoe &ant donnOqu’ll n!bxi&e par d’autre fondementB
by India and Paklatan?Stla evident that thlr 11not a
oe oerrss-le-feu qua la oalidit~ der rColution6
I rhetoriod quertlon and we do not ark it in order to
en quertion et leur aooeptationpar l%de et le
wore a point, On the oontrlry, oonrequenoerof an Pakirtan? De toute &ldenoe, ce n’ert par lil une
~ extremely praoW.oal
nature will flow from the answer question thdorlque et noun ne la pceonepas pcul
it la arbitrrzy and’lf it irnotbned on, and rmotioned
by, the freely expre~sb will of the people oonoerned.

, that wlll be given to ua by the Government of India.

marquer un point. Bien au oontraire, de la rdponse
que IIOUB donnera le Gouvernement de 1’Inde d6oouleront descon&quenoes extrOmement oonor8tes.

37. We have been gratified by the references made
ln the statements of the members of the Security
Council to the realities of the situation. We weloome
the sugge&ons that a solution must pay dua regard
to these realities. So people of Jammu and Kashmir
are not any less of a reality today than they wore In
1949. Will this statement be contested? The primary
reality of the situation 18 the fact that, all passage
of time notwithstandlng,
these people are not recon-

31. Nous avona 6t6 heureux de oonstater que les
memhres du Conseil de s6ourit6 se sont rbf6r6s dans
leurs d6olnratfons nux r6allt6s de la situation. Nous
aooueillons
aveo satisfaotion
l’id6e que la solution
doit tenir dament compte de oes r6alMs.
I& peuple
du Jnmmu et Caohomire est une r&lit6 auJourdlhuI
tout nutant qu’en 1949. Cette nfflrmation sera-t-ello
contest6o7 La c6allt6 essentieile de In sltuatlon est
qu’end6pit des ann6es qui 30 oont 6couldee la popu9

z
been
sndia
eawt
ram
38.
the
Ori

frert
right
impr
is th
Karh
from

9%

EC
aeY
in tb
&ml
WhOl
I ho]
tie
CCUX
tab:
dira
sndia
pro8
#OIlI

unda
Prec
%Z
l PP
ww
*w
totl
iii

tbat

’

Will
the1

a ds
and

’

40.
tot
betv
I3pir
&ml
rein
clot
will
just
&SF

41.

of I.

oiled to Indian ooouprtloa Tha prlmuy reality is
their frumtration and diooont8nt. The primary reality
lo their revolt, And the direot oonwquenoerof thir
reality ir the faot that the dirputo over Kaobmir bar
bmught abutt a thmotening oonfrontation between
India andPaklotan.The reality lo thattbershao never
beena time whenthe utrainc0hediopute in the sntlro
&lia-Pakiotan oltuation has shown-any oignof beh
eased or when the tenolonothat it engendershava
waxed
38. It is to the00 malitier that th0 efforto towardo
the peaoefui solution of this problem have to be
oriented if they are to bear any fruft, No mo-oalled
fresh approachoandiooover a aubotitutefor a pop109
right to self-determination. No fresh approachoan
improve upon the oubotanooof the moolutiono,whioh
Is the aooertainingof the popularwill in Jammuand
Kashmirwithout ooerolon,aorn\ption or interferenoo
from outside.

39, These are the oonolderationothat must govern
any endeavar towardsa settlement,if that endeawur
lo really a oeriouo one, While thorn is no doubtthat
they havebeenlmplioit in the thoughtooxpmsoedhem
in the Counoil, the rituatlon in JammuandKashmir
domandoouitable international aoMonbasedon them,
WhenI oaf that this a&on haobeenlooking, it will,
I hope, be underotoodthat I am not unappmoiativeof
the efforts made by the members of the Seourlty
Camoil during the series af meetineoin February
to bridge the &f betweenf.heparties.-It la, howeve*,
diooouro#iM that the spokesmen
of the Oovernmentof
India oh&l& have lord no time in distorting the expreooedvlewo d the Counoll membersandin @estioning the very baoio of a oon1enouo. This attitude
underliner ths neoerrity of the Cnunoilto adopt a
pmoloe and oonoreteformula for rotting in motiona
prooerr that will result in an amloableand
honourable
settlement of the dioplb. Wedo not deny the value of
appealaand exhortationo. But it ir errential that an
appealshouldoonrtituk an adequaterraponre to the
urrnt demandoof the preaentsituation. A ouggeotion
to the two partirr to negotiateir nothingmom than
an exhortation, unleor someinouranoelr provided
for the negotlatlonr to be moanlngful.I am oertain
thd them lr uo member of the Seourity Counoilwho
will be oatiofied by the partie@merely goingthrough
the motionsof negoMaMono
and,asamoult, inorearing
a dangerourfeeling of futility in JammuandKalhmlr
andin India andPaklrtan.

laMon no hot pao r&ol@e & 1%00uprtlonlndlenne.
La &alit6 eorsntielle sot que oette populationeat
dhue et m6oontente.La r6allt6 eooentlelle, o’eat
l a r6volte. Et 11en r6ruite
quoledlff6rend du Caohemire a ouoolt6un dangereuxantagonlomeentre PIndo
et lo Paklotan. La r6aliU eot qu’k auounmoment
la orloe provoqu6epar 1s diffbrend danol~enoembls
deo relatlons indo-palciotanaIoeono o’eot apalo6a
ni la tensionqu’il engendrerelUoh6e.
SE. C’eot our 08s r6alit6o que doivent Otre ax6a
loo efforts d6ployboen vue d’une solution paoifique
du problbme 01 l’on veut qulllo Solent fruotueux,
Auoune 8tfaponno*velle d’aborder le problOme”ns
peut permettre de remplaoerpar autre ohooele droit
deo peupleo A dioposer d’eux-m@meo.Auoune m6thodenouvellene peut marquffrunprogrbspar rapport
A oelle qul est d6finle dans lea r6eolutionset qul
oonoiote A tenir oomptede la volont6 du peupledu
Jammuet CaohemireoanoauounreoouroA la foroe
ou A la oorruption et oattoauouneintervention extb
rleure.
99. Telles oont lee ooneid6ratlonodontdoit stineplrer tout offork, vrahent o&leux, de r6glement.
Elleo ont, 08110
nuoundoute, oervi implloltementde
fondementaux ld6eoqul ont 6t6 exprlm6eoau Conrail
de o6ourit6, mais la situationau Jammuet Caohemlre
exige doemeoureointernatlonaleoapproprl6eoreporant our oette bare. Loroque je dir que de teller
meoureon’ont pas 6t6 prloes juoqu’loi, on oomprendra, je l’eop6re. lue Je ne sour-eotime nullsment
10s efforts aooomplispar les membreodu Conoeil
au oourodens6anoeodu molsdef6vrler pour oombler
le foso6 qui o6pare les dew parties. Mais 11eet
d6oourageantde oonotater que lee porte-parole du
Couvernementindien n’ont pao perdu de tempopour
ddformer lea vueo exprim6eo par 160 membres
du Conreil et pour met& en oauoe le fondementmdms
d’un accord. 11eat d’autant plus n6oesoairepour 1s
Conselkde a6ourit6 d’adopter une formule pr6oioe
et oonor6teen vue d’amoroer le prooeosusouooep
tible de oonduire A un rbglement paoiflqueet honorable du diff6rend. gnn(~nler la valeur deo appelr
et der exhortations, nouspenoonoqu%nappel dolt
de tout0 n6oeorlt6tenir d&nent oomptedeo exigenoeo
urgenteo de la oituation aotuslle. Sugg6rer aux
deux partleo de n6gooier n’eot rien de pluo quoloo
oxhortsr A le faire, A molno qu’on ne oolt aoour6
que 10sn6goolatlonombneront quelquepart. Jo ouls
oertaln qu*auounmembredu Conoell de l 6ourit6 no
o@eotlmerrrrtirfait al &r prrtier M bornent b
entamerdeon6gooiationlde pure form0 et A aooroitre
pr
16 la ro~ttable impmorlon de vanit6 deo
&fork qui exiote au Jammuet Caohemlre,en lnde

4% Mr. CHAKBAVI
thank you, Mr. Pm
Counoilfor girl* ml
youin oonnenlonwltl
49. It iI not my int
dtoousrionat thfr otr
oa@eolnoo the objet
merely to l eek an ad
oiroumotanueo
under
moating am well k
delegationis not quit
hero themselveswe:
neoeooityfor this IT
iuternational peaooI
ened.The oaoehasb
Counollfor all the01
of the Swurlty Ccw
with a view tofindir

to peaoe and reourll
from UI. The oixtee~

of 00uroe, remains
not vaoated.

44. Whenthe Couna
meeting],our Mlnist
urgedthat there wa
Jammu and Kaohm
emergenoy as allegi
wasno oaoefor a mc
Pakirtani plea was (
like to aak the Fort
this emergenoy 0ud
1964[1093rd meeMn
ment. Obviously, he
the emergency. BY I
Journment;the C&c
noemergency.

46. As the CounoilY
tion of India, Mr.
adjournmentandhe II

“It suits the oon
Pakirtan to got01
book.It doer not II
of oonvenienoe,tl
rhouldbe oonriden

“There3ore, I ot!
thto debateohould
am ready to olt hc
after

tomorrow

u

[lOQSrdmeeting,pc

et au Plldrtan.

40. Wehave comeherea@n to offer our co-operation

40. Noue venonade nouveauoffrlr notre ooopdratlon

to the Counoll for the betterment of the situation
between India and Pakistan. While we appreoiate the
spirit of the agreed opinion of the members of the
Seourity Counoll and endorse its ooneents, we beg to
remind the Counoil that this opinion need8 to be
olothed in suoh a form andconveyed in suoh terms as
will tangibly help to move the situation towards a
just, a peaoeful and an honourable settlement of the
dispuputoof Jammu and Kashmir.

au Conseil de s6ourit6 afin que la situation entre
1’Inde et le Pakistan pnisse s’am6liorer.
Tout en
appr6oiant et en approuvant la communaut6 de vu88
qui s’est d6gag6e au Conseil de s6ourit6, nous demandone instamment au Conseil de ne pas oublier
que oette oommunaut6 de vues doit se trnduire 80~8
uno forme et dans des termes susoeptibles d’aider
II orienter effeotlvement la quaetion vers un r&lemerit juste, paoifique et honorable du differend oonoernant le Jammu et Caohemire.

41, The PRESIDENT:
of India.

41.

I now oall on the represenkative

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais): Jo donne
maintenant la parole RU repr6sentant de 1’Inde.

46. Themafter, on I
Moroooo, the Counoi
2 of rule 33 of the pr
adjournment under t
!&
47. Now the ostensj
Minister of Paldstan
request for adjournr
oonsultatlons with M
inore time for refleo
why the Foreign Mini
was his desire to pia
Foreign Minister of
Although this faot w8

49. M. CHAKRAVARTY (f&e) (treduit de l’&ngiairlr
41. Mr. CHAKRAVARTY (India): I mwt firat of all
Jo doL tout d’rbord vat8 remeroler, Monsieur
thenk you, Mr. Prealdest, and the mumberr
of the
le Plbrldent,
alnnrl que ler membrer du Conrell,
Council for gtvlng me the permirrlon to appear before
de mtevolr eutorll6 6 partialper 6 oc‘ dbbat.
you In oonnexion with thir oeme.
43. It ir not my intentionto enter into 8 subrkntlve
43. Je n’al pea l’intentlon, 6 oe a,$ade,de m’engadirousrio~ et thh &ageon the merit@of the KIlhmlr
gem danr une dlrourlion
de fond mur 1~ quertlon du
oaaerlnoe the objeot of my present IntervenUon ta
CaOhOmlm; manlnterventlon a unlquementpour objet
merely to l eek an adjournmentof the diraurrlon. The d’obtenir un ajounement de la dirouarrion. Ler
oiroumrtanoenunderwhlohthe SeourityCounolli&now olr~onrtanoesdanr lerquellee le Cona
de rburit6
meeting are well known to member@,althaugbmy
a 6tb oonvoqu6eont bien oonnue~de tata Ior memdelegationie not quite 8ure if a majority of the mem- bree - me d616getion
n’est d’eilleurr peerllre que la
berr themrelveerwere at any &age oonvlnoedof the
meforlt6 d’entre eux rit Jemalr 6t6 oonveinouede
neoesrity for thle meeting. The Councilm&r when la n6oersit6 d’une tell6 oonvoaetion. Le Conrell
iuternetlonal peaoeand eeoutity are gravely threetae r6unIt ohrque fole que la palx 41 la rburit6
ened.The 08114
ha6beenon the record of the Seoutity
internetlonaleerant grevementmeneobee.II eat nalrl
Counollfor all theee Years, It hasbeenthe oonoern de oetie affalre depuir de nombreuer am&e& 11’
of the Seourlty Council ta bring the partler together
l ‘elt efforo6 de rappmher les partier en vue de
with a view to findhut a peeoefulrolutlon. The threat
parvenlr A une rolution paolflque. La mennaoe
6 la
to peem and reouritj d&s not and her never oome peix et P le r6ourlt6 n’ert pamet ne nouile jrmalr
from ua. The rixteen-year-old Pekirturl aggrea~lon, 6t6 imputable. C’erC l~egrerrlon pakirtanelre, qui
of aour18, remelnr a oonrt6ntthreat 10 long a8 it ir
dure depuir 16 ane, quI, de t&e 6videnoe,oonrtitue
not veoeted.
et oontinuere de oonrtltuer une meneoooonrtante
tant qu’elle n’aure pas dlrparu,
44. Whenthe Counoilmet on 9 February 196411087th 44. Lorrque 14 Con6411r’est r6unl 14 3 f6vrler
meeting], our Minister of Eduoatlon,Mr. Chegla,had iLO876mos6anoe1,notre mint&e de lt6duoatlon.
urged that there wee no newsituationin the Stateof
&l. Cbagla, a db;;lar6 que la altuetlon n’avalt pa6
Jammu and Karhmir, and that there W&I no grave ohang6drnr PEtat de Jammuet Caohrti,
que le
emergenoya8 allegedby Paktrtan anda8 auohthere grave (tat d’urgenoeell6gu6per le P8kirtan n’exirwe8no oeoefor a meetingof the bourity Coundl. The t&t peu, et qu’en 0aWquenoa 11n’y evelt auoune
Pakirtani plea we8 one of grave emergency.I wa\ld
reiron de oonvoquer lo Conroil de r6ourtt6, tr
llke to adr the Foreign Minister oi Paklrtan howdtd demand6du Puklrtan felreit &et d’une littuatlon tr6u
thir smergenoysuddenlydtreppear on 17 February grave. Je voudralr demanderau Minlrtre doaaffafrer
1964(109&d meeting]whenhe arkedfor an adjourn- ext6rleurer
du Pakirtsn comment 11 14 felt que
ment. Obviourly, he himrelf wa8 not ratirffed about oette rltuation elt roudainemennt
oara d%tre urgente
the emergency.By agreeingto this requert for ed- 1s 17 f6vrier (10936mer&or], lorrqu’il a demurd6
fournment,the Councilalro woc@z.ed that therewa8 un ejournement.De touts 6videnoe,lukm6me n’6taft
no emergenoy.
par oonvainoude oette urgenoe. En aoo6dant6 oette
demanded’ajournemennt,lo Conrail a reooanu de
ran o&6 quola rituation ne r’6trit peaogpreobe.
46. An the Counoil will reoell, the Mlnlrter of Eduoa46. Commaler membrer du Conrail r’sn Kntvtentlon of India, Mr, Chagle, protertod again& thlr
dront, le Mini&e
de l%uoetfon de PIndo, M. Chglr,
adjournment
andhe 11Pfd:
e’eet 610~6 oontre oet afournemenntet a dblrr6
notomment:
*It ruftr the oonvenlenoe
of the representative
of
@Lorepr6rentant du Pakirtm trouve 6 aa oonvePaldrtan to go to Paldrtan for a few days andoome
nanoe de 14 rendre denr ron pay8 pour quelquej
beok.It doer not rult me,After all, if It fr e qti4aMOn
jour~, pub de rermtr,
Or, oelr no me oonrlent
of oonvenfenoe,the oonvenlenoaof both partfor
pa, It mol. Apr68 tout, r’tl r’rgit d’une questton
rhouldbe aonridered.
de oonvenanoe
peraonnelle,11feut tenir oomptede@
pr6fCenoer der deuxpertler
en oeuee.
“Therefore, I rtrongly appo~ any Ngge&fOntbet
*VoilA pourquol je rn’ome Cergiquement 6
thir debaterhould be edjournedfor e rhort time. I
ta& proporition
d’rfournemmpt du prbent &at,
mhme pour MI br6ve p6riode. Je rulr. dtrpor6 6
m reedy to rft here today, tomorrow
md the day
efter tomorrow and oonoludetbeae prooeed@I.”
rlbgor aujourd~htd,domainet rpr&-domain, afin
(109Srd meeting,purur. 10 and11.1
de mottn un term4
A oette &faire.*
[10996mo
ubnoo, pm. 10et 11.1
46. Thereoftar, on a motionby the r6p1~0nktltn of
40. Per la r&e, unr motion ayant 6t6 d6poa6a
Moroooo, the Counolladjournedunder sub-paragraph par le representantdu Meroo, 14Conrell e efourn6
3 of rule 33 of the provisional rule8 of procedure. An
adjournment under this rule la an adjournment s&
g!g.
47. Now the oetenslble reason given by the Foreign
Minister of PaIdstan on 17 Pebrunrv in support of his
request for adjournment w8t-1 to enable b& to have
oonsultntlons with his Government and also to have
more time for refleotlon. We lmew that the real reason
why the Foreign Minister wiehed to return to P&i&an
wab his desire to play host to the Prime Minister and
Porelgn Minister of the People% Republlo of China.
Although this faot was not given out at the time to the

le debat sine die en vertu de l’alin6a 2 de l’nrtlolo
du r6glemmrleur
provisoire.

33

47. Le Mini&e
des nffafres extkleures
du Pakistan
a invoqu6, a l’appul de aa demande d’ajaurnement,
le 17 f&rler,
qu’il voulait oonsulter flon gouvernemerit et nueal avoir plus do temps pour r6fl6ohir.
Ma18 IIOUS snvlons que la rnleon v6rltable de EID
requ6te Btnlt qu’il d6sirait
reoevolr lo Premier
Mini&e
et le Minlstro de8 affalros btrang&es
de
la RQpubllque populnlre do Chine. Ce fait n’a pas,
B 1’6poque, 6t6 port6 h la oonnaiseanoe du Consell,
11

mafr M. Bhutto Pa ruo~nnuouvertement lors d’une
oonf6renoe de presse6 Karaohi. Le Conrail be rap
pellera quo, 18 16 f&rier,
Is Minirtre des affalrer
exttrleurer du Pakistanavait solennellementd6olar6:
(1. . * oe probl6mesrt al diffloile et 11pr6rente pour
nousune lmportanoe81fondamentale
quetouts8autrer
oOneid6ratlons
o&lent le PRSii l’affalre duCaohemlre*
[lOiUbe, shoe, par. 191.Ce Mlnlrtre
de8aBlror
exdrieume du P&Wan pen&t-il. que 10sentretiens
quU all&t avolr we0 sesvlrlteum &&eat plus lmportantr encoreque les dbatr duConrelldedourit
48. We would have homedthat the Seaurity Caunoll 48. Nousaurlons eap6r6 que le Consellde r6durit6
ferait part au Mini&e deu affaires ext6rleuree du
w&d convey itr displeasureto the Fare@ Minister
of Pakistanfor the cavalier fashionin whlohhe was Pakistan de son mbontentement devant une telle
treating the Counoil. He Oalls for 8 meetingof the d6rlnvolture. 1.e Paklatan demandela rdunlon du
Security CamoIl whenever it suits his convenience Consellde e6ourit6 lorsqu~ll le juge bonet sollioite
un afournementpour eatlefalre auxaxi=noea de son
and asks for an adjournmentto suit his owntimepropre emplol dti temps, saris se &o<er de rav&
table without oonslderinfgthe oonv8nienoeeither of
the membersof the Se0urity Counoilor of the Qovern- rl oela oonvient aux autres membresdu Conseilou
au (louvernementde 1’Inde. Malgrd nOsObjsotlons,
mentof India. Despitecur objeotionr, the Counoil,in
le Conrell a Jug6 bon d’aoobder R la demands
du
its wisdom, deoldedto grant the requestof PaklrkR
Pakistanet s’est ajourn6slnedie, Lorequele Mini&e
and adjournedthe meeting sins die. Again, whenthe
8 demand6que
Forsign Mlnlster of Pakirtix
for yet another dee affaires ext6rieures dustan
meet& the majority of the membersof the Counoil le Consell solt oonvoqu6de nouveau,la majorlt6 de8
once more aooommodatod
him in oompletedisregard mrmbrer a dereohef fait droit A sa re@te, saris
tenir Oomptela mains du mondedes v(33uxde mon
of the convenlenoeof my CJovsrnment.
gouvernement.
0. In my lett8r of 8 Maroh 1964ISlSS8‘dl.I already 4% Danema lettre du 8 mars 1964[S/SUS%],
je 00~s
o&eyed -to you, Mr. President; the tiiwr of my ai fait part, Monsieur le YrBeldent, de Popinlonde
Governmeht with regard to the holding of a fmeh
mongouvernementquant6 l’opportunit6d’unenouvelle
oonvcaationdr Conrell. Nousvous avons 6plemsnt
meetlag. We have al60 oonveyedto you in that Istir
the understandingof the Governmentof India of the inform6 der vu01du Qouvernementde 1’Indetouohant
oiroumrtancesin whiohthe Security Counciladjourned. 10solroonstanoerdanslenquellerle Conreil de sbuWe had also vontuwd to e%preesour views that a
rit6 r’6tait ajourn6. Noue avons m6meaffirm6 qu%
further meeting of the Security Counoll 0811
be oon- notre avis Ie Coneell de r6ourit6 ne pouvait 6tre
vunedonly for substantialruaeonowith dueregardfor
reaonvoqu6,
oOmptedtlmant tenu der vceuxdesdeux
the oonvenienoeof the two sldee. No cuoh realona partier, quepour desralronr valabler, Ls reprbrenhave baenfurnishedby the PermanentReprerentatiw
tant permanentdu Pakistanno falt pas (tat de tellss
of Pakistanin hir letter dated4 Maroh 1864[S/S6’?6], raironr dsnssalettre endatedul mars 1964[S/6676].
50. The Foreign Mini&r of P&&stunha8 nowtried
60. Le Minirtre dsr affaires ext6rleurer duPakistan
to Introduos some argument6to justify an urpnt
slafforoe
maintenant de routenlr 6 l’appui de sa
meetingon the groundthat WaOeontheOeare-fire line
demundede oonvocatlond’urgenoe sue la Dalx sot
in Kashmiris threatened.
menao6ele long de la llgne de rurpdnslon htarmer
au Caohemlre.
61. The Camoll will rrmember thst durfngtheperiod 61. Ler membwr du Conrail se rappelleront qua
b8fore Pakistan oalled for the lart meeting of the durant la p6riode qui a pr606d6la dern1Cedemands
Counoil on 18 Yanuary, Pal&tan had taken every
pakirtanalre de oonvooatlon du Conretl, demanda
opportunity of orrating dlffiaultier andbringing about qul date du 16 Janvier, le Pakistannta manqu6auouna
au rtmosphen of oririr in Kahmir, In hlr letter al
oaoarion de fomenter der troubler et de or6er une
1 November 1988.U the wpnsentative of Pakistan atmorph6re de orlre au Caohemlre.Danr sa lettre
had alleg&milltar$ preparationsby India onthe oeasfe
de novembre 18&3A/, le repraeentant du Pakirtan
flro Unr aad dlrturbaimr of the pati ln the ama of falralt (tat do pr6pnratifs militalrer de PInde sur
la llgne de ruapanrton d’armer et dlattelntar 1 la
Cluknot. This Pakistani allsgatlon was invenrtigated
Iw &a Unitsd NaUonrCNrd Mllikrp Obwnrr who plix danr la r6gionde Obaknot.LtObrrrvateur mill6imr to the oonolurion that bdia h~faonoontra~
no
take prtnolprl drr Nation@Unirr r%st llvrd 6 un6
en&ta I or rujet, et il a oonrtati quo l%dr n’avrtt
troops in or in bhr olointty of Cbaknhbut that, on the
ou danr 16senoontrary, Pslcistanttroops hadbeenreinforoed in the pao oonoentr6de troupes B W&n&
area oontrary to the Cearro-flra Agroomant.Aooord- viron8, mais que, pns oontrs, lea troupes pnklstningly, he gavean award of “no vlolatfonnagninstIndia naisosnvnient 6t6renforo6oudnns00Oaoteur,oontrniand an award of Volntion” ngninstPnk1stan.UThus rement h 1’Aooord do suspensiond’nrmO8. 11Onn
ths oomplaintof the PakistanGovernmentwasproved oonoluqu’il n’y nvnit ou “nuounaviolntIon’l de la uurt
to befalse andbaseless.
da I’Inde, mnis qu’il y nvnit Ou1tviointi&119
de In iart
du PakistruQ/. I1 eat don0 ~rouv6 sue In Dlnlntodu
Uouvernomentpaltistannie&nit fuuo’seet &3nubode
tout fondement.

Counail, Mr. Bhutto openly admitted as much at a
prerr oonfersnoe in Karrohl, As thaCounoilwill reoall,
on 18 Febmary, the Foreign Minister of Pakistanhad
solemnly deolared that: n ,, , this problemis so difficult
andsofundamentalbus that all other oonaiderations are supersededwhen it aomeato the q-uestionof
the problsm of Kashmir” [109&d meeting,para, 121.
Did the Foreign Mlal@ter think that dieouurrions
with
ble visitors were even more important than dellberaUono in the Seourity Counoil?

ii Offlclal
llacords
of tbo Sucttrlty
Council,
ElShtconth
Ynar, S+lomom for October,
Novolnbr
ml ~ecornbor
1963, document s/5450.
2/ Ibld., Nln;;Tieentl,
Yew,
Sup+ment
for JsIu’~,
t’ebrkwy
and
~arch4,
document S/m

a

After tit0 ldfou

d tbo last series e
the dat8l) montionsc
Pakistaaa
whioh trio
maso-fire line, I su
tar to make out M)
8eourity Cc4uaoil
me
flrrt fired aoroa
engineeredcertain
II! is normal
in the
BbsOrvBrsabouttba
to our mporte, Pa
Military Obrerver
dety of the perrom
Qroupwho had b b
onthbotherhand,off’
TV theso perronnol
Obrerv8r Team wil
there lnoidantr andI
India whiah is at Ii
Counoil should at
prossumfrom the Q

18. Another
roam
given by the Fore11
Mldrter of Karhml
demandfor the so-t
Ida, The Coundl
main plea of Pskisc
meetlngr in Januam
Forelf@ Mlnlrter i
revolt in Kashmir.
olearly explainedk
rc3-oalledintegratk
tnuvre
on thepart of
that thwe was a na
oaursewasnot at al
you oannotannex a
cannotmakemore 0

64, The Oovernmea
Prerident of tke Cc
emtzoweredta call f
is brne

on tbe

tlmo, WI fed thatT
rpidPearonablyy.
i a
omenad, the eoRv8
tan should got k 1
lwl6n66 of th4 aotn
EQupleeanridrratioa

II. The Ccunail ha
Oonsidorntion
the oo
of PaWstun. Is it t
venienoeshouldalsc
ter of Eduoatlon, M
of India bus appoinl
SeOurlt*y
COunoilells
hlsy now wit11 the bX
meat. Heis also the
Parlloment and, %E
from the Housedul
Pnrllament. It is fox
U1eCoutloil
to defe

69, Aftar the &djournnlent of tbo earnot at the rwt
Qf the lart rrrior of Aneoting~-tbs eaAnoi1 will no&
the dates montionsd bu tho For&n Mlairbr--it wan
Paktrtun
OMO-fim

w&oh
ho,

tried
;%rtn
to o&k
karlen
I mupporo to enable tbo Forol~

6% Aprk krfournomoat du Caarall 6 la Mn dr
la dornibm r6rio de r6unIona- lea mombwr du
Co~oil prondrart note der date6 olt6er par le
Mhtirtro
drr affairer o1~t4rlauror -, o%atlo F&ii&a
tan qul, uno fools enooro$a array6 de pwoquer
deo ten&ma aur la l&no de ruepenrlon d’rrme8
afin, jo ~uppoao,de dfmnner
6 ronmlnlrtreder affairea
axt6rteurer un prbtexts pour demander1a rcprkre
dor d6batsdu Gmsetl. Ce sont lea foroes p&etanatror qul, lea premlbrea, ant ouvert lofouau-de~aua
de la 11 o de ruspenrlond’armeaet ant, de oo fait,
pravoqur oertalnr aooroohagor, Comme11eatd’uango
on paroll ,016, l%de a d6paJ der plalntes auprl
dea obrervateurs mllttalras pour vlolatlonr du
Qesrrsr-la-feu,Dtapr6r nfx Iafmr~atbnr, la Fakiatan
a sppod un rofua au Ckouped’obrervateurr mlllblroe qul domandaltquo rolt garantle
la &writ6

on MO
Minlr-

tar to m&o out aomooaw for e resumptionol the
Ssourltycoluloil meotlng.It wasI?r#rtmforeoa whi&
flrrt flrsd aorola thheseara-flro line and thoraby
englnoonwloortaln olrrher. India lo&gedoomglalnts,
RL k IlOFld ill th0 hVUtll~OOL,
With th6 hffiihar)r
O~MTOP~ &OUt the ooare-flm ~I~lRtioflr. Amid-

to our mportta Pal&tan mleotad a rouuort by the
Military dbaerk OrsUp fir an ~murminOa
if tb0
rrfoty of the ~~monnelof the U&edNatlonr Obrorver
C&au~who hid b be rent ts tho tiosted area, India,
ontheother hrrtd,offeredall faallltloa andoo-operation
ta those perrsnnol, No doubt &o Unitod Nationa
Obrervor Toam will ln duo earm be reporting on
thereladdantr andalro on whetherit WRY
Pakirtan or
Indlr wbloh 18 at fault. There la no reaaouwhythe
Counoil rhould at this atage rubmlt ta thlr klnd of
pwaauaW
from the Qovernmontof Pal&tan,

ds oeux de #a6 arpentr devant 8tro eavcyba danr Ia

region on quo&an. UInde, pour aa part, afaurnl toutoa faollit6r et a offort do pr&ec aeate@noaura
6 OOEagent@.Lo c)roupad~oborvntaurr dsr Natfona
Unler rends%r@omont oompto,
en tamp utile, de
018 knoldantret dlra qul, do 1’Indeou du P&Wan,
on oat rerponrablo. I1 nty a auounort\l.sonpour quo
le Conrell OWO, 6 OS atade, I der prerrimr de
00 genre do la part du Qouvernementpakintanala.

18, AitOthOF roaMi for &heur@ita)Pof thih(s
me&~
&on by the Foreign Mluirtor
ir that the newPrime
Minlrtor of Karhmir, Mq &%diq,bar r6lGrabd the
Lmand for tho so-oalledin&r&ion of Kahsnlr with
India, The Catnot will rom<mberthat thta WII the
main plea of P&t&au for aalltag tho lrrt EePirr Bi
meetings In January 1964.At tbrt time, tho Pakirtanl
Forolgn Mlnlater had alro et&d that thore was a
rev&t in Karhmlr. During the debate, Mr. Cha@a
&early explainedfo tho Counoilthat this ohw@ of
la-oalled lntagratlon waa a mure ppoprgondamanQUVFIon thopert d Pkkhlm, to ormtsths lmprurlon
Lhatthoro wan a now rftuatlon in Ka&mlr whishd
oasrmwasnot at all tnrd. Aahae%plaiadat tba tlmo,
m oannotamiox a thing whlohla already *II,
yuu
oanaotm&&o more Bcsmploto
whatla alreadyoompl6t&

ed the Oov8ramontof India fully rooogaimrthattk
Prarident

rmpowomd

of tko CounallOF sny

member

th6raaf 18

to call for a mooting on my matter whioh

II ~bornoon tho won& d tho Qunoll. At the ram0

$9. Lo Mkilotre dar rF[lrls~ sxt4rl6uror duPaklrtaa
a 6a-alomentall6~6. b 1WxnU de M domandsdo
~n~keatlon dtur&&
du d&nmell,quo 10 noumu
Premlor Mfnlrtre du Caohomlr~, M. L&a. a de
nouveau l ollloM 1’QMgratlonn du Ca~&klre 0.
PIndo. La18mombroa du Oanarll a0 rappolloronO
quo lo Pal&tan avalt orrant~ellementfond6 suc aat
a~6nt
aa demand6de oonvaoatlonde $mvlor 1984
A oette 6~~0, lo MMrtre der affal~ar oxtbieurer
du Faklatan avalt 6galomentd6elar6 qu%aotivolto
wait &Art& au Cachemlre. Au aoura der d6bata,
M. Chagla a olalromeat expliqu6 au Conroil @a
formtiant ootto aaauaatlonde pr6tonduskrt6gratlan
lo Pakirtur IO llvrait rtmplemont I, de la prop&
gmdr
at ohortrhalt I dormer l~lmgrerslan gue la
rltuatlon r’6tait modifi6o au Caohemim, eo qut,
bion entsndu, 6tait abrolumont faux. Comme lo
Mlnirtro ltr oxpllqu6 I lt6pquo, on no paut ann~por
oo qtd vow qipartbnt d6JIg an ne pm& rondm plus
Wmplot oo qul ort d6j6 eomplet.
64, Lo &uvornoment do 1Vndr r-aft
wu r&
~avo qt.16 lo Prdriddsnt olf tout mombre du CaPuell
de r6ourtt6 peut demanderIa oonvooatlaado art organo pour oxuniner
but0 quertion hrorlh 6 m5
wdre du Jwr, mair now ortlmena quooe drolt doit
6tro oxor& fudioiouarmart ot 8ana abus, SW y a
lieu de oenvequorIr Ca~rrll de r&urit4, cru(orrno
IO RF~
mmuslauomontdw VGWSdu Gowwie55. Le @onasll.anonpasunefolamaish
Mix rep&sea
tonu oompto dos voouxpersonnelsdu MInistro des
nffalros 0xt6ri0Um duPakistan,Nosommss-nous
patr

55. The Counoilhas not once, hut twloe, takeninto

aonsldsrntion the oonvanlonoo of tho Foro1g11 Mi~tisbr
of Pakistan. Is it too muoh to oxpeot that our oonvsaienoo should also be taken Into nooolant? The Mfnlster of Eduoatlon, Mr. Chngla, whom the Uoverninent
of India has appointed na its representatfva for the
S3urit.y Ccunoil dleousslons on Kashmir. is oxtremoly
buQy n&v with the budget session of tho &dinn Parlia~

on droit d’nttondro qua l’on tlenno Bgaloment oompta
dos nbtras? Lo Ministro de l’fkluoatioa, N. Chnglu, ’
qua le Gouvornornontde PItide A d&s@8 oomma
QOII reprBsantnnt aux ddbats du Consell de a&ourltB
sur lo Cnohamfre.set notuollemontfort oooup5par

10s ddbnts bud&nires nu Pflrlumont indlen.‘I1 set
BrralomentPrBstdant da la Chnmhrehautedu Purlon%t::t at. h 00 titre, rm peut s’nbs&er AU ooursdo
08s impoptants ddbats du Parlement. Tslle est lo
mlson pour lnquoila nous avons domnnd6
AU Conseil

meat.He is also the Leaderof the UPPWHouseof tha
Parllnmont and, BRsuoh, ho onnnt% nbsenthimself
from the Houseduring this trnpo&u~t sess1011 of the
Pnrliament. It Is for this roasonthat we had request4
b Counoll to dofor tha oonsldorntlon of thki oaso

13

flu eh begimg d M~Jteea,whraehadgtte805att
d our ParIiament16e%peoeed
to en’i If theremm in
faot a ERF~W rtturtion.

or if them

&velopxiient~ in whioh immediate
Counoil

would

haps

had Been Earn6
inlewbntion
* th6

been h6lDfW. that we&d k mother

matter. This, howevert

is n&

tke QUO.

18. Furthermore,
no conEtruotive
diEouEslon~
on
Karhmir
or any of the other attrtandhg
problemr
oan
be expeoted
unlerr
and until the P6ki~tan Ctovernmsnt
rtopl the pmrent
p6rreoution
of it6 mlnoritie6,
Memb6rE of the Saouritu Ccunoll
6~ evan now witnos~lrrp
the large exodur
of -minorities
from Ea6t Paki~t n l&
India. It is only with tbe flight, thir time, of the Christian mlnoritie6
of Eart P&irtan
that the Wertern
eountrire
are now beooming awam of the trcmedu that
la being enaoted there, A r&n
of temer for %he-minorit1er ha6 be6n let loom in East Pakiotan whloh the
Qovwnment
of Pakirtut is either unable or unwilling
to oontwl, Aotr of vio16nr+6, deprivation
of property,
arraultr
on women,
eto,, have bsoome
the order of the
day in EaEt PaWEton.
Thor6 16 a daily influx of ovur
S,OOO-I
Fepeat, over 9,000~mfuge06
who are fleeing
Pakirtun
b6oauEe
of oalaulatsd
perseoution
and oontinuod
ln6rouritv
a6 renardr their life and urocertv.
Thin, of oourw; ir not-a matter before thd catnoii,
We reaIlPe that, but In&a 11 fawd with the prospeot
of hundmd6
and thourandr
of mfugesr pourlag into
India from EaEt P&iEtan,
Already etwr 116,000
mfugaer
have arriv6d
in India, Nearly
9S,OOO people
ham
fled from
one neighbouring
distriot
of Eart
Pald~tan
alone,
and of there akut 40,000am ChrirUanr. The Government
and peopl.6 of India am direotiw
their m6ourm
and ener&Ei
toward6
meeting thli
tremendour
human
problem
and are
undertaking
rnaaww
for mbabilitation
and reEettlrm6nt
of this
unfortunate
peoplr
fleeing
from perreoution
by PakiEt&n. My Qovernmrnt
believer
that firrt
thinp
mu&
oomo
fir& The dimension6
of thir
problem
am
arruming
more
and mom
Etaggering
prep&ion6
rvery
day and am a 6ouroe
of grape ooneern
to my
Qcvernmsnt.
The Government
si Pakistan
doer not
worn to k oonoerned
with this human problsm,
but
with
a oynioal
dirmgard for the 6uffering
of it6
minsritier,
I6 more lntemrted
in diverrionarytaotio6
and in agttating
the Kashmir
16ru6. We, on our part,
hare
already
twioe made pfoporelr
to the Pakirtan
Government
for taokling
the problem
by joint dircurrlonr
at the level of MiniEkE
for Homo Affalrr
but that proper&l har ken
turned down.

69,
that

My tbmrnment
oww it to its&f rad toitr peep10
it rhould
do Ml
jurtlae
to it6 rsprerentation
in

the Seourlty Cam011 on thls Important qua&fan, whloh
la bound up wlth the unity, territorial
integrity and
aoverelgnty of India, against whioh Pakletan ha8 oommitted aggresolon. The muln preoooupatlon should be
to make a oonetruotlve oontribution towards the settlement of this question. For this purpnae, nnd slnoo no
oonstruotive
nclvanoe is posslbla without the oooperation of both gldeo, it is neopsoary that India also
should be represented by the Minister who hns beon
epeoially deslgnnted by my aovernment to deal with
this iesue. It lo relevant to point out that Palcistnn Is
represented
by ita Minister
of Forolgn Affairs. In
ease the Seourlty Counoil wishes to make n oonstruo-

da renvoyer
l&amen
do o&to
auestion au d&nit
ds mai 1664, date 11 laquelle
doivkt
prendre fin Ier
d6batE budtz6taire6 du Parlement.
81 la situation
E%tait
r6ellrmanfaggrav4e
ou 6‘11 r%Wt prodult de6 ~V&VJmentr
n6eerEitant
MO
intervention
lmm6dlate
du
ConEelI,
la question
reralt
diff6mnts.
Ma16 ta1 ntsrt
par 10 068.
16. En cutre,
on ne peut eqdrer
entamer
de dlsourslon
oonrtruotlve
6ur
lo Caohemire
ou sur l’un
qusloonqua
de6 autres
problhmes
en 6u6pen6 tant quo
10 Bsuvernement
pakistanair
n’aura
par mis fin au6
parE6outlonE
dont
sent
aotuellement
vIotlme6
lem
minorit
Want 6ur ran terrltolre.
Las membreo
du Conreil
de 66ourit6
ravent
qu’il y a aujourd’hui
enoor6 un exode masslf de6 minorlt66 du Pakistan
oriental
ver6
l’Ind6,
C’ert
seulement
paroe
que,
oette fois,
de6 mlnorit66
ohr6tiennos
no Eont enfuiea
du Paklotan oriental que lee pay6 oooldentaux
ont
prir
oonroienoe
de la tragkiie
qui 66 d6roule
danr
oette
rbgioe.
Lea mlnorit66
du PaW6tan
oriental
vivent
dans un olimat
de terreur
qua la Qouverne-

ment paklstanals ne peut par ou ne veut pas dlseipsr. Leo aotes de vlolenoe, lee spollatione, Ies
agreseions oontre 160 femme6 rant devenus monnaie
oour6nte
au Pakistan
oriental.
Chaque
Jour arrivent
plur
de 8 000 r6fusi6r - fe din bienr ~1~6 de 9 000
i6fugi66
- qui fuieire 16 P&&tan
pour ‘4ohappar
aux
psrsQoution6 d6liWr6es
et P l’in66ourlt6
oonrtante
$i
menaoent
leur vie et leurr
bienr.
Evidemment,
10 Consell
n’ert
par sairi
de oette quertion.
Nour
10 Eavan6,
ma16 l%de
dolt 6e pr6parer
k aooueiIl1r
6u.r ron terrltolre
de6 oentalner
et de6 millier6
de
r6fugi66
venant
du PakiEtan
oriental.
D6jk,
plus de
126 OUO r6fugi66
aont
arriv6r en Inde. Prbs de

71000 personnes Ed Eont enfuler d’un dlstrlot voi6in
du Paklkan oriental,
et parmi
elles on oompte
environ
40 000 ohr6tienr.
Le puvernement
et le pup18
de 1’Iade mobiliE6nt
leurr
rw~ouroe6 et leurr 6nergisd pour faire faoe 1. oet immen6e
problbme
humain
et prennent
de6 merurer
en we de reolrrssr
et da
r6inrtdler
oe6 malhsureux
qui fuisnt
Is6 perE4outionr
dont ilr sont Itobjst
au Paklrtan.
Man gouvernement
ertime
qu’il
faut parer
au plus preE66,
Co problbme
prend
de6 prcportlanr
ohauue
lour
plur ‘ inqul6tdr
rt oonrtiiua
I pour
mon g&ve&
m&t une aouroe de prawn
inqui6tuder.
Le Qouvernemene
palcirtanais
ni ramble
&bre
aten rouoler et,
avao un m6priE
oynique
pour
106 Eouffratloer
dsr
minorit6s
qui vivsnt
our non territolre,
il pr6fbre
maourir
B la diverrlon
brandlr
10 problbme
du
Caohemire.
PO notre o&6, nous avon6 B deux reprlEs6
prop066
au Gouv6rnEmEnt
pakistanair
dtsEEayar
de
rdroudre 06 problbme
au moysn dtsntretienr
bilat&
rauv antre nor minirtrer
de l’int6rirur,
mair no6
properltionnr
ont 6U rrjEt6e6,

et

67. Mon gouvernement
de 68 faire
repr6aentsr

60 dolt,

et ildoltR

son peuple,

clans ler meilleur6r
oonditlons au Consell de sdourW.3 pendant ies d6bnts
oonsnorbs (1 oette Import&e
question dent dQxx&xlt
l’unlt&, l’int6grit6
territoriale
et la souvernlnet6
de FInde, mises en dnngor par le PaIcI&ui. Nous
devons avolr pour pr6oooupution essentlello de oontribuer
de fagon oonstruotive
nu rQgloment de ootte
question. A oette fin, et oomme auoun progr8o v&itable n’est poseible Rana la ooopkation des deuxpnrties, 11 Importe qua 1’Indo soit, ellenu~sl, ropr6sont6e
par le Ministre sp6oinlement dQaign6 par aon gouvornemont pour EI’OOOU~OP
do ootte quo&Ion. I1 oonvlont
de noter que le Palclstan eat reprt3sent6 par ~011
minletre des affalres extkieuree.
Si le Conee!i de

uve advanw, it
pate in the dirfn
any propoEaI6
a
I have Etated
eax
urgent
meeting
Them
16 no U~LF
view. IformaIlv:

toa&urntoa&

TM6 lr a q
eounoil will aoa
68.

Mtnirkr

of Pak

our aonvwMwo
with

u6 In thir

rt

16. Mr. HAJEB
Frenoh):
My de1
rtatementr
by 1
P&&tan
and by
80. We deedv
r
Elnoe the &ur
1564 to adlourn
progrerrr
his bet
of thore
two grc
61, May I plnt
that adjournmen
Counoll
rtated the
ment6,
poEltionE
wish to me the 6
oountrier
find 60
62

The

role

of

ventured to obrc
faoillkte

the

fin

for both partier

1
we feel that all U
tion of the dirpr
bn oonduotsd,
No

vonduotlng

the (

r6preE6ntrtiveE
in them.
That is
of the Chart6r,
Chapter
VI PI a
rettlement
Oz dir

69. It was for
partioipation
Counoiltr

of I
dirour

Minirkr

of P&d
d II

mrnt of tbs debt
the Minirtar
WW~*toQOXX

c.*

Today
delegation

the pc
whioh

the Counoil’s dlt
and Pakistan; on
tion whloh ii3 no
hut whioh says t
date,

66. In these olrm
one eolutlon to th
desire to oontribl
oondltione oondu
together. Conseql

uva advanoo, it nbould anable aw Mlnietar topartinlprta in the dWurdonr of the Camail and to oondder
any proporals or MggWiOM
that may ooma up. A0
I h&vu bated earllor, there WPI nolllrtlffoatioafor
M
urgent meetlagof the Laurlty Carnal1in February,
There lr no urQenoyfor a mOOtIt@ noweither. In tblhlr
HOW, I formdly requert that the coull011
k guoclenough
to adjournto any day in the flrrt weekof May lD64.
68. Thlr 1sa very reasonablerequest, andI hopethe
couaoil will aooedeto It. I alsohopethat thhsForelen
Mlnlrter
of Paid&n will give roxie ooarlderrtlon~
our oonv8alenoe
andwill flnd It porrlblo to w-operate
with
ua In thlr rospeot,
68. Mr. HAJEK (Caeot.oslovakla)(tranrlated from
Frenoh): My delegationha6 ll~~ned OarOhlly to the
rtakmeatr by the Minlrter
of Fore@ Affalrr of
Pakistanandby the Ambarrador of ladta.
80, We deeplyregret that although&month
ha6parred
tlnoe the Smurlty Counolldeoldedon 17 Febxwrv
lW4 to adjourntlie oonrlderatlonof thlr question,nb
prqrerr hasbeenmadetowardr brlngingthepo~ltlonr
of thore two great onuntrlor of Ada olorer together.
81. M&y I point out that in the debate whlohpreoeded
that adjournmentall the memberr of tho Seourity
Ccuaoll&atadthqporltlonr o! their re~peotlvaOovernmanta, porltlonr whlohwere apparentlylnrplrsd by a
wirh to geetho Qov8rnmentrof thore two great Ad&a
countrlor find somecommonground
62 The role of the SecurityCounall,II mydolegatlon
ventured Zo obrorve on that oooaslon,oanonly be to
faollltak the flndtng of ruoh a pathta undorrtandlng
for both partion wnoemd, andIt ir onthlr bar16that
WI feel that all the Counnli’r dllrourrlonr ontho quortlon of the dleputebetwoonIadla andPaklatanshould
beoonduoted,Now,oneof the orreatlal aondltlonrfor
oonduotlngthe dlrourrlonr
In thlr manner ir that
nproronfitlwr of both oountrlor rhould partloipak
In them. That LI In line with Artiolo 58, parapraph 1,
of the Charter, and, furthermore, with ‘the ipl?lt oi
ChapterVI aI a wholo, wbloh doalr with the paolfio
rettlomentof dlrputer.

dourit vat l bouMr Ade8rdrultak vraimait oawtzuotlfh 11dolt permottm A notre minl~tm de partlolper aux d6ktr du Co~oll et d%xaminor t~utes
proporltlotu ou rugtgeatlanrqui pourraleat 6tro prb
ranthoa. Cormno fo IW d4fA dblrs6, rlan no justlflalt Ia convooatlcn d’ur
oe du Cone011
do rQourlt4
en f6vrior. Rlea no juar lo eel10d’aujourd’hul.Dono
011 oeadltlonr, je demandsformollomontau Canroll
da bienvouloir suependreseatravaux fuequ’Aun jour
de la proml6re romainedo mal 1964.
18. J’erpWa que le Conrell voudra blen aao6dor
A ootte roqu6to tout A falt ralronnable. J’ospbre
6galomontquo 1s Mlnlrtm der affaires ext6rlourer
du Paklrtm voudrr blon tonlr oomptede nor v(~sux
et Iera en melure de owp6rer aveo now A oot bprd.
1% M. HAJEK (Tohborlovaqule): Ma d616gation
a 6oout6aveo attention le dlsoours du Mlnlstre doa
affalrer oxt6rlouros du P&l&an alnml quo oelul
do llambarradourdo PIndo.
60. Nour regretton
profond6tiont
qua, alors qu’un
mols #e&t 600~16ciopulclla d6airlon du Conrell de
s6ourlt6 du 17 f6vrler 19134
d’ajourner l’examen do
oette question,auounprogr6en’alt 6t6 aooomplipour
rapprooher lee porltloar do 008 deux grand6 pays
d’Aalo.
61. Pormettec-mol de rappelor que, danr lo d6bat
qul a p&&6 sot ajournomont,tour ler mombror
du Conreil do r6ourlt6 ont exprlm6 la podtion do
lourr gouvernomontrrorpeotilr,
porltlon qul parairralt 6tre lnrplr6o par lo d6rlr do volr lea gouvernemonk do oe& doux grandr payo d’Aolo trouvor un
terrain d’entento.
61. Lo r&o du Conrell do aBourlt6, oommema d61&
gatlon &o6t parml~ de lo faire observer A ootto
oeoaaion,no peut otmolrtsr qu’A faollltar la reoheroho
d%notelle vole d’antonto aux dew nartlor InUrea&OS, rt O’olt d&m 00 aelm-U quY1‘nouspBr8l-kquo
touter 10s d6llbbarrttonrdu Conroll wr la auovtlon
du dlff6rond entre 1’Inde ot la Pakirtan d&Wart
6tre oandulkr. Or, unodor oardltlonr lndirpanrablor
d%inetelle oondultedor d6llb6rrtlonr ort Ia partloipation der repr6rontmlr dor dour payn Aooller-01.
Cela oorrorpand au paragraphe 1 do I~Artlolo 89
do la Charte, et dtalllours A l’eaprlt du Chapltre VI
ks&srztii
qul 8 trait au r6glomont paofflquo doa

89. It wer for that realon, Lo., ta fcoilitato the
partlolpatlon of both partler b the #amoextent in tho
Counoll’r dleouIstonlr that weagreedto the adjou!?nmrnt of the debato. on 17 Februarv 1864. rlnno the
Mlnlrter oi P&&in
eoarldekd itbdra~l~,
th h
th8 MM8ter of India ftrmly opped itr raylng that
‘Y 8
W&Iready to aontinuethe dobateto the on&

63, C’ort pour oetto ralron, otert-A-dim pour faollltor la paitlolpatlon dor dot& prrtlor, dani la m6mo
meauro, aux d6llWratlonr du Conroll QUOnow avon8
aooopt6;lo 17 f6vrior 1984, l~ajounoinontdu d6bat,
6tant donn6quo lo Mlnlrtre du Pakirtan lo c%xWd6rrit d6rtribIo, Wan qur lo MMsts% do PSndbry
fdt q&w6 rbrolummt, an se d6olrrtmt pr6t h pawrulvre lo d&t furqiYru ho&,

c Today the poeltlon
la different: it ia the Pakistan
doiegnlicn whfoh deslros an immedlato resumption of
the Counoll’s dlsouasion on the dispute between India
and Pnklstan; on the other hand, it is the Indian delegntlon whloh ia not in n positlon to take port at preeent
but whloh says that it is prepnred to do so at a later
dato.

64. Aujourd’hui,
la situntlon ost dIff6ronte: o’es!
la d6lBKation du Pnkietnn qul d&Ire la reprlse lmm6dinte aes dblibbratlons
ciu Conaefl cur ie diff6rend
qul sepnre llInde et la Paklstnn; pnr oontre, o’eet
la d616gatlon de 1’Inde qui n’est pas en position d’y
prendre pnrt aotuollement,
mais qui pq dbolare dispoe6e f~ le fnire n ulle date ult8rleure.

86. In these olroumetnnoee, my delogatlon seee only
one solution to the problem. It bnaes Its poeitlon on its
desire to oontrlbute to the beat of ito ability to oreatlng
condltlone oonduoive to bringing both aides closer
together, Consequently. It foole that the Council abculd

06. Devant une telle situatlon, mn d6ldgation ne volt
cpQune aolutlon nu problbme. Elle fondo en position
SW aon d6sir de oontrihuer do oon mleux 11order
doe oondltfons fnvornblea nu rapprochement
dea
deux partlea. A 801: nvia, pnr oon&quent, le Consell

8

lolt prendre une d6oielon aur la date de reprise
le ses dQllbbratlons sur le dlffbrend entre 1’Inde
rt le Pakistan.
36. L’ambassadeurde 1’Indea dlt quesa delegation
murrait partloiper B oe d&bat dans la premlAre
lemalne de ma11964.Alnsl, 11nous semblequele
Zonseil est en mesurede fixer unedate pr6olsepour
lette reprise et ma d616gatlonpropose, oonform&
Pent B l’alln6a p de l’artlole 33 du rbglementin&
rleur provlsolre, d’ajourner le debat B un Jour
~6termin6,8 savolr le 6 ma1de oette annhe.
67. Le PRESIDENT(tradult de l’anglals): Le rep&
sentant de la Toh6ooslovaqulea propos6 clue le
d&bat du Consell sur oette- question soit ajourn6
au 6 ma1 1964. ConformBmenta l’artlole 33 du
rbglementlnterleur, Je dole oonsulter lee membres

take a deoirlon on the date of the resumptionof Its
dlrourrion on the dlrpute betweenIndta andPakistan.
66. The IndianAmbaesadorhassaidthat hlr delegation would be able to partlolpate in the debatein the
first weekof May 1964.Weaooordlnglyoonslderthat
the Counollin in a posltlontoflxan exaot datefor that
resumption, and my delegationproposes,under rule
33, sub-paragraph3 of the provisional rules of procadure, that the debatebe adjournedto a oertaln day,
namely6 May 1964.
67. The PRESIDENT:The representativeof Czeohoslovakla has proposed that the Seourlty Council’s
dlsousdon of this item shouldt? adjourneduntil 6
May 1964.I believe that underrule 33,I shouldoonsult
membersof the Counoll on the question-f adjournment,
68. Mr. BERNARDES(Brazil): We have neard the
statementof the Foreign Minister of Paklk.*qn.That
statement dealt with the substanoeof the Kaslmlr
question,The representutlve of India, however, has
informedthe Councilthat he is unabletoengaget dday
in a debateon the merits of the ease,andhas luggestedthat the Counoilshouldadjournits oonsldera1
.on
of this important issue until sometime in May, The
representative of Czeohoslovakiahas madea formaI
proposalto that effeot.

iu Consell a oe sujet,

66. M. BERNARDES(BrBsll) [tradult de l’anglals]:
Nous avons entendula d6olaratlon du Mlnlstre dee
zffalres extbrleures du Pakistan. Cette dbolaratlcn
portalt sur le fondde la questiondu Caohemlre.Male
Le reDr6eentantde PInde a fait savolr au Consell
qu’ll -1~1Btalt impossiblede s’engageraujourd’hul
dansun debat s.ur le fond de l’affalre et 11a sugg6r6
que le Conaell ajourne Vexamende oette quGitlon
importante au mois de m.al. Le representantde la
Toh6ooslovaqulea pr6sent6unepropositionformolle
dansoe sens.
69. Blen entendu, le Consell de s6ourlt6 dolt se
69. Of oo&se, the Seourlty Counollwill have to take
a deolsionon the proposalmadeby the representative prononoer sur la propositiondu representantde la
et mad614gatlon
eat pr&e Bprendre
of Czeohorlovakla,andmy delegationwill beprepared Toh6oodlovaqule,
to take a positionon that proposal,But the Camoll~s position B oet Bgard. J’estlme, toutefols, que le
deoislonshould,I think, be arrived at after very sober Consellne devralt prendre de d6olslonqu’aprbsavolr
s6rleusementr6fl6ohl a la question.Un ajournement
and mature oonelderatlon, An adjournmentfor six
weeksor more may have a bearing on the eltuatlonin
de six semalnesou plus pourralt avolr des rbperKashmir. I am sure that all the members of the
ouselonasur la situationau Caohemlre.Je au18oerCouncil will wish to do everything in their powerto
taln que tous les membres du Consell entendent
n’epargnerauoun effort pour attbnuer la gravetension
alleviate the serious state of affairs nowprevailing
in the area.
qut rbgneaotuellementdansoette rbglon.
70. It is in that spirit that I am encouragedto appeal 70. C’est dansoet esprit queje mepermeted’adresto the representativesof India andCzechoslovakiato
ser un appel aux representantsde 1’Indeet de la
TohBooelovaqule
pour leur demanderde se oontenter
oonsideraooeptlngat the momenta ourpensionof the
debate for two days, in order that the Councilmay pour le moment d’une suspenelonde deux jours,
oonrlder the proporal for a relatively long adjournafln que le Consell pulsse examiner, oomptetenu
ment In the light of the present olroumstanoesand des olroonetanoesaotuellea et des Bvenementsau
the developmentsin Karhmlr itself.
Caohemlre, la motion tendant B ajourner le d&bat
pour unep&lode relatlvement longue.
71. If my ruggeotionlo aooepted,I would propoee 71. 91ma suggestionrenoontre l’agr6mentdead&16that the Council shouldreoonveneto deal with thlr
gatlons, je propoee que le Consell 88 r&mlsee
problem on Friday, 20 Maroh, at 3 o’olook in the B nouveau pour examiner 08 problbmele vendredl
afternoon,
20 mara B 15heures.
72. The PRESIDENT:The reprerentatlve of Brazil,
72. Le PRESIDENT(tradult de l’anglale): 81j*al blen
if I understandhim oorreotly, has not at thir stage oomprls, le reprbsentantdu Br&eil ne proposepas
formally movedto amendtheproposalmadeprevlourly
formel.lement,pour le moment,de modifier la proposition qul vlent d’&re falte par le reprbeentant
by the reprosentatlveof Czechoslovakia.
de la TohBcoslovaqule.
73. M. FEDORENKO (Union des R6pubIiqueb socia73. Mr. FEDOl1ENKO (Union of Soti& So&list
Ropubllos)(translatedfrom Russian):In thestatement llstee sovl6tlquee) [tradult du russe]: En Bcoutant
M. Bhutto, le mlnlstre des affulres Btrnn@res du
we have just heardby tha Ministar of Foreign Affair’s
of Pakistan, Mr. Bhutto, wt~have once again been
Pakistan, nou8 avons de nouveau entendu un expos6
d&n1116 des VUBB de son gouvernement nu sujet du
given
a detailed aooount of- his Government’s views
on the disputebetweenPsklatanandIndia.
differend entre 1’Indc et le Paklstnn.
74.

The Council hos aleo heard the Tepresentatlve

of

India, Mr. Chukravarty, whoaskedtlint thedlscusslon
of the question we nre considering
for some tlmo.

c+hould he adjourned
,,),
,,

I’

74. Le Cons011 a entendu bgnlement M. Chnkravnrty,
le reprBse;itnnt de l’lnde, qul voudrnlt volr dlfferer
quelque peu l’examen de cetb question.

Tl(i,,‘.,,l,,,**..

I),.‘,

I’

The Sovle
Cow1011
in thl
February 1964
Pakistan.it wl
the dls&sslon
enablehim. Mr
Government.T’
modatedPaklst
It is alsonotew
India, Mr. Cha
oonslderthe 01
and opposedar
time: he said 1
76.

was ready

to c

urlty Counoll1

of the disputeb

76. Now, it 1
adjourn the dll
the letter from
it is statedlnte
vene the Co=
to the oonvenle
party, namely,
the letter in gu
India will be u.
way in any me
the ourrent but
whlohis expeob
77. Conseque
into aooount the
just as it did be

70. In our vie
India’s request
Indo-Pakistand

79. The Soviet
tar.9 of the Sea
equallyfair to 1
will meet the In
also
the

adopt

the

representa
Flepubllo,Mr. H

80. Mr. HAJE
French): Slnoe
Mr. Bernardes
takinginto a000
delegationin se
bore of ths Cou
is WllIlng to 0’
althoughwe 00;
submitted
3 of the

in ac

provI

hmnedlately COI
31. It is my un~
inn representat

ndjournmentthe
Proposalwhich
thevote on it wl

82. Mr. CIIAIC
request for an
grnteful. I to 1 1\9y
has hem good (

71. A oe propos, la dhl&atlon sovl&lque se permet
de rappeler qu’fi la s6anoedu Consellde s&ourlt&
du 17 fbvrier 1964le Mlnistre des affairee Btrangbres du Pakistanavalt, oommeon Ie salt, demand6
au Consell de dlfftWr I’examen de.la questiondu
Caohemlre afln de lul permettre de oonsulter son
gouvernement.Le Consell a fait drolt B la demande
du Pakistan et n accept6de retarder la dlsousslon.
11y a lieu de remarquer Bgalementquele Mlnlstre
de I’bduoatlonnationalede PInde, M. Chagla, avalt
alors soullgn6 la n6oessltede tenlr oomptede oe
qul oonvenait le mleux auxdew parties lnt6ress6es,
et qu’ll avalt prls positionoontre un ajournementde
quelquesJours.11avalt deolar6qu’entant querepr&
sentantde 1’Inde11etait pr& Bpoureulvrela dlsoueslon
au Consell, afln d*enterminer aveo l’examendu dlff&rendexlstant entre 1’Indeet le Pakistan.
16. Now, it is India’b turn to ask the Counollto
76. Aujourd’hul, o’est l’lnde qui, &Ieontour,demande
adjourn the discussionon the Kashmir question.In
au Consell de dlfferer le debat sur la questiondu
the letter from the representativeof India [S/5662], Caohemlre.Dana la lettre du reprbeentantpermanent
it is statedinter alla that if it is neoessarytc reoonde 1’Inde (S/6662], 11 eat dlt notammentque, el Ie
vene the Co~noll,this shouldbe donewith dueregard Consell dolt &re oonvoquet2nouveau,11faut ddment
to the oonvenlenoeof both parties andnot of only one reoheroher al oela oonvlent aux deux parties, et pas
party, namely, Pakistanin this ease.At thesametime
eeulementB l’une d’ellee, le Pakistan en l’ooourthe letter in questionexplainsthat the Governmentof
renoe. En m8metempa, on lndlquedane oette lettre
India will be unableto partioipate in an appropriate que le Qouvarnementlndienne pourra pa8partlolper
way in any meetingsof the Ccunollbefore the endof
oomme il oonvient aux r&unionsdu Consell avant
the current budget sessionof the IndianParliament, la fln de la sessionbudg&alre du Parlementindlen,
whichis expeotedto endby the beglnnlngofMay next,
laquelledevralt @aoheverau debut du mofsde mal.
17. Consequently,we feel that the Counoilmusttake
17. Par oons6quent,II notre avle, le ConeelI ne
Into aooountthe request by the Qovernmentof India
sauralt faire autrement que de prendre en ooneldb
just as it did before in the oaseof Pakistan’srequest, ration Ia demandedu Gouvernementlndlenet d’agir
oomme11l’a fait p&o&demmenten oe qul oonoerne
lea souhaltsexprlmbepar le Pakistan.
13, In our view, lt wouldbe logloal andfair to meet 73. Nous pensonsqu’ll eeralt logique et Bqultable
India’s request and postponethe oonslderatlonof the de donner eatisfaotlon B la demandede llnde et
Indo-Pakistandisputeuntil the beginningof May.
de retarder l’examen du dlffdrend entre l’fnde et
le Pakistanjusqu’audebutdu mols de mal.
19. The Sovietdelegationis confidentthat the mem- 79. La d616gatlonsovl&ique eat oonvalnoueque lee
bersof the Security Counoll~111hedulyobjeotlve and membreedu Consell de s6ourlt6 feront preuve de
equallyfair to both sldeo, IndiaandPakistan,that they l’objeotivlt8 voulue, qullle prendront une attitude
will meetthe Indian representative’srequestandwill
BqultableB l’&gard dee dew partlee, l’lnde et Ie
also adopt the proposalwhlohhasjust beenmadeby
Pakistan, et qu’lle feront drolt au d&sir exprlmb
the repreeentatlve of the Czeohoslovak Socialist par le representantde PInde, de m&mequ’llr aooep
Republlo,Mr. IiAjek.
ieront la proposition qul vlent d’Btre d&por&epar
M. HAjek, le reprbsentantde Ia R9publiqueroolallste
toh6ooeIovaque.
80. Mr. HAJEK (Cceohoslovakia)(translated from
80. M. HAJEK (‘L’oh&oorlovaqule):
Commemonami
Frenoh): Slnoemy friend, the Ambaeradorof Brazil,
ltambarsadeurdu Brbsll, M. Bernardee, m’a adrem
Mr. Bernardee,has appealedto me, my delegation- un appel, mn dbI6gatlon- prenant en oonrld&ratlon
Wng into aoocuntthe goodintentionsof theBrazlllan
les bonnesintentionsde la dblkatlon du BrOell en
delegationin reekingto faollltate for the other mem- vu8 de faolllter aux autree membrer du Coneell
krr of tha Counoilthe oonriderationofthlrrquemtlon- ltexamen de oette quertlon - veut bien sootier P
1s wllLing to oomply with the Brazilian ruggertion, la ruggertlon brBslllenne, blen que nouaertlmlonr
althoughwe oonrider that our proposal,havingbeen que, ayant &6 p &sent&eoonform9mentaux termer
submittedIn aooordanoe
with rule 33, sub-paragraph de l’alln9a 0 de l’artlole 33, notre propositionde3 of the provlslonal rules of procedure, shouldbe vrnlt Otre lmm&dlatement exam!n&3 et faire l’objet
lmmedintelyoonslderedandput to a vote.
d’unvote.
81. It is my understanding,in agreeingto theBrnzll81. En dormantmanncoordh In suggestiondurepr&,
Inn representative’s suggestion,that even after this
sentnnt du BrBsil, je crols oomprendre que, m&ne
adjournmentthe discussionwlll deal only with the upr& oet ajournement, la discussion ne portern qua
proposalwhich my delegationhasjust mnde,andthat
sur la proposition que vlent de faire ma d616gatlon
thevote on it will take place at the next meeting.
et que le vote sur ootte derniOre nura lieu B la

76, The Soviet delegation would l+emlnd the Seourlty
Counoll in this oonnexion that at its meeting on 17
F&nYIUy 1964, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Pakistan, it will be recalled, requested it to postpone
the dlsousslon of the Kaehmlr question in order to
enable him, Mr. Bhutto, to have oonsultatlons wlthhle
Government. The Security Council, as we know, aocommodated
Paklstan 8nd agreed to adjourn the dlaoueslon.
It 1s also noteworthy that the Minister of Eduoatlon of
India, Mr. Chagla, at that time stressedthe needto
considerthe oonvenlenoeof both parties oonoerned,
and opposedan adjournmentof the debatefor a short
time; he said that as the representative of India he
wasready to oontlnueattendingmeetingsof the Seaurlty Counollin order to completethe oonslderatlon
cf the disputebetweenIndia andPakistan.

82. Mr. CIIAKRAVARTY (India):

I have mademy
Wcpest
for an adjournment until May. I am most
gl’ateftll.,tot WY colleague from Czechoslovakia who
has been good enough to make a formal proposal on

proohaine Oh~iC6.
4?2: <OZ. WiAKFlAVARTY
(Inde) [tmdult de l’anglnls]:
J’ai demand6
que le Consells’njourneaumolsdemap.
Je suis trbs reoonnnlssant 8. mon colNgue de In
TohQcoslovaqule
d’avol r blen voulu prBaenter
une

that basis. The date that he has suggested, 6 May, will
be oonvenient for my Government. As regards the other
adjournment,
the short adjournment,
it 1s for the
Counoil to decide. But I should like to make it olear
that that short adjournment does not meet my requirements,
83. The PRESIDENT: If I understand the situation
oarreotly, the representative
of Czeohoslovakla has
aocepted the suggestion made by the representative
of Brazil subject to one condition, and that is that
when the Council reconvenas, the Council will prooeed to vote on the proposal to adjourn until 5 May.
If that is the oorreot understanding,
I should like to
oonsult the wishes of the members of the Council as
to whether that oondltion is aooeptable to them.
84. We are on a point of procedure, anti I oall on the
Foreign Minister of Pakistan.
86. Mr. BHUTTO (Pakistan): The suggestionmadeby
the representative
of Brazil, as understood by my
delegation, le that a ehort period is required for the
Csunoll to ooneider whether, in ,viow of the rapidly
deteriorating
situation in the subcontinent and the
uneasy cease-fire line, as well as the heavy exohange
of fire that has taken place in the reoent past, it
would be appropriate
and oorreot for the Counoil to
have a long adjournment or a short one. It is not aCLr
understanding
that a decision will be taken to have a
long adjournment, but rather that time is requiredfor
the members of the Counoil to hold oonsultations and,
in the light of suoh oonsultations, to determine whether
there should be a short adjournment or a long one.
66. Mr. BERNARDES (Brazil): I think that my suggestion was quite clear, A proposal has been made to
adjourn until 6 May. The proposal wus made under
rule 33, sub-paragraph
3, of the provisional rules of
procedure. The last paragraph of that rule reads: “Any
motion for the suspension or for the simple ad,. rnn
ment of the meeting shall be decided wlthout deL
This paragraph relates to sub-paragraphs
1 and 2 bf
the rule, Therefore, there should be a discussion In
this instance, and a dlscussion is actually takiugplace
now,
87. My euggestlon was that we should adjourn this
dfsouesion for two days in order to ponder the sltuation in the llght of the considerations which I put forward, and to reoonvene on Friday, 20 Maroh, to
disouss the matter and adopt a deoislon on the proposal
to adjourn until 5 May. Thus, as I understand It, the
first Item on our agenda on Friday, 20 March would
be the oonolurlon of the Counollts oonsideration of the

proporal made by the representative of Ceeehoalovakia.

88. The PRESIDENT: As1 Just stntsd, the nppenl made
by the representative
of Brnzil has been accepted on
the understanding thnt, at its next meeting, the Council
will declcle the next step which it is to take.
89. If there ia no objection, 1 ohnll adjourn this
meeting until * ‘?y, 20 March, nt 3 p.m., at which
time the Count
.lI proceed at once with IL dlscussion,
if neccssnry, to decide whether to resume consideration of this item.
?%e meeting

Lltho

In IJ.N.

raw

at 5.5 p.m.

propositlon
formella dans oe aens. La date qu’il a
euggeree, oelle du 5 mai, renoontre l’agrement de
mon gouvernement. En oe qul oonoerne Pautre propositlon tendnnt a un ajcurnemont de breve duree,
o’eet au Coneeil quil appartiunt de d6oider. Mais
Je tiens a preoiser qu’elle ne me satisfait pas,
63. Le PRESIDENT
(traduit ,j.d l’anglaie):
Sl je
oomprendo bien, le representant de la Toheooslovaquie
a accept6 la suggestion faite pnr le representant
du Br6sil h la oondition que, lorsque le Conseil se
reunira do nouveau, la proposition tendant a ajourner
les debats au 6 mai soit mise aux voix. Si tel est
bien le sens des remarques
qui ont 603 faites,
Je voudrais oonsulter les membres du Conseil pour
savoir
si oette oondition renoontre leur agrement.
84. I1 s’agit dlune question de procedure, et je donne
la parole nu Miniatre
des affairee exterieures
du
Pakistan.
86. M. BHUTTO (Pakistan) [traduit de l’anglais]:
Le representant du Bresil a dit, h oe que ma d&3gation a oru oomprendre, que le Conseil avait besoin
de quelque d6lai pour examiner si, oompte tenu de
la d&erioration
rapide de la situation dans la peninsule et de la tension regnant sur la ligne de suspension d’armes, ainsi que des violent8 aooroohages
qui se eont produits r&oemment, il y avait lieu pour
le Conseil de slajourner
pour une longue ou pour
une breve periode, 11 n’en r6sulte pas, a notre avis,
que le Conseil se prononoera en fnveur d’un ajournement prolong&, mais qua les membres du Conseil
ont bescin d’un oertain temps pour prooeder a des
oonsultations et, a la lumiere des resultats, d&older si
l’ajournement
dolt Btre de longue ou de oourte duree.
86. M. BERNARDES (B&11) [traduit de l’anglais]:
Je crois que ma suggestion etait parfaitement claire.
Une proposition d’ajournement
au 6 mai a et6 prbsent6e. Elle a et6 falte oonformement P. l’alinea o
de l’artiole
33 du rbglement int6rleur
provisoir6
Le dernier alinea de oet article est libelle oomme
euit: “11 est statue sans debat sur bute proposition
touohant la suspension ou le simple ajournemont
de la seanoe.” Cet alinea no se refer-e qulaux paragraphes p et b de oet artiole. Par oons&quent, la
motion dont nous aommea salsis dolt donner lieu a
‘in d&bat, et le Conseil est preoisoment en train d’en
d6h;:tre en ce moment,
07. J’ai propose que nous suspendions le debat pendant deux joure afin de r6fMchir
fi la situatton,
compte tenu des oonsiderations
que j’ai expcsees,
et que nous nous rbuniosione le vendredl 20 mar6
pour disouter de la question et nous prononoer
sur
la propoeitior.
tendant a ajourner la dieoueeion au
6 mai. Je vole dono lee ohoses de la facon sulvante:
le premisr point A notre ordre du jour du vendredi
20 mars serait la fin de l’examen par le Conseil de
la propositlon faite par le representant de la ToWooslovclquie.
88. Le PRESIDENT (trnduit de I~nnglnie): Comme
je viens Lie le dire, la clemnntle du reprcsentnnt clu
Br6sil r, 616 ngrcce, &nut enten& qu’& sn prochnine
rounlon lo Conseil decidern de ce qu’il doit fnire.
89. En l’nhaence tl’objection,
il sern entendu que
la Consoil tlendrn le vendredi 20 mnrs n 15 heures
sa proch~~ine reunion, ciul d&utera,
le ens ccllR.ult,
par ~11 cicbnt touchnnt In reprlse cventuelle de l’exnmen de ln questloti.
La shnce

est lev6e

fi 17 h 5.

265Y9--Pcbnmy

u

e
D

Pr
Ad
Th
I

.* ,.,, ,
Or
Ad

Qu

I

( 11 p.
lY65--1975
