142

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

grasshoppers, especially the Global lnformation and
Early Warning System on Food and Agriculture of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and its role in identifying this potential disaster,
I. Expresses its appreciation to donor countries, organizati<:ms _of t_he ~nited. Nations system ~nd ot~er competent mst1tutions m the1r efforts to contam the mfestation;
2: Urges !he Food and Agriculture Organization ofthe
U~1ted Nahons to strengthen its co-ordinating mechamsms and its technical and field operational support for
locust and grasshopper control;
3. Endorses and encourages the continued cooperation of local, regional and global organizations and
donors in the campaign to control the current threat to
agriculture caused by locusts and grasshoppers, including
the exchange and dissemination of information on pests
and insects;
4. Encourages the donor community to continue to
marshal its resources in support of the affected countries
to bring locusts and grasshoppers under control;
5. Encourages also the affected countries to continue to
ensure that adequate resources are made available to combat_ these_ recurrent crises, in particular by strengthening
the1r nat1onal plant protection services;
6. Urges ali parties concerned to establish and
strengthen early warning systems in respect of the affected
countries and to co-ordinate their efforts in this regard;
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with t~e ~irector-Gen~ral of t~e Food and Agriculture
(?rg~mza~•~m of the Um~ed Nat1ons, to take catalytic act10n m_ ra1sm~ the co~sc1ous_ness of the world community
regardmg thts potenttally d1sastrous situation;
8. Invites the Director-General of the Food and
Agriculture Organization ofthe United Nations to submit
an _up-to-date report on the locust and grasshopper infestatton to the Economic and Social Council at its second
regular session of 1987.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/186.

lnclusion of Kiribati, Mauritania and Tuvalu in
the list of the least developed countries

The General Assembly,
N oting Economic and Social Council decision 1986/ 15 3
of 11 July 1986, in which the Council endorsed the conclusion and rec~mmendati~n of the C:ommittee for Development Planmng regardmg the mclusion of Kiribati
Mauri~ania and Tuvalu in the list of the least develope<l
countnes,
Decides to include Kiribati, Mauritania and Tuvalu in
the list of the least developed countries.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/187.

Proclamation ofthe World Decade for Cultural
Development

The General Assembly,
Considering recommendation No. 27 40 adopted by the
World Conference on Cultural Policies convened by the
40 Sec

United Nations Educational, Scientitic ,111d Cultural Organization, World Co11jere11ce 011 Cu/1ural Policies, Mexico Ciry, 26
July-6 A ugu,r 1982. Final Reporr (CLT /MD/ 1, Pari,, Novernher 1982),
part V

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at Mexico City in 1982, in which it recommended that the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
propose to the General Assembly of the United Nations
the proclamation of a world decade for cultural development,
Considering also resolutions 11.20 of 25 November
198341 and 11.10 of 8 November 198542 adopted by the
General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its twenty-second
and twenty-third sessions, respectively,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1986/69 of 23 July 1986, in which the Council recommended that the General Assembly take a decision at its
forty-first session on the question of the proclamation of a
world decade for cultural development,
Taking into account the interest that the intemational
community, including the organizations ofthe United Nations system, have shown in the proposed decade,
Recognizing that voluntary efforts at the national leve)
by interested individuals and non-governmental and govemmental organizations are principal vehicles for advancing the objectives of the decade,
Taking note of the draft plan of action for the world
decade for cultural development, submitted by the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, 43
1. Proclaims the period 1988-1997 the World Decade
for Cultural Development, to be observed under the auspices ofthe United Nations and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
2. Approves the four main objectives of the Decade: acknowledging the cultural dimension of development; af~n:nin~ an_d enriching cultural identities; broadening part1c1pat1on m culture; promoting international cultural cooperation;
. 3. Invites all States, intergovernmental and internatlonal non-governmental organizations, and interested individuals to take an active part in the fulfilment of the object~ves of the Decade and, for that purpose, to make
ava1lable, on a voluntary basis and taking into consideration their particular situation, priorities and means, the
necessary intellectual, human and financia! resources;
4. Encourages the organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system participating in the fulfilment
of the objectives of the Decade to do so in a manner that is
in accordance with established programme priorities and
does not entail additional financia! impltcations for nonvoluntarily funded programmes;
5. Re9u_ests t_he Secret~ry-General to ensure, through
the Admm1strat1ve Comm1ttee on Co-ordination, that activities undertaken by the United Nations system in support ofthe Decade are co-ordinated in such a manner as to
avoid duplication and overlap;
6. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to report biennially to the General Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session, on

41 Scc Unitcd Na11011, Educational, Scicntitic and Cultural Organization, Record., o} the Ge11crul Co11jere11ce, Twe111y-wcond Sessio11,
vol. 1, Re.10/a1io11s, sect. 11.
42 /bid., Twenry-rhird Ses,ion, vol. 1, Resolurio11s, scct. 111.
4 •1 E/llJKó/l..10. anne,
