UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/2000/166
1 March 2000
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 24 FEBRUARY 2000 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

In paragraph 26 of its resolution 1284 (1999) of 17 December 1999, the
Security Council requested the Secretary-General to make the necessary
arrangements for approval by the Council, to provide for reasonable expenses
related to the Hajj pilgrimage to be met by funds in the escrow account
established by Council resolution 986 (1995). In the same resolution, the
Council also decided that Hajj pilgrimage flights that did not transport cargo
into or out of Iraq were exempt from the provisions of paragraph 3 of Council
resolution 661 (1990) and Council resolution 670 (1990), provided timely
notification of each flight was made to the Security Council Committee
established by resolution 661 (1990).
According to the Government of Iraq, under the Iraqi quota for the Hajj
pilgrimage established by the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the total
number of pilgrims is 24,700. Previous communications from the Government of
Iraq, particularly to the Chairman of the Security Council Committee, indicated
that $2,000 was required per pilgrim. The total amount required to cover the
Hajj pilgrimage for Iraq, therefore, would be $49.4 million (see annex for
statement of implementation of the Hajj pilgrimage).
Pursuant to paragraph 26 of Security Council resolution 1284 (1999), and
taking into full account the relevant provisions of Council resolutions, in
particular resolutions 661 (1990), 670 (1990) and 986 (1995), I should like to
submit, for the consideration of the Council, the following arrangements:
(a) The Government of Iraq should provide the United Nations with a list
of the names of the Iraqi pilgrims, including details of their respective travel
documents, with an indication of mode and route of travel, by land or by air;
(b) Funds from the United Nations Iraq account, sufficient to provide each
pilgrim with approximately $250 to cover local costs inside Iraq related to the
pilgrimage, including pocket money, will be transferred to the United Nations
Office of the Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq (UNOHCI) in Baghdad. Each
pilgrim will receive $250 in cash and will sign a document confirming the
receipt of the funds concerned, to be witnessed and signed by a representative
of UNOHCI and a representative of the Government of Iraq;

00-32340 (E)

010300

/...

S/2000/166
English
Page 2

(c) All other expenses required for the pilgrimage will be handled through
a third party as follows: for pilgrims travelling through Jordan, and for those
travelling directly to Saudi Arabia, expenses and funds will be handled by the
designated agencies in Jordan and Saudi Arabia, respectively;
(d) The agencies concerned will submit to the United Nations certified
lists with the names of each pilgrim who has arrived in Jordan or Saudi Arabia;
(e) The United Nations will transfer the necessary funds from the United
Nations Iraq account to the agencies concerned in Jordan and Saudi Arabia to
cover the cost of the pilgrimage.
I should like to express my sincere appreciation to the Governments of
Jordan and Saudi Arabia, which have expressed their readiness to assist with
this endeavour.

(Signed)

Kofi A. ANNAN
Secretary-General

/...

S/2000/166
English
Page 3

Annex
The Hajj pilgrimage:

statement of implementation

In accordance with the agreement reached at the "informal informal"
consultations of the Security Council, the following represents a statement of
implementation for making available the necessary funds to meet expenses related
to the Hajj pilgrimage.
The agreement envisages the distribution in Baghdad, Iraq, by the United
Nations Office of the Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq (UNOHCI) of $1,750 in
traveller’s cheques and $250 in cash (as pocket money to meet local costs, and
so forth) to each Iraqi pilgrim.
1.
The total funds required, $49.4 million, will be drawn from the United
Nations Iraq account at Banque nationale de Paris (BNP)/Paribas and transferred
to an established bank in Amman, Jordan.
2.
Standard traveller’s cheques with a total of $43,225,000 ($1,750 per
pilgrim) will be obtained from the bank in Jordan in booklets containing $50,
$100 and $500. A total amount of $6,175,000 in cash ($250 per pilgrim) will
also be obtained.
3.
Senior UNOHCI officials, accompanied by United Nations security personnel
with additional support as necessary from the Jordanian authorities, will
receive the total funds at the bank. They will escort the funds, in
coordination with the United Nations established courier service, to a United
Nations aircraft that has received prior approval from the Security Council
Committee established by Council resolution 661 (1990), and the Government of
Iraq, to fly to Baghdad with the specific purpose of delivering the above funds
to UNOHCI in Iraq.
4.
Upon its arrival in Iraq, the United Nations aircraft will be met by United
Nations security personnel with additional local security support as necessary.
All security personnel will escort the funds by road in United Nations vehicles
to UNOHCI headquarters in Baghdad. The funds will be kept in the UNOHCI vault
and guarded by United Nations security and local security personnel on a 24-hour
basis.
5.
Designated UNOHCI staff, supervised by senior UNOHCI finance and
administrative personnel, will collate $250 in cash and $1,750 in traveller’s
cheques to be distributed to each Iraqi pilgrim.
6.
Distribution of the funds will be based upon the lists of names of the
Iraqi pilgrims presented to the United Nations by the Government of Iraq.
Distribution will be undertaken in the presence of UNOHCI personnel and
representatives of the Government of Iraq. Pilgrims will travel to UNOHCI
headquarters in Baghdad to receive the funds where the following procedures will
apply:

/...

S/2000/166
English
Page 4

(a) Each pilgrim will furnish identification upon the presentation of
which UNOHCI personnel will confirm that the pilgrim is on the list submitted by
the Government of Iraq;
(b) Each pilgrim signs the allocated traveller’s cheques in the presence
of a UNOHCI staff member and a representative of the Government of Iraq, and
signs against his/her name in the list provided by the Government of Iraq to
confirm receipt;
(c) Each pilgrim receives $250 in cash and signs against his/her name on
the list provided by the Government of Iraq to confirm receipt.
7.
UNOHCI will inform immediately the United Nations Treasury of any funds not
distributed to pilgrims. Stop-payments will be issued against the traveller’s
cheques not distributed. UNOHCI will retain any cash funds that have not been
distributed and ensure that the equivalent amount is transferred from the ESD
(2.2 per cent) account to the ESB (53 per cent) account.
8.
Upon completion of the distribution of funds, the lists will be sent to the
relevant authorities in Saudi Arabia positioned to receive the Iraqi pilgrims at
the designated entry points into Saudi Arabia.
9.
On the basis of the lists, the relevant authorities in Saudi Arabia will
confirm the entry of Iraqi pilgrims into Saudi Arabia. Subsequent to the end of
the Hajj season, the lists will be returned to UNOHCI headquarters where UNOHCI
personnel will undertake a cross-referencing exercise to verify that all
pilgrims in receipt of funds entered Saudi Arabia.
10. Any discrepancies will be reported directly to the Executive Director of
the Iraq Programme, who will in turn report to the Security Council for its
appropriate action.

1 March 2000

-----
