S/PV.8979

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8979

th meeting
Friday, 25 February 2022, 5 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Kelly
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-26925 (E)
*2226925*

Ukraine

S/PV.8979

Samoa, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States
of America.

The meeting was called to order at 5.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Andorra,
Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, the Niger,
North Macedonia, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey
and Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2022/155, which contains the text of
a draft resolution submitted by Albania, Andorra,
Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, the
Niger, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
2/17

25/02/2022

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): We are here today because of Russia’s
unprovoked,
unjustified,
unconscionable
war
on Ukraine.
Let us never forget that this is a war of
choice — Russia’s choice. Russia chose to invade its
neighbour. Russia chose to inflict untold suffering on
the Ukrainian people and its own citizens. Russia chose
to violate Ukraine’s sovereignty, to violate international
law, and to violate the Charter of the United Nations.
Now, all across Ukraine, people are fleeing for
their lives. Residents of Kyiv and Kharkiv have left
their homes with only the belongings they could stuff
in their backpacks to take shelter in subway stations,
which have now become bomb shelters. We have seen
reports of attacks on kindergartens and orphanages.
Newborn babies in an intensive care unit have been
evacuated to makeshift bomb shelters, too. We have
seen heart-wrenching images of fathers sobbing as
they say goodbye to their young children and send
their families away to safety while they stay behind to
defend their country.
In Kyiv today, thousands of people crushed into a
local train station, with mothers passing their children
over the crowd, begging for people to help get their
babies onto trains and to safety. According to the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, more than
50,000 people have fled Ukraine in less than 48 hours.
We have also seen everyday Russians bravely
speak out and demonstrate in cities across Russia
against President Putin’s decision to plunge them into a
war with their neighbour. They do not want to sacrifice
Russian lives for Putin’s ambition.
The
Council,
charged
with
maintaining
international peace and security, was created to prevent
precisely this kind of aggression from ever happening
again. Russia’s latest attack on our most fundamental
22-26925

25/02/2022

Ukraine

principles is so bold and so brazen that it threatens our
international system as we know it. We have a solemn
obligation to not look away. We believe, to our core,
that the noble intentions of this institution should still
have a place in solving twenty-first century problems
and shielding our children and our grandchildren from
the horrors of war.
The horrors of war are exactly what our Ukrainian
brothers and sisters are experiencing today. The people
of Ukraine will soon need food, water, shelter and
medical aid. They will face displacement and lose
everything they have worked to build.
For those reasons, we and Albania, in consultation
with our allies and partners, have proposed draft
resolution S/2022/155 to hold Russia to account for
its aggression against Ukraine. The draft resolution
condemns Russia’s aggression. It reaffirms the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity
of Ukraine and it demands that the Russian Federation
immediately, completely and unconditionally withdraw
its forces. It also calls for the facilitation of rapid, safe
and unhindered humanitarian assistance to those in
need in Ukraine and for the protection of civilians,
including those who are humanitarian personnel.
Today, we are taking a principled stand against
Russia’s aggression in the Council, but many of us are
taking action in our capitals to defend international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations, and to
impose severe consequences on Russia for its invasion
of Ukraine. In coordination with our allies and partners,
we are imposing severe and immediate economic
costs on Russia. Those measures include sweeping
financial sanctions that will have an immediate impact
on its economy and export controls that will cut off
Russia’s access to vital technological inputs, atrophy
its industrial base and undercut Russia’s strategic
ambitions to exert influence on the world stage.
In addition, as was just announced, President Biden
will be sanctioning President Putin himself, along with
Foreign Minister Lavrov and members of Russia’s
national security team. Those actions are meant to
complement the important work we are doing in the
Security Council and the draft resolution we have put
forward today.
History will judge us for our actions — or lack
thereof — and so long as we have a Security Council,
I believe that we should strive to ensure that it lives up
to its highest purposes: to prevent conflict and avert

S/PV. 8979

unnecessary war. Russia has already subverted that
mission, but at a minimum — the very minimum — the
rest of us have an obligation to object and to stand up
for the United Nations Charter.
To those who say that all parties are culpable, I
say that is a clear cop out. One country — one country
only — is invading another. Russia is the aggressor
here. There is no middle ground. To any doubters,
I say, look at the kindergarten that was bombed this
morning — take a hard look. To those who say that
there is a special history between Russia and Ukraine
that somehow excuses the war, I say that we should all
think carefully about who that label might apply to next.
As I said on Monday night (see S/PV.8970),
President Putin has asserted that Russia has a rightful
claim to all territories from the Russian Empire. Just a
few hours ago, Russia threatened Finland and Sweden
with military and political repercussions. Responsible
Member States do not invade their neighbours. They
do not commit violence against their neighbours just
because they have the ability to do so. That is the
entire purpose of our international system. That is,
fundamentally, the point of the Security Council and
the United Nations.
Today’s vote is therefore simple. Let me put it
plainly. Members should vote in favour of the draft
resolution if they believe in upholding the United
Nations Charter. They should vote in favour if they
support the right of Ukraine or any State to sovereignty
and territorial integrity. They should vote in favour if
they believe that Russia should be held to account for
its actions. Members should vote against or abstain in
the voting if they do not uphold the Charter and if they
align themselves with the aggressive and unprovoked
actions of Russia. Just as Russia had a choice, so do
members of the Council.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me begin by stating that
my delegation subscribes to the statement just made by
the Ambassador of the United States.
We have been called here today to express clearly
and loudly where our States stand, individually
and collectively, with respect to international law
and the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations to which we have agreed, as well as
the international norms that we have collectively
established to govern our relations as independent
and sovereign countries, peace-loving nations and
responsible international actors.

22-269253/17

S/PV.8979

Ukraine

As we speak, Ukraine is being bombed and people
are being killed. A country in Europe is being destroyed
by a more powerful country — its neighbour — that has
decided it wants to turn back the clock of history. It is a
permanent member of the Security Council — to which
the world has given power and trust to decide on peace
and security — that has decided instead to dominate
and inflict death. With its unprovoked aggression,
Russia is not only inflicting untold pain and causing an
unprecedented humanitarian situation in Europe; it has
stained the Charter of the United Nations with innocent
blood. It is burying the Charter under the rubble of
destruction in Kyiv and other cities in Ukraine. We
must say no. It is not too late to stop this madness.
Albania and the United States, together with many
partners, have presented draft resolution S/2022/155,
which condemns Russia’s actions and underscores
that it must immediately cease its use of force against
Ukraine and withdraw its forces. It calls on Russia
to abide by the Minsk agreements. It also calls for
the facilitation of humanitarian assistance to those in
need in Ukraine — and their number is growing by
the hour — and urges continuous efforts to respond
to the humanitarian and refugee crisis that Russia’s
aggression has created. The draft resolution echoes
the call of the Secretary-General publicly addressing
President Putin that, in the name of humanity, he bring
his troops back to Russia. It echoes numerous similar
calls around the globe at the highest level to stop the
war. It is the minimum that we can do. We owe it to
Ukraine — a Member of the United Nations — and to
its people and the world.
This is not just a defining moment for the
Council. This is a day that will be long-remembered
for one single aspect: our children — the succeeding
generations — will know who stood up for respect
for human life, international law, rules and solidarity
with Ukraine, so that children, young girls, women and
men — human beings — may live their lives free and
in peace and dignity. And they will remember who did
not. This is not a moment to look away; it is a moment
to speak.
We call on the members of the Council to support
the draft resolution in order to say no to aggression;
to say no to an unprovoked war; and to say no to the
domination of a country by a more powerful one.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): The
Charter of the United Nations begins with the solemn
4/17

25/02/2022

invocation to peace: “We, the peoples of the United
Nations, determined to save successive generations
from the scourge of war...” That conviction has been
the touchstone of the work in this Chamber since 1945.
We must not forget that our fundamental purpose here
is to protect people and their futures; to protect people
from violence and conflict that destroy lives.
As we speak, women and children in Kyiv,
young families in Odessa, pensioners in Kharkiv and
civilians all over Ukraine are sheltering from Russia’s
military onslaught.
First, Russia claimed that this was all Western
hysteria. Then, it said that it was about Donetsk and
Luhansk. Now, Russia is bombing Kyiv. We have seen
dreadful images of Russian tanks crushing civilians in
the Ukrainian capital. A country of 44 million people is
being attacked on all fronts.
Draft resolution S/2022/155, on which we are voting
today, is a message to those people that the world is on
their side and that it stands with the Ukrainian people.
It is a message to the world that the rules we built
together must be defended — because otherwise, who
might be next? It is a message to Russia as well — to
the brave Russian citizens who are protesting a war that
they do not want. This draft resolution demands an end
to that war.
President Putin has launched a massive invasion
of Ukraine. His aim is to remove its Government and
subjugate its people. No fog of war is thick enough to
obscure a truth that clear. This is not self-defence under
Article 51 of the Charter. It is naked aggression. It is
an unprovoked, unjustified war, and the Council must
condemn it.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): Today
the Security Council is tasked with reaffirming the
fundamental principles that underpin its existence.
The main objective of the United Nations, which was
established at the end of a deadly war, has been to
prevent and deter another such conflict. Many nations
and peoples of the world still struggle to cleanse
themselves of the afflictions of the wars of the past.
Meanwhile, we are trying to decisively address the
multiple vulnerabilities and fragilities that pose a threat
to humankind. We do not need new wars or new fears.
War is the denial of the aspirations of the peoples
of the world. War sows death and destruction. It causes
terrible and often irreparable devastation and trauma.
22-26925

25/02/2022

Ukraine

War never has any real winners, but only serves to
inflict horrific suffering and perpetuate a vicious cycle
of resentment.
My country is committed to peace and the founding
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
supports a fairer, rules-based international order. For
those reasons, today we will condemn a war against a
Member State of the United Nations. My country joins
all those who condemn the war today, in the hope that the
language we have used to reaffirm the principles of the
Charter will never again be left open to interpretation,
and that wherever the principles on which our position
is based are violated they will always be defended with
the same determination and vigour.
The international community owes it to itself
to seize this momentum to take a hard, critical look
at itself and refrain from engaging anywhere in the
world in all wars of choice, all wars of influence, all
hegemonic wars, all resource-driven wars and all
unjust and dehumanizing wars. The international stage
must not be like a jungle in which nations are either
predators or prey.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate our call for an
immediate ceasefire and de-escalation. We urge the
belligerents not to obstruct humanitarian aid access
for the populations in need. We call on all parties to
resume dialogue and commit to settling the conflict
peacefully. The responsibilities that we must assume
today and every day as members of the Council compel
us to defend, reaffirm and renew the commitment we
made 77 years ago: to save current and succeeding
generations from the scourge of war.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico will vote in favour of draft resolution
S/2022/155, submitted by Albania and the United States
for the following reasons.
First, we are confronted with the invasion of
one sovereign country by another, which constitutes
a flagrant violation of Article 2, paragraph 4, of the
Charter of the United Nations and also constitutes an
act of aggression under the terms of General Assembly
resolution 3314 (XXIX), adopted by all Member States
of the United Nations.
Secondly, Mexico has itself endured four invasions
in its history as an independent State,: two by France
and two by the United States. The first invasion by the

S/PV. 8979

United States, in 1846, resulted in the loss of almost
half of our national territory at that time.
Thirdly, Mexico has always condemned all acts of
aggression, as evidenced by our protests at the League
of Nations against Italy’s annexations of Ethiopia and
Albania and Germany’s annexation of Austria.
Fourthly, our rejection of the use of force led us
to convene the Inter-American Conference on the
Problems of War and Peace, held in Mexico City in
1945, in order to bring to the San Francisco Conference
a clear and defined regional position on that issue.
Fifthly, Mexico has a pacifist foreign policy. Since
the United Nations was established, my country has
defended the prohibition of the threat or use of force in
international relations and we will continue to do so in
this Organization and in all other forums.
Sixthly, in 1988 we enshrined in our Constitution
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations as
normative principles of our foreign policy.
For all those reasons, Mexico condemns the acts of
aggression that the Russian Federation has perpetrated
against Ukraine. We call on the parties to immediately
cease hostilities. We recognize the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine and
support the efforts of the Secretary-General to find a
diplomatic solution in order to prevent further suffering
of the civilian population.
As a result of our historical experience and in line
with our constitutional mandate, Mexico will support
the draft resolution that is before the Security Council.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): We live in unprecedented
circumstances of threat to the international order and of
violation of the Charter of the United Nations. We are
gravely concerned about the Russian military operations
against targets in sovereign Ukrainian territory. We
believe that the Security Council should strive to show
a united resolve in pursuing diplomatic solutions to all
threats to international peace and security and to seek
agreement also on the Ukrainian crisis.
As we hear reports of increasing civilian casualties,
fear and devastation in Ukraine — a scenario that any
war inevitably generates — our main objective now is
to stop the ongoing hostilities immediately. How should
we do that?
First, the Security Council must react swiftly to the
use of force against the territorial integrity of a Member

22-269255/17

S/PV.8979

Ukraine

State. A line has been crossed and the Council cannot
remain silent.
Secondly and no less important, we need to create
the conditions for dialogue among all parties involved.
The world cannot afford a point of no return, at which
parties see military victory as the only avenue to end
conflict. During the negotiations on the draft resolution,
Brazil attempted to seek such a balance and to maintain
a space for dialogue, while still signalling that the use
of force against the territorial integrity of a Member
State is not acceptable in the world today.
We are also deeply concerned about Russia’s
decision to engage troops in military operations on the
ground and the loss of life and danger to the civilian
population that may ensue. We continue to hold the
firm conviction that threats and force will not lead to a
lasting settlement to this crisis.
Military action will inflict damage, undermine
faith in international law and put the lives of millions
of people in jeopardy.
The mission of the Security Council is not over. If
our efforts have so far failed to prevent a war, it is our
duty to persevere and seek the immediate suspension
of hostilities. We should strive to find ways to restore
peace to Ukraine and the whole region. We renew our
appeal for the full cessation of hostilities, the withdrawal
of troops and the immediate resumption of diplomatic
dialogue. There is no alternative to negotiation to solve
the present crisis.
The security concerns voiced by the Russian
Federation over the past few years, particularly
regarding the strategic balance in Europe, do not give
Russia the right to threaten the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of another State. The Security Council has
the legitimacy to debate and, with the good will of all,
adopt measures to redress this dangerous situation.
The collective security system of the United
Nations rests ultimately on the pillar of international
law. The sovereign equality and territorial integrity of
Member States are not hollow words. It is our duty to
give concrete meaning to the high aspirations of the
drafters of the Charter of the United Nations. That is our
most valuable legacy. To rid ourselves of the scourge of
war was the very reason for the establishment of the
United Nations. In the end, peace and international
order must prevail. We shall not rest until that mission
is accomplished.
6/17

25/02/2022

The President (spoke in Russian): I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, France, Gabon, Ghana, Ireland,
Kenya, Mexico, Norway, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
Against:
Russian Federation
Abstaining:
China, India, United Arab Emirates
The President (spoke in Russian): The draft
resolution received 11 votes in favour, 1 against and 3
abstentions. The draft resolution has not been adopted,
owing to the negative vote of one permanent member
of the Council.
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements after the vote.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We deeply regret the
decision of the Russian Federation to veto draft
resolution S/2022/155. The Security Council lost a
precious opportunity to show the world its unity, power
and usefulness. Instead, it was blocked — it was taken
hostage. We are disappointed, but not surprised.
This is not the end of our efforts. We will continue
to work with the Member States of the United Nations,
those who stand for rules and not chaos and those who
base their relations with others on respect and not
contempt. We continue to condemn this aggression
and call for ending this senseless war. Russia may
inflict damage, kill people, overthrow a legitimate
Government and try to destroy Ukraine, but as history
teaches it will never be able to kill freedom.
Instead, Russia will be held responsible for
the consequences of its actions. It is already facing
worldwide condemnation. As we heard, it will face
sanctions and restrictions, such as the suspension of its
rights today in the Council of Europe. But it will not be
able to destroy European security, nor will it be able
to set back the world. We will continue to stand with
Ukraine and as Prime Minister Rama announced today,
Albania, in its tradition, is ready if needed to shelter
Ukrainians fleeing the war.
22-26925

25/02/2022

Ukraine

In conclusion, let me reiterate that Albania supports
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Not surprisingly, Russia exercised its veto
power today in an effort to protect Russia’s premeditated,
unprovoked, unjustified and unconscionable war in
Ukraine. But let me make one thing clear: Russia can
veto draft resolution S/2022/155, but it cannot veto
our voices. It cannot veto the truth. It cannot veto
our principles. It cannot veto the Ukrainian people. It
cannot veto the Charter of the United Nations. And it
will not veto accountability.
Responsible members of the Security Council have
stood together today in the face of Russia’s aggression
and we will continue to stand with Ukraine, supporting
it in every way we can. We are united behind Ukraine
and its people, despite a reckless, irresponsible
permanent member of the Council abusing its power to
attack its neighbour and subvert the United Nations and
our international system.
Today’s vote showed which countries truly believe
in supporting the core principles of the United Nations
and which ones deploy them as convenient catchphrases.
The vote showed which Security Council members
support the United Nations Charter and which ones do
not. We will be addressing this matter in the General
Assembly, where the Russian veto does not apply and
the nations of the world can, will and should hold Russia
accountable and stand in solidarity with Ukraine.
Before I conclude, I want to commend the true
and tremendous courage that we are seeing from the
Ukrainian people. I also want to thank the Ukrainian
Permanent Representative, who is with us here today.
Earlier today, President Biden spoke with President
Zelenskyy and personally commended the brave actions
of the Ukrainian people, who are fighting to defend
their country. He also conveyed the ongoing economic,
humanitarian and security support being provided by
the United States, as well as our continued commitment
to rally other countries to provide similar assistance.
It is hard to imagine what it must feel like for
people to see tanks rolling into their cities, bombs
being dropped onto their streets and soldiers storming
their parks and gardens. But in the face of all of that,
everyday Ukrainian people are taking extraordinary
actions to protect their children, to protect their country
and to defend everything they hold dear.

S/PV. 8979

I also want to commend the courage of the thousands
of people in Russia who are protesting Putin’s war,
despite grave risks to their personal safety. They will
keep chanting “no war”. They will keep asking how
many Russian lives Putin wants to sacrifice for his
cynical ambitions. As we move forward, I hope that
more Member States take their cues from that courage
and honour all of that bravery with more of our own.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): India is deeply disturbed
by the recent turn of developments in Ukraine. We urge
that every effort be made for the immediate cessation
of violence and hostilities. No solution is worth the cost
of human lives. We are also deeply concerned about
the welfare and security of the Indian community,
including a large number of Indian students in Ukraine.
The contemporary global order was built upon the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States. All Member States need to honour those
principles in finding a constructive way forward.
Dialogue is the only answer to settling differences
and disputes, however daunting it may appear at this
moment. It is regrettable that the path of diplomacy
was given up. We must return to it. For all of those
reasons, India chose to abstain in the voting on the
draft resolution.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): A
large majority of the Security Council has just voted
in favour of a draft resolution aimed at stopping war.
Draft resolution S/2022/155 has not been adopted only
because of the single veto of the permanent member of
the Council who is perpetrating that conflict.
Russia claims that its invasion of Ukraine is in
self-defence. That is absurd. Russia’s only act of selfdefence is the vote that they have cast against today’s
draft resolution. Make no mistake: Russia is isolated. It
has no support for the invasion of Ukraine. History will
record how we voted today and which countries stood
up to be counted in defence of the Charter of the United
Nations and the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. The United Kingdom stands steadfast in
support of the Ukrainian people and will hold Russia
accountable for its aggression.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Norway voted in favour of draft
resolution S/2022/155. We deeply regret Russia’s veto.
Preventing and ending acts of aggression is a direct
responsibility of the Security Council. A veto cast by
the aggressor undermines the purpose of the Council.

22-269257/17

S/PV.8979

Ukraine

It is a violation of the very foundation of the Charter
of the United Nations. Furthermore, in the spirit of
the Charter, as a party to a dispute Russia should have
abstained from voting on the draft resolution.
As we sat here in the Chamber on Wednesday (see
S/PV.8974), we could see the shocking first images
of what now amounts to a full-scale Russian invasion
of a free and independent Member State. We can
only imagine the hardships the people of Ukraine are
going through.
With its tanks, missiles, bombs, planes, warships
and cyberattacks, the Russian Federation’s aggression
not only violates the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine but also constitutes
a serious breach of international peace and security.
Russia has disregarded the very core principles of the
rules-based world order that the United Nations has
stood for since the Second World War.
Let me be absolutely clear. Norway insists that
the Russian Federation immediately, completely and
unconditionally stop all fighting and withdraw all of
its forces from the territory of Ukraine. Russia must
respect the principles and purposes of the United
Nations Charter. Norway expresses full solidarity
with Ukraine and the Ukrainian people in the face of
Russian aggression.
Indeed, we already see the dire consequences
for civilians, with casualties and injuries among
large numbers of children, women and men. We fear
increased suffering in the time ahead, with potentially
large numbers of casualties and extensive destruction
of civilian infrastructure, such as schools, medical
facilities and water and electricity plants. We see
fighting unfolding in and around urban areas.
We are deeply concerned about the long-term and
protracted harm to the civilian population caused by
such warfare, including by the use of heavy explosive
weapons. We already see mass displacement. That will
only increase, together with trauma, family separations
and missing persons. The situation is a tragedy, both for
individuals and Ukrainian society at large.
The parties to the conflict in Ukraine must comply
with their obligations under international law, including
human rights law and international humanitarian
law, and must ensure the protection of the civilian
population and detainees. Space for neutral, impartial
and independent humanitarian action must be protected
8/17

25/02/2022

to ensure safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian
access to those in need.
We condemn in the strongest possible terms
Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine. The
Council must now carry out the great responsibility of
its mandate and act in a determined and united manner
to stop the ongoing aggression against a Member State.
We also condemn Belarus for facilitating those
attacks. Norway will join our allies and partners in
swift and concrete countermeasures. That includes
Norway’s alignment with the intensified sanctions of
the European Union.
Let me conclude by reiterating Norway’s unwavering
support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
Mr. Kelly (Ireland): Ireland voted in favour of draft
resolution S/2022/155, presented by the United States
and Albania in response to the Russian Federation’s
flagrant violation of the Charter of United Nations,
international law and the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine.
The Russian Federation has turned its back on
diplomacy. It has spurned genuine offers of dialogue
and rejected repeated calls from the international
community for de-escalation. Instead, it has launched
an unjustified and unprovoked attack on Ukraine, an
attack that continues today to rain death and destruction
on Ukraine and its people. We condemn those actions
outright. In casting our vote today, we did so in full
solidarity with the people of Ukraine.
The Security Council has a responsibility to act
in the face of conflict, protect international peace and
security and uphold the principles that the world agreed
upon in response to the utter devastation of the Second
World War. That is not a responsibility that Ireland
takes lightly. Yet it is one that we were prevented from
discharging today, in spite of the clear and declared will
of the great majority of the members of the Council.
We deeply regret the Russian Federation’s use of
the veto today. The veto is an anachronism that has
no place in today’s world. The use of the veto to block
Council action is always unacceptable. Its use today in
blatant defence of military aggression is reprehensible.
However, the veto in no way obscures the plain
facts of Russian aggression against Ukraine. Nor
will it hinder the international community’s response
22-26925

25/02/2022

Ukraine

to Russia’s blatant breaches of international law,
as demonstrated by the broad co-sponsorship of
today’s draft resolution by the wider United Nations
membership. In that context, Ireland strongly supports
the comprehensive sanctions announced yesterday by
the European Union. We stand ready to support further
measures if Russia does not reverse course.
The unfolding horror of the recent days is a
tragedy for the people of Ukraine and one which
evokes nightmares that the people of Europe fervently
hoped had been consigned to a bloodstained history.
Only dialogue and diplomacy offer escape from those
nightmares. We call on Russia to end its aggression
against Ukraine today, turn away from war and choose
the path of dialogue and diplomacy. That is the right
path, and the time to take it is now.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): At
this moment, Russian missiles are killing civilians,
bombing cities and destroying essential infrastructure
with the sole goal of making Ukraine a vassal State.
It is the dreams of reconquering the Russian empire
that we have before us. Ukraine is the victim of a
premeditated attack by the President of the Russian
Federation. Nothing could ever justify that. No member
of the Security Council supports it. The result of today’s
voting is clear: Russia is alone.
France welcomes the mobilization of all members
of the Council who by voting in favour of the draft
resolution have expressed their commitment to
international law and their support for Ukraine. It
condemns Russia’s veto of the efforts to restore peace
and international order. Russia flouts the responsibilities
conferred on it as a permanent member of the Security
Council. It uses the Charter of the United Nations to
violate the Organization’s most basic principles.

S/PV. 8979

Nations and its obligation to respect the provisions of
Article 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter.
By not refraining from the use of force in its relations
with Ukraine, the Russian Federation has chosen to
violate without justification the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine, even
as several world leaders have appealed for dialogue to
find a peaceful settlement to the situation. The Russian
Federation’s actions, which have assailed the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
have threatened the global order and the balance of
peace and security.
We have also taken note of the letter from the
Russian Federation submitted to the Security Council,
which seeks to indicate that its use of force against
Ukraine was in self-defence while dismissing its all-out
military action against Ukraine. We are pained by the
unnecessary and rising number of deaths that have been
occasioned by the invasion and we call on the Russian
Federation to immediately withdraw its forces from
Ukraine and to recommit to dialogue and diplomacy.
Besides our own assessment that Ukraine presented
no immediate threat to the Russian Federation, the letter
is also interpreted in the context of Russia’s own public
declarations about the cost of the past days, which have
shown to the world that rather than a security merit, this
has been about Russia using force against its weaker
neighbour because it could.

At the United Nations and in all forums, France
will continue to mobilize with its partners to support
Ukraine and the Ukrainian people.

At the beginning of its military build-up on the
borders of Ukraine, we were told that what was being
observed was a normal military exercise. When
concerns about the massive build-up were raised, the
Russian Federation informed the world that its troops
were on its side of the borders and had no intention
of crossing the frontiers of Ukraine. At one point we
were also informed that the possibility of sending
troops to the Donbas region of Ukraine in the context
of peacekeeping was under consideration.

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Ghana voted in favour of
draft resolution S/2022/155, on the situation in Ukraine,
which was not adopted, because — as a member of the
Security Council — that is the minimum duty that we
owe to the Charter of the United Nations, the peoples of
the world and in particular the Government and people
of Ukraine. We join 10 other members of the Council
in seeking to deplore in the strongest terms the Russian
Federation’s invasion of Ukraine because that act
breaches Russia’s obligation as a member of the United

Today the whole world knows better. As we met
in an emergency session on Wednesday night (see
S/PV.8974) to afford yet another opportunity for
peace, the trust and good faith crucial for diplomatic
engagement was broken in a cruel and dismissive
manner. The battle against Kyiv may yet be won, but
the good will of the world has been lost. The use of
force as a basis for securing international agreement
has no place in our modern international order and the
world cannot accept this.

22-269259/17

S/PV.8979

Ukraine

Ghana is deeply disappointed by the actions of the
Russian Federation, a permanent member of the Security
Council. Its actions have fallen short of the highest
standards expected of those States that are considered
to be the enduring guardians of international peace and
security. Indeed, for those members of the Council with
a special privilege, there is also a special responsibility.
I reiterate Ghana’s full support for the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine, in accordance with the Charter. At a time
when the world looks to the Council to send a strong
message that threats and use of force against other
States are unacceptable, we have been unable to
do so — not because there is no broad agreement to
do so but because the way and manner in which the
Security Council has been structured to function has
constrained us.
The present situation creates difficult choices that
we all must consider and carefully reflect upon as we
proceed with the long-standing efforts to reform the
Security Council and how it operates. Fortunately, the
ongoing process in the General Assembly provides an
opportunity. All Member States must genuinely commit
to that process. If we fail to act proactively, our inaction
will cost us permanently.
Before concluding, let me indicate Ghana’s
continuing concern about the situation of the civilian
populations in all parts of the internationally recognized
borders of Ukraine, as well as the welfare of the more
than 1,000 Ghanaian students and several nationals
in that country. We recall that in accordance with
international humanitarian law, there are consequences
for unlawful actions against civilian populations.
Also, as the Secretary-General rightly said in his
press engagement on Wednesday night, the invasion of
Ukraine by Russia will come at great cost to most of
our countries. Already, the price of oil has surpassed
$100. Inflation in most of our countries has begun to
rise. Investment decisions are being pulled back. The
already difficult situation of economic stagnation
triggered by the coronavirus disease pandemic is
beginning to worsen. The consequences of those
adverse developments are that the fragility of most
of our countries will deepen, creating further risks to
global stability.
The actions that have been taken against Ukraine
are therefore far-reaching and require even greater
solidarity — above all for the people of Ukraine, who
10/17

25/02/2022

bear the direct and immediate impact of an unjustified
action that violates the Charter and the principles of
international law, and in addition for the many countries,
especially developing countries, whose populations are
facing severe austerity. Will we find the wisdom and
common purpose to overcome the difficult moment we
face? I raise the call for peace. Let us give peace yet
a chance.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Brazil regrets that the
Security Council was unable to react to a breach of
international peace and security that is still happening
as we speak. During the negotiations, Brazil favoured
a text that could maintain space for dialogue among
all the parties, while sending a decisive message for
respect for international law and the basic principles
that for more than 75 years have saved us from a war
of broad proportions. We thank the proponents for their
flexibility with respect to several aspects of the draft
during the negotiations.
The framing of the use of force against Ukraine as
an act of aggression in the draft, a precedent that has
seldom been used in the Council, signals to the world
the gravity of the situation but could also downplay
other times when force was used against the territorial
integrity of Member States with no equivalent reaction
from the Council. Indeed, we could have ended up with
a text that is more conducive to reconciliation. Brazil
has fought for that.
However, under the current circumstances, not
even a different text would have been enough to allow
the Council to fulfil its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security today. No country,
elected or non-elected, with or without veto power,
should be able to use force against the territorial
integrity of another State with no Council reaction. The
Council’s paralysis when world peace is at stake could
lead to its irrelevance when we need it most. It is our
collective responsibility not to allow that to happen.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): We
all agree that the serious developments in Ukraine
undermine regional and international peace and
security. Throughout this crisis, my country has
consistently called for de-escalation and dialogue. We
placed great hope in the various diplomatic initiatives
and channels aimed at resolving the crisis and those
calls reflected our alarm at the consequences of this
crisis for civilians present in Ukraine, as well as for the
region and the international community. We emphasize
22-26925

25/02/2022

Ukraine

the importance of ensuring that humanitarian assistance
reaches those in need and we call on all parties to
respect international humanitarian law, prioritize the
protection of civilians and allow for the unhindered
delivery of humanitarian assistance.
We believe that every Member State of the
United Nations has the right to security, sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. Being from the
Middle East, we are intimately aware of the critical
importance of a stable regional security environment
and of de-escalation, diplomacy and dialogue as the
basis of that security. Similarly, we understand from
experience — and share — the need for inclusive and
consultative processes. We support the draft resolution’s
emphasis on the need to adhere to the principles of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
That must be the basis of the resumption of dialogue
and the pathway forward now that the draft resolution
has not been adopted.
The United Arab Emirates restates its commitment
to the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence
of all Member States of the United Nations. We urge an
immediate de-escalation and cessation of hostilities and
we once more underscore our readiness to work with
members of the Security Council towards that goal.
The results of the voting were a foregone conclusion,
but the avenues for dialogue and diplomacy must
remain open more urgently than ever before and we
must pursue them together. That is the clear sentiment
that the Council is united on.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): Kenya voted in favour of
draft resolution S/2022/155 to affirm Article 2 of the
Charter of the United Nations, according to which all
members shall refrain in their international relations
from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any State. We
voted yes to register our opposition to the breaching
of the territorial integrity of Ukraine by the Russian
Federation. We voted with hearts that are heavy with
sympathy for the people of Ukraine. We offer our
condolences to all the Ukrainian families that have
suffered the devastating loss of loved ones to this
unnecessary war. Our affirmative vote today transcends
the tragedy unfolding in Ukraine.
We voted yes also having in mind the justifications
for past interventions by other powerful States,
using resolutions from this very Security Council
that seriously compromised international peace and

S/PV. 8979

security. Even as deserved condemnations ring out
today about the breach of Ukraine’s sovereignty,
history’s condemnations are allowed silence in this
room. We cannot help but recall that Africa’s Sahel
region is in terrible turmoil due to the hasty and illconsidered intervention in Libya a decade ago.
On that occasion, the African Union sought more
time for diplomacy. Its Peace and Security Council
was ignored and what resulted was not peace or the
safety and security of the Libyan people. Instead, terror
was unleashed on African peoples in the countries
to the south of Libya. There have been yet other
actions of similar magnitude that have brought us to
this unfortunate pass. Today the precious fabric of
our Charter lies torn and trampled and is threatened
with further harm if there is no urgent and visionary
leadership with a faith in diplomacy pushing in the
opposite direction.
If the United Nations Charter could speak for itself,
it would vote for the draft resolution in order to affirm
its central role in safeguarding our collective peace. It
would remind all members of the Security Council and
the United Nations that the Charter contains the tools for
the pacific settlement of their disputes by negotiation,
inquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial
settlement, resort to regional agencies or arrangements,
or other peaceful means of their own choice. By failing
to adopt the draft resolution, we deeply regret that the
Security Council has failed to stop the infringement of
the sovereignty of a member of the United Nations.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is deeply concerned about the latest developments of
the situation in Ukraine. Now it has come to a place
that we did not want to see. China always forms its
own position on the basis of the merits of the matter
at hand. We believe that the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all States should be respected and that the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations should be jointly upheld. We have always called
on all parties to seek reasonable solutions to address
each other’s concerns through peaceful means on the
basis of equality and mutual benefit. We welcome and
encourage all efforts for a diplomatic solution and
we support the Russian Federation and Ukraine in
resolving the issue through negotiations.
In the past week, the Security Council has held two
emergency meetings (see S/PV.8970 and S/PV.8974)
and all parties have fully elaborated their positions and

22-2692511/17

S/PV.8979

Ukraine

concerns on the current situation. At present, faced
with the highly complex and sensitive situation, the
Security Council should make the necessary response.
At the same time, its response should also be
undertaken with great caution. All actions should be truly
conducive to defusing the crisis rather than adding fuel
to the fire. If not handled properly — or if managed only
by exerting pressure and imposing sanctions — there
could be more casualties, more property loss and a
more complicated and chaotic situation, while it could
also become more difficult to resolve differences. It
may completely shut the door to a peaceful solution and
ultimately vast numbers of innocent people would be
the victims. We must draw profound lessons from the
extremely painful experiences of the past. For those
reasons, China abstained in the voting today.
I wish to stress that the issue of Ukraine is not
something that only emerged today and the current
situation did not develop suddenly overnight. It is the
result of the interplay of various factors over a long
time. China advocates a common, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security concept, in the
belief that the security of one country cannot come at
the cost of undermining the security of other nations,
and that regional security cannot be secured through the
strengthening or expansion of military blocs. Against
the backdrop of five successive rounds of NATO
expansion, Russia’s legitimate security aspirations
should receive attention and be addressed properly.
Ukraine should become a bridge between the East and
the West, not an outpost for confrontation between
major powers. We strongly call on all parties concerned
to exercise maximum restraint, ease tensions and avoid
civilian casualties.
The final settlement of the Ukraine crisis requires
the Cold War mentality to be abandoned and that full
attention and respect be paid to the legitimate security
concerns of all countries, as well as that negotiations
be held to build a balanced, effective and sustainable
European security mechanism. We urge all parties
to return immediately to the track of diplomatic
negotiations and political settlement; show sincerity
and goodwill; reach a political decision; and engage
in dialogue and consultation for a comprehensive
settlement of the Ukraine issue.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
12/17

25/02/2022

The Russian Federation voted against the
anti-Russian and anti-Ukrainian draft resolution
(S/2022/155) that was submitted today. Why is it
anti-Russian? I think there is no need to explain
that — a cursory glance at the text will suffice. Why
is it anti-Ukrainian? Because it without any doubt runs
counter to the fundamental interests of the Ukrainian
people insofar as it is an attempt to salvage and
establish in Ukraine a system of power that has brought
the country to the point of tragedy, which has persisted
for at least eight years now. We thank those who did not
support the draft resolution.
I will not respond to those who just accused the
Russian Federation of abusing the right of veto. The
main reason for our negative vote is not based on what
is included in the draft resolution but what it lacks. If
its sponsors were to attempt to make it even remotely
balanced, then they would not have left out issues that
must be addressed and cannot be overlooked in the
context of the Ukrainian problem.
Specifically, what was left out is the fact that
the Maidan junta, which assumed and seized power
as a result of the anti-constitutional coup in Kyiv in
February 2014, unleashed a war against the residents
of the country’s east, shelling residential areas with
artillery pieces and multiple rocket launchers, raining
bombs on the people of Donetsk and Luhansk.
What was left out was the way in which the
Ukrainian authorities, with the connivance of their
Western patrons, consistently and cynically shirked
their responsibility to implement the Minsk agreements,
the lynchpin of which was direct dialogue with the
residents of the country’s east.
At the same time, Ukrainian death squads,
comprised largely of radical, neo-Nazi battalions,
were positioned and deployed on a line of contact,
methodically and relentlessly shelling the residential
areas of the Donetsk People’s Republic and the Luhansk
People’s Republic on a daily basis, killing women,
children and the elderly. That situation continues. Just
today four civilians died as a result of the actions of the
Ukrainian armed forces.
In addition, how can we fail to mention the bloodchilling crimes perpetrated by the Ukrainian nazis over
the past eight years or the fact that the protesters against
the Maidan in Odessa were burned alive? How can
we fail to mention the fact that peaceful protesters on
Maidan Square were shot at by unknown snipers? The
22-26925

25/02/2022

Ukraine

investigation into both of those tragedies is something
that has been deliberately dragged out and worn down
by the Maidan regime.
At the same time, the culprits in the Odessa tragedy
are well known and do not seem to be hiding. Alternative,
independent investigations and the confessions of the
snipers themselves unambiguously confirm that the
slaughter at Independence Square was provoked by
Maidan leaders. Last year, we held an informal Arria
Formula Security Council meeting on both of those
issues with the aim of sharing more information with
Security Council colleagues. However, what we heard
in response from Western partners were at best merely
cliches about so-called Russian propaganda. How can a
resolution on the Ukrainian issue fail to mention those
issues I just referred to?
It would have been appropriate to include in the
draft resolution an honest assessment of the role of our
Western colleagues in fueling the Ukrainian crisis.
Not only did they stand behind the Maidan coup but
they also effectively issued a carte blanche to Kyiv
to carry out acts and steps that would be unthinkable
for any civilized State. That includes the egregious
discrimination against the Russian language and
consequently against Russian-language speakers.
That includes the glorification of Hitler’s henchmen,
alongside the ban on paying tribute to and honouring
the real heroes of Ukraine who freed it of Nazism, as
well as the religious schism in that country.
While speakers are spinning tales about the
triumph of democracy in Ukraine, the Maidan
authorities and nationalists have been, murdering their
political opponents with impunity. They have been
persecuting the opposition. They have been closing
down opposition television channels where one could
get at least relatively objective information. Six of those
television channels were closed down under President
Zelenskyy alone.
And how can we fail to mention the fact that the
country has been flooded with weapons that were then
used to kill civilians in Donbas? Our Western colleagues
have made Ukraine a pawn in their geopolitical game,
with no concern whatsoever for the interests of the
Ukrainian people. The responsibility for what is
transpiring at present lies not only with the Ukrainian
Government but also with them. Today’s draft resolution
is nothing other than yet another move in a brutal and
inhumane chess game on this Ukrainian chessboard.

S/PV. 8979

At the moment, all Western media outlets have been
inundated with reports about how civilian populations
in Kyiv and a number of other Ukrainian cities have
been seeking refuge in bomb shelters and how they
fear for their lives and flee artillery fire. We genuinely
empathize with our neighbours and we urge them not to
yield to provocations. President Putin and the Russian
Ministry of Defence explicitly stated that there would
be no strikes targeting civilian infrastructure.
However, nationalists are already using civilians
as human shields. We categorically condemn the
placement by nationalists of artillery and multiple
rocket launchers in residential areas. That is a direct
breach of the norms of international humanitarian law,
including Articles 51 and 58 of the first Additional
Protocol to the 1949 Geneva Conventions.
We see how the situation is being exploited in
propagandistic exercises by Western politicians and
media outlets. I would like to ask them where they
they have been for the past eight years. Why were they
not concerned when shelling and killing occurred in
Donbas? Why did they not even bother to notice that
there are more than 4 million people living in the
Donetsk People’s Republic and the Luhansk People’s
Republic who, at best, were branded as pro-Russian
separatists? Why did they not call out Poroshenko
when he said that the residents of Donbas would rot
in basements? Why did they not call out Zelenskyy
when he called those same residents “non-people” and
“specimens”?
Parenthetically, I cannot but note that in the latest
frenzy of propaganda our Western colleagues very
frequently use imagery from Donbas, brandishing
them as alleged consequences of the so-called Russian
aggression in Ukraine. Those fake images are abundant
and proliferate today. They have flooded the Internet
and a number of Telegram channels. There are videos
alleging Russian strikes targeting residential areas
that were filmed in other parts of the world and have
nothing to do with Ukraine.
That was mentioned today by the BBC, which issued
an article entitled “Ukraine conflict: many misleading
images have been shared online”. There you can find
everything. There are photographs from parades. There
are photographs of American aviation bombing Libya.
There are photographs from Syria. There are even
photographs of the explosion in Beirut that is being

22-2692513/17

S/PV.8979

Ukraine

presented as something that took place in Ukraine. I
will send that article to Council members separately.
I wish to turn to my French, British and American
colleagues. The Permanent Representative of France
said that civilians are being murdered in Ukraine. That
is untrue. Russian troops are not bombing Ukrainian
cities, and we have said that civilians are not threatened
by anything. There is no verifiable confirmation
whatsoever about the deaths of civilians.
I note that the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom alleged that a Russian military weapon
system was targeting civilians. I saw the reports today,
and I would like to inform that representative that, as we
can see from the videos, that is a heavy surface-to-air
missile system system called Strela-10 or Arrow-10. It
is in the possession of the Ukrainian armed forces. The
Russian military does not have that kind of equipment.
It is obsolete. That is the kind of fake information being
used by the representative of the United Kingdom.
Turning to our colleagues from the United States,
I note that with respect to the alleged bombing of the
kindergarten, that too is fake information. Of course,
it is difficult for us to compete with the United States
in terms of the number of invasions targeting their
neighbours. I will refrain from listing the aggressions
carried out by the United States in its history, but that
country is in no position to moralize.
I wish to conclude by emphasizing that we are
not waging a war against Ukraine or the Ukrainian
people. We are carrying out a special operation against
nationalists to protect the residents of Donbas and for
the purposes of denazification and demilitarization.
Those objectives will soon be achieved and the
Ukrainian people will gain an opportunity to once again
independently determine their future and in so doing
live in peace, good neighbourliness and cooperation
with all their neighbours.
I now resume my functions as the President of the
Council.
The representative of the United States of America
has asked to make a further statement.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I am not going to respond to the atrocious
lies, propaganda and disinformation that we have just
heard from our Russian colleague. I have asked to take
the floor for a different reason.
14/17

25/02/2022

I have asked to take the floor to recall some of
our members whose names may not have been heard
earlier. Due to the rapidly moving response to the
events in Ukraine, the names of some of the countries
that sponsored draft resolution S/2022/155 may not
have been clearly read out or heard. I would just like
to highlight their names because we greatly appreciate
what they have done. Those countries are Barbados,
Croatia, Estonia, the Gambia, Grenada, Haiti, Jamaica,
Japan, Kiribati, Lesotho, the Marshall Islands, Monaco,
North Macedonia, Palau, Papua New Guinea and
Suriname. I want to thank all of them for their support.
We will continue to all speak within one voice in
the days ahead to address the atrocious situation that
we see happening every day on the ground, despite
what we have heard from our Russian colleagues.
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the floor
to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I will not dignify the
Russian diabolical script — which resembles a letter of
application for an upscale seat in hell — by commenting
on it.
I would like to use this opportunity to thank the
parents of every Ambassador here; to thank the people
of the democratic nations who put these Ambassadors
in their seats; to tell the children of these Ambassadors
that they should be proud of their parents who have
voted in favour of the draft resolution.
I thank my good friend Nicolas from France,
Ronaldo from Brazil, my good friend Mr. Hoxha from
Albania, Linda, Barbara and Mona. I thank my good
friend from Mexico, Martin from Kenya, Ireland,
Ghana and Gabon. I thank the dozens and dozens of
co-sponsors who would have voted in favour of the
draft resolution if they had had a chance to vote. They
will have that chance in days to come.
The draft resolution recalls the obligation of all
States under Article 2 of the Charter of the United
Nations to refrain in their international relations from
the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State.
The draft resolution called on Russia to stop its
offensive against Ukraine. The memories are very
fresh. The Security Council was discussing the ways to
prevent the war quite recently in this very Chamber. At
the very same moment, deadly air strikes were dropped
on civilian heads across my country and Russian troops
22-26925

25/02/2022

Ukraine

crossed the Ukrainian border from the territory of
Russia. The territory of Belarus was used for missile
attacks and the troops were marching from the occupied
parts of the Ukrainian Donbas and Crimea.
Last night was the most horrific for Kyiv since — just
imagine — 1941 when it was attacked by Nazis. Last
night it was attacked by someone who pretends they are
fighting with neo-Nazis. I am therefore not surprised
that Russia voted against the draft resolution. Russia
is keen on continuing its Nazi-style course of action.
The Kremlin regime should not be called the Russian
regime. The Kremlin regime should be called the
“Russist regime”.
A couple of hours ago my President said “Tonight
the enemy will use all the forces at their disposal to
break our resistance — vile, cruel and inhuman. Tonight
they will storm. We must all understand what awaits us.
We have to persevere tonight. The fate of Ukraine is
being decided right now.”
We just heard something that the Russian
Ambassador wanted to present as assurances
from himself and from his leadership: that it is all
provocation. He urged us not to yield to provocations.
Do Council members remember how many times he
said that or how many times his deputy said in this very
room that there will be no invasion, no attacks? Do
Council members remember that during the previous
meeting he was walking out of the Chamber trying to
call someone, not knowing what was going on? How
can we trust him? How can we trust his assurances? He
has no idea what is on the mind of his President. His
words have less value than a hole in a New York pretzel.
The Russian Federation, which by treachery
occupied the seat of a Security Council member in
1991, daily violates not only the Charter but also the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council.
Indeed, if Russia did not violate the provisional rules,
then Mr. Nebenzia would have to follow rule 20,
which states in relation to the President of the Security
Council that
“for the proper fulfillment of the responsibilities
of the presidency, he should not preside over
the Council during the consideration of a
particular question with which the member he
represents” — that is, the Russian Federation — “is
directly connected, he shall indicate his decision to
the Council” not to preside.

S/PV. 8979

So since the Council is not ruled by the current
presidency on the basis of rules, I, too, will probably
be unruly and ask all here to dedicate a moment of
complete silence to pray, or to meditate if they do not
believe in God, for peace — to pray for the souls of
those who have already been killed and for the souls
of those who may be killed, and I invite the Russian
Ambassador to pray for salvation. I would suggest that
we spend a moment in complete silence.
The President (spoke in Russian): My apologies,
but before moving to a moment of silence, I want to
include on the list those people who perished over all
these years in Donbas. They, too, are worthy of being
mentioned. All human lives are valuable. Let us not
forget them either.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the floor
to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I shall now continue
with my statement.
I am saddened, however, that a small handful of
members seem to still be tolerating the war. No complex
historical context can be used to justify what is going
on. I would say to some that it is exactly because of the
safety of their nationals right now in Ukraine that they
should be the first to vote to stop the war to save their
nationals in Ukraine, and not think about whether they
should or should not vote, because of the safety of their
nationals. Nothing can justify the missile shelling of
a kindergarten, an orphanage and hospitals that took
place today. In fact, one of my relatives had a stroke a
few days ago and cannot be evacuated even to a shelter,
because that person cannot be moved and so is in the
hospital in the city of Kyiv. Those attacks are war
crimes and violations of the Rome Statute, whether one
is a party to it or not.
We are gathering those and other facts and
will immediately send them on to The Hague, and
responsibility is inevitable. Nothing can justify
today’s deliberate shelling by a Russian warship of a
Moldovan-flagged chemical tanker with a Russian
crew — imagine — or a Panamanian-flagged cargo
ship near the port of Odessa, in the Black Sea. That is
a flagrant violation of the international law of the sea.
Is this the time to discuss historical reflections
against the backdrop of the alarming situation at the

22-2692515/17

S/PV.8979

Ukraine

25/02/2022

Chernobyl nuclear power plant, which has been seized
by Russian armed troops? They detained the staff of
the nuclear power plant, not allowing them to rotate as
required by technical safety rules.

and the resolve and dedication of civilians joining the
Territorial Defence Forces are the best proof that we will
not surrender, even if Russia succeeds in temporarily
occupying additional chunks of our territory.

Another matter of concern there is that the control
levels of gamma radiation, those in the exclusion zone,
have already been exceeded because of damage to the
topsoil owing to the movement of a great deal of heavy
military equipment, including tanks, and, as a result,
there has been contamination by radioactive dust.

Ukraine has broken diplomatic relations with
Russia — something that should have been done eight
years ago. We call on our partners to follow our example
or to find other ways to sever diplomatic relationships
with Russia. We call on international organizations to
ban or suspend Russia’s memberships. The latter has
happened today, in fact, as the Committee of Ministers
of the Council of Europe, by an overwhelming
majority — almost by consensus — adopted a
decision to suspend the Russian Federation’s rights of
representation in the Committee of Ministers and in the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe.

As of midnight the previous night, almost 140
persons had been killed and 316 others wounded on
the Ukrainian side during the first day of the Russian
invasion. Many civilian infrastructure objects were
ruined. To stop the advance of the Russian tanks, a
young gentleman, a hero, blew himself up on a bridge.
He killed himself in order to destroy the bridge and
prevent the Russian tanks from moving ahead.
But the destruction is not only taking place in cities.
Indeed, 80 per cent of the infrastructure of the small town
of Schastia, located in the Government-controlled part
of Donbas, has been completely destroyed, according to
the local administration. The name of the town can be
translated as “happiness”; that is actually the name of
the town. What a grotesque irony. That speaks volumes
as to what kind of happiness the Russian Federation
will be bringing to Donbas, to Ukraine and to other
nations sooner or later if we continue to allow Russia to
go ahead with its diabolical plan. The Ambassador can
rest assured that there will be no hospitality shown to
his troops on our territory.
Ukraine has been exercising its right to selfdefence under Article 51 of the Charter. Russia does
not have that excuse. Its perverse reading of the Charter
is so sick that it is impossible to interpret. Calling
occupying troops peacekeepers, claiming the right of
self-defence — that is lunacy.
The Russian troops are suffering heavy losses
in aircraft, helicopters, tanks, trucks and, most
importantly, personnel. Russia can stop the voting in
this Chamber, but what may stop the war, unfortunately,
are the thousands of bodies of Russian soldiers that will
be delivered to their mothers in Russia, whether you
like it or not, because we have to defend our territories.
We have to defend ourselves on our territory.
Thousands of Ukrainians have already joined the
Ukrainian army or the Territorial Defence Forces,
16/17

Russia should never have been invited to join the
Council in the first place. It was invited to join the
Council of Europe — a temple of human rights — in
the very middle of the war in Chechnya, even before the
Khasavyurt Accord. For hypocritical political reasons,
the Europeans were then of the opinion that it was better
to invite Russia — and it was invited — in the middle
of the war, as it was killing thousands and thousands of
its own citizens in Chechnya.
We count upon the proper reaction by the
international community to the medieval atrocities
committed by Russia in Ukraine. Today, a number of
countries have already imposed sanctions on Russia.
The burden must be heavy. If you say that sanctions are
nothing, I am sure that the bodies of dead Russian soldiers
are not nothing, even if you are completely diabolical.
We are sincerely grateful to the United Nations
for its prompt decision to support the humanitarian
response in Ukraine, and we highly commend the
United Nations efforts to encourage major humanitarian
donors to make additional funding available. I thank
the Secretary-General for his statement to that effect.
I have a plea: “Stop harassing the Secretary-General.
Stop attacking him. Show respect for the institution.
Stop wiping your feet on the Secretary General, who
is a very nice person and a dedicated supporter of the
Charter of the United Nations.”
We remain open to negotiations, but no one
should put words in our mouth or manipulate our
statements about negotiations. We are sick of Russia’s
interpretations. Let Russia speak on its own behalf and
not on ours. It was stated by the President of Ukraine
that we are open to negotiations on a permanent basis.
22-26925

25/02/2022

S/PV. 8979

Ukraine

We have been saying that all along. It is Russia that
killed the Normandy format. It is Russia that killed
the Minsk agreements. All that gibberish about who
said what and when in the Normandy format can by
no means justify the offensive. By no means can it
justify thousands and thousands of Russian troops
on our territory. The President of Russia today called
on the Ukrainian army to remove the Government of
Ukraine. Is he crazy? Russia should show respect for
the core principles enshrined in the United Nations
Charter: sovereign equality, non-use of force or threat
of force against the territorial integrity and political
independence of States.
In my opening remarks, I said that the parents of
all Ambassadors here are proud of their children and
that the children of the Ambassadors are proud of their
parents. It is so painful to imagine what your family
must think about you when you lie every day. The
Russian people deserve peace and democracy. The
Russian people deserve liberty, and they will have
it — if not tomorrow, because tomorrow is not possible,
but probably in the near future.
The President (spoke in Russian): In my capacity
as the representative of the Russian Federation, I should
like to make only one comment in order to calm Council
members’ fears. There is a great deal to say about the
statement made by the representative of Ukraine. I will
let his boorishness weigh on his conscience and say
nothing further about it. But let me say one thing.

The Russian Ministry of Defence reported that
“Yesterday, 24 February, units of the Russian
paratrooper forces took full control of the area
surrounding the Chernobyl nuclear power plant. An
agreement was reached with Ukranian servicemen
from the power plant special guard battalion about
the joint provision of security for the power units
and the sarcophagus at the power plant”.
We do not want Ukraine to build a dirty bomb. The
representative of the Russian Defence Ministry also
noted that personnel at the power plant continued to
carry out their tasks normally and were monitoring the
situation of radioactivity:
“The level of radioactivity surrounding the nuclear
power plant is normal.”
Vienna reports that the level of radiation at the
Chernobyl nuclear power plant is low, and there is no
threat to the population, as announced on Friday by
Rafael Grossi, the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 7 p.m.

22-2692517/17
