S/2020/915

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 September 2020
Original: English and French

Letter dated 18 September 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of Belgium,
China, France, Indonesia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South
Africa, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Viet Nam, in
connection with the video-teleconference on the situation in the Middle East (Syria),
convened on Wednesday, 16 September 2020. A statement was also delivered by the
representative of Turkey.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefing and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Abdou Abarry
President of the Security Council

20-12265 (E) 210920 211020

*2012265*

S/2020/915

Annex I
Statement by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock
I will start by paying tribute to three humanitarian colleagues killed in
northern Aleppo on Monday. A staff member of the Turkish Red Crescent was
killed when his vehicle, which was reportedly clearly marked, was attacked north of
Al-Bab town. On Monday evening, a doctor who worked for the Syrian organization
Hand in Hand for Aid and Development was killed, along with a staff member of a
local relief organization and at least 11 other civilians, when a car bomb detonated
in Afrin city. Humanitarian workers across Syria are taking personal risks to deliver
aid every day. They must be protected.
I will focus today on five areas: first, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
outbreak; secondly, the humanitarian impact of the economic downturn; thirdly, the
protection of civilians; fourthly, humanitarian access; and, fifthly, the assistance
that humanitarian agencies are delivering across Syria.
Reports from inside Syria continue to point to a much broader spread of
COVID-19 than the number of confirmed cases — currently at 3,618 — conveys.
We will not be able to grasp the extent of the outbreak until the laboratory testing
capacity is increased across the country. We know that community transmission is
widespread, as almost 90 per cent of newly confirmed cases cannot be traced to a
known source. Infection rates among health workers have also been rising. Syria
lacked the health workers it needed even before the pandemic. Supply shortages and
temporary shutdowns add even more pressure to the decimated health system.
Analysis by my Office has shown that, in low-income countries, disruptions
to health care caused by the pandemic could result in more, otherwise preventable,
deaths than the pandemic itself. On 27 August, the first confirmed cases of
COVID-19 were reported among residents at the Al-Hol and Arishah internally
displaced persons camps in the north-east. Five health-care workers at one of the
field hospitals in Al-Hol had tested positive in the previous weeks.
My deputy briefed the Security Council last month on plans for an inter-agency
mission to Al-Hol, led by the World Health Organization (WHO), following the
deaths of eight children under five years of age in less than a week in early August
(see S/2020/866, annex I). That mission has since taken place. It aimed to strengthen
capacities for managing critical and urgent medical cases. The United Nations and
other humanitarian organizations continue to provide a range of critical assistance in
Al-Hol, including emergency, primary and reproductive health care.
The Humanitarian Coordinator for Syria, Imran Riza, made his third visit to
Al-Hol last week. He was again struck by the number of children living in incredibly
difficult conditions there. Let us recall that two thirds of the 65,000 residents in
Al-Hol are children and that they come from more than 60 different countries. Their
situation must be addressed in a much more serious way than it has been hitherto,
and in a manner that treats them first and foremost as children who are victims.
I echo again High Commissioner Bachelet and others in urging States to
immediately assume responsibility for all their nationals, in accordance with
their obligations under international law. Many in Al-Hol, including orphans and
unaccompanied children, have experienced severe psychological distress and
trauma, in addition to physical harm. It is cruel and inhumane simply to leave them
detained in their current bad conditions.
My second point is the humanitarian impact of the economic downturn. The
value of the Syrian pound has remained relatively stable in recent weeks, trading in
2/21

20-12265

S/2020/915

informal markets at around 2,100 Syrian pounds to the dollar. But food prices remain
at the highest level ever recorded. Monitoring by the World Food Programme shows
that the price of a standard reference food basket has increased by more than 250 per
cent on last year. Recent data also show the impact of COVID-19 on businesses,
with 45 per cent temporarily shut down, 25 per cent operating at a reduced level
and 15 per cent permanently closed. In the north-west, where an estimated 45 per
cent of households draw their income from day labour, more than 70 per cent of
households say their income does not cover their needs — an increase of 10 per cent
since January.
My next point is on the protection of civilians and the critical infrastructure
on which they rely. In the north-west, while the situation remains relatively stable,
we continue to receive reports of ceasefire violations, with shelling close to front
lines in the Idlib area and in areas south of the M4 highway. In August, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights recorded at least four
civilian deaths and nine civilian injuries as a result of shelling in the so-called
de-escalation area.
In southern Syria, reports of kidnappings and targeted attacks continue on
an almost daily basis. At least 26 civilians, including four children, were killed and
five civilians, including a child, were injured in such incidents in Dar’a between
1 August and 13 September.
Explosive hazards also continue to claim lives across the country. At least
27 civilians were killed, 13 of them children, by explosive remnants across the
country between 1 August and 13 September.
We are monitoring with concern the humanitarian impact of the increase in
the activities of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in recent months. ISIL
attacks displaced 200 households in eastern Hamah during July and August.
Let me now turn to the supply of water essential for civilians’ survival and
the protection of critical water infrastructure in north-eastern Syria. We have seen
disruptions at the Allouk water station for almost a year now. Every time operations
stop, the water supply is cut off for at least 460,000 people in Al-Hasakah city, Tal
Tamer and surrounding areas, including in Al-Hol and Arishah camps. The health
consequences are serious. During the most recent disruption, which lasted two
weeks, more than 1,000 cases of diarrhoea were reported in health centres in the
area, as many families were forced to use water from alternative and unsafe sources.
Following the constructive and welcome engagement of a number of Member States,
water from Allouk reached several neighbourhoods of Al-Hasakah city in the
evening of 27 August. I hope that reflects a shared recognition that it is ultimately in
everyone’s interests to keep the water flowing.
Also on the issue of humanitarian access, the United Nations is adjusting its
cross-border operations into north-west Syria to meet the needs of millions who
rely on those operations for life-saving assistance. All United Nations humanitarian
deliveries into the north-west, including to northern Aleppo, are now dispatched
via the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing, in line with resolution 2533 (2020). With the
United Nations expanding its loading facility at the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing,
we believe that sufficient capacity can be established to manage increased traffic at
the border crossing, while still maintaining COVID-19 safety measures.
The initial humanitarian convoys from Bab Al-Hawa to those areas previously
covered from Bab Al-Salaam faced significant challenges on the Syrian side of
the border. Some were substantially delayed and one had to turn back completely.
Since then, agreements have been reached with parties for simplified bureaucratic

20-122653/21

S/2020/915

procedures to support the unimpeded passage of humanitarian deliveries across
lines of control.
The United Nations, working with others, also continues to engage with
relevant parties to move forward with plans for cross-line assistance to the northwest. Unfortunately, agreement has not yet been reached on the operational details
of the mission. I call on all parties to redouble their efforts to find a solution to allow
that mission to go forward.
Turning to the north-east, in addition to the existing constraints in delivering
cross-line assistance, in recent weeks several cross-line humanitarian deliveries
dispatched to Qamishli were delayed at Al-Tabqa crossing point as a result of the new
bureaucratic procedures imposed by local authorities. Those procedures affected
more than 100 aid trucks in total. The trucks were able to cross at Al-Tabqa this
morning. It is crucial that all parties facilitate the passage of humanitarian supplies
into the north-east, in particular as we continue to work to narrow the gap in medical
assistance coverage since the removal of Al-Yarubiyah as an authorized crossing
point for United Nations cross-border assistance.
Dozens of primary health centres and mobile medical units that are key to
the front-line health response have yet to receive cross-line supplies. Local supply
chains for pharmaceuticals and medical supplies have also been disrupted by the
economic situation. Key medicines, such as insulin, have been in short supply for
months as a result. One non-governmental organization partner that supports 38
health facilities has reported a complete stock-out of insulin, as well as shortages of
critical medicines for non-communicable diseases.
The distribution of medical supplies from the most recent WHO overland
shipment to reach the north-east in July is still ongoing. Recipient facilities so far
include 17 hospitals, of which 12 were previously supported by the United Nations
through cross-border operations. We hope that the ongoing distribution will further
expand the previous reach of such cross-line deliveries.
Turning now to Rukban, it has been a year since the humanitarian operation
accessed the camp. The situation for the 12,000 remaining civilians is deteriorating
and unsustainable. I reiterate my call for humanitarian actors to be granted access to
Rukban to deliver life-saving assistance to the civilians remaining there.
Allow me to close with a few words on the assistance that humanitarian
agencies continue to provide across Syria. The majority of assistance continues to
be provided from within Syria, reaching more than 4 million people each month. In
July, humanitarian operations from within Syria reached 4.6 million people. That
includes food assistance delivered to 3.8 million people, more than 900,000 medical
procedures and more than 1 million treatment courses.
All efforts are being made to continue routine immunizations, which have
been disrupted in Syria — as in some other parts of the world — as a result of the
pandemic. Over a five-day campaign in August, a UNICEF-supported programme
administered polio vaccines to 23,000 children aged under five years in rural
Damascus. However, the need for much larger campaigns is increasingly acute and,
in their absence, the number of avoidable infant and child deaths will grow.

4/21

20-12265

S/2020/915

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Philippe Kridelka
I will make this statement on behalf of Germany and Belgium, the humanitarian
co-penholders. We would like to thank Under-Secretary General Lowcock for his
briefing. We would also like to thank the humanitarian workers in the country for
their lasting engagement. They are at the forefront of every humanitarian disaster
and this is no different in the current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis. Their
protection should be, and is, our constant concern. I will make three points.
First, some claim that the situation in Syria has stabilized. Indeed, we are
relieved to see that the situation in the north-west remains relatively calm despite
the ongoing violence, and we — Germany and Belgium — call for the continued
implementation of the Turkish-Russian ceasefire agreement. However, the
humanitarian situation in Syria remains alarming. Eleven million Syrians remain in
need of humanitarian assistance and protection. Moreover, the economic crisis and
COVID-19 have added an additional burden to an already very dire situation, and
the winter is right ahead of us. The war, mismanagement, corruption and oppression
have resulted in an unprecedented economic crisis, sharply limiting the purchasing
power of Syrians throughout the country. That has led to an additional 1.4 million
people having become food insecure over the past six months.
COVID-19 is claiming victims across the country. The number of cases has
grown exponentially. That is alarming. Statistics are unreliable. The identified cases
are only the tip of the iceberg. The testing capacity remains far too low everywhere
in the country, including in the north-east and the north-west. Prevention therefore
falls short. Treatment options are inadequate, as this crisis is also, once again,
so acutely showing the limitations of the Syrian health-care system. Health-care
facilities that were deliberately bombed and destroyed during years of war are unable
to cope with the current crisis. The shortage of health workers further endangers any
appropriate response.
Wintertime adds to the challenging humanitarian circumstances, and that
will especially be the case for the 2.7 million internally displaced persons, among
them 1 million children, in the north-west. We remember the deeply dehumanizing
circumstances under which many of those people fled their areas of origin in large
numbers and arrived in camps last year. We — Germany and Belgium — encourage
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and its humanitarian
partners to undertake all efforts to prepare for winterization. We know that, with
limited access, that will not be an easy exercise.
That brings me to my second point. Humanitarian access remains limited,
which is intolerable and defies humanitarian logic. We, the co-penholders, call upon
all parties to allow neutral and non-political access to all parts of the country without
limitations and fully in line with humanitarian principles. Administrative hurdles
are not acceptable. Throughout this year, Secretary-General Guterres and UnderSecretary-General Lowcock have consistently called for that, with more cross-line
and more cross-border access to all Syrians in need.
While the majority of the Security Council was in favour of supporting this
request in the interest of the Syrian people, some have chosen to deny it. They have
blocked draft Security Council resolutions seeking adequate access to the north-east,
via Al-Yarubiyah, and the north-west, via Bab Al-Salam. They claim that cross-line
deliveries from Damascus and deliveries passing conflict lines from Bab Al-Hawa
would compensate for the closure of cross-border posts.
20-122655/21

S/2020/915

However, the sad reality is that the non-renewal of Bab Al-Salam has so far
resulted in a more costly and more risky humanitarian operation in the north-west.
So far, no cross-line deliveries have taken place and it remains to be seen whether
the current planning becomes reality. At the same time, access from Damascus to the
north-east seems to have become further complicated recently, as Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock mentioned, and gaps in medical access to that region are still far
from being filled. What else is clear is that we cannot accept Damascus deciding who
is to receive aid and who is not. Humanitarian action has to be neutral, independent
and impartial.
Thirdly, humanitarian access is not limited to the delivery of food or shelter.
Access should also be facilitated, by all parties, to those who need protection —
for instance, those in arbitrary detention. It should be guaranteed to those located
in hard-to reach locations, such as the camp of Rukban. It should be urgently and
unconditionally guaranteed in order to keep civilian infrastructure — such as the
Allouk water station, which provides the essential water supply to over half a million
people, including to the camp of Al-Hol — fully functioning.
Each of these points illustrates the immeasurable human suffering that Syrian
children, women and men are undergoing on a day to day basis. Therefore, we —
Germany and Belgium, the humanitarian co-penholders — once again call for
sustainable, durable and unconditional solutions.
Finally, to change the situation for the Syrian people for the better, action
will be needed, and we to reiterate our call for the full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015) and for accountability. We fully support the conclusions of the Board
of Inquiry, and the work of the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic
since March 2011, and the Commission of Inquiry, as well as justice initiatives at the
national and international levels.

6/21

20-12265

S/2020/915

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: Chinese]
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for the briefing. China appreciates
the efforts of the United Nations and its humanitarian partners to improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Regarding the humanitarian issue in Syria, I would
like to emphasize three points.
First, there is a need to take a comprehensive and integrated approach to
revitalizing the Syrian economy and improving the humanitarian situation on the
ground. The current economic situation in Syria is extremely fragile. The Syrian
Government has launched many initiatives to alleviate the difficult situation, which
deserve recognition. The international community should take concrete actions
to increase financial and material assistance to Syria to support its economic
development, improve people’s livelihoods and rebuild infrastructure. The
international community should also fulfil its promise of humanitarian assistance
to Syria as soon as possible, without attaching preconditions, and not use such
assistance as a tool to pressure the Syrian Government.
The top priority is to immediately lift unilateral sanctions. Unilateral sanctions
are severely undermining the ability of countries such as Syria to mobilize resources,
rehabilitate their economies and respond to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. Secretary-General Guterres and his Special Envoy have repeatedly
appealed for a waiver of unilateral sanctions. China strongly urges relevant countries
to earnestly respond to these appeals by immediately lifting unilateral sanctions
against Syria and other countries.
China welcomes the recent positive progress in cross-line humanitarian
operations. We note that the United Nations plans to cooperate with the Syrian
Government to deliver two batches of supplies to the north-west, and the World
Health Organization continues to deliver medical supplies to the north-east. It
is hoped that all parties will continue to improve the efficiency of cross-line
humanitarian operations, simplify the procedures for cross-border delivery to meet
the humanitarian needs of the Syrian people. China is paying close attention to the
issue of Allouk water station and Rukban camp and hopes that the relevant parties
can find a lasting solution through dialogue.
Secondly, we should attach great importance to the threat of COVID-19 and
support the efforts of Syria and the United Nations to combat the pandemic and
save lives. The pandemic situation in Syria is worrying. The number of confirmed
cases has increased rapidly, detection capabilities are insufficient, many medical
workers have been infected, and women, children and refugee camp populations
face additional risks. China encourages the Syrian Government to continue to take
active response measures, and appreciates and supports the work of the World Health
Organization in leading and coordinating countrywide COVID-19 response efforts.
China calls on the international community to increase multilateral and
bilateral support for the Syrian Government and people in their fight against the
pandemic. China will continue to provide assistance to Syria through the bilateral
channel to help the Syrian people prevail over the scourge as soon as possible.
Thirdly, there is a need to respond positively to the Secretary-General’s
global ceasefire initiative, strengthen political dialogue and maintain regional peace
and stability. The political and security situation directly affects the humanitarian
situation. Since March this year, the overall situation on the ground in Syria has
20-122657/21

S/2020/915

been relatively calm, creating better conditions for the protection of civilians. We
appreciate the efforts of all parties to maintain the ceasefire arrangements and
encourage the Astana process to continue playing its constructive role. All parties
in Syria should seize the opportunity to strengthen political dialogue and advance
the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process. China welcomes the recent
successful convening of the third round of meetings of the Syrian Constitutional
Committee in Geneva.
Many countries, including China, are deeply concerned about terrorist
activities in Syria. According to the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/813), more
than 10,000 Islamic State terrorists are active in Syria and Iraq, threatening the
security and stability of Syria and the entire region. The ceasefire arrangement does
not and must not mean give free rein to terrorists. The international community
should adopt uniform standards and strengthen counter-terrorism cooperation in
accordance with international law and Security Council resolutions.

8/21

20-12265

S/2020/915

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing. His conclusions are indisputable —
the coronavirus disease pandemic continues to spread, particularly in the regimeheld areas, but also in the north-west and north-east. We cannot rely on the Syrian
regime’s official figures, which are well below reality. The rate of contamination of
medical and humanitarian personnel is alarming. And, while testing capacities are
gradually being strengthened, they remain largely insufficient.
The indirect impacts of this pandemic are also very worrying. Food insecurity
is deteriorating by the day, further increasing the humanitarian needs of the most
vulnerable populations. In this context, every effort must be made to put in place an
immediate, lasting and verifiable cessation of hostilities at the national level and a
humanitarian pause, in accordance with resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2254 (2015) and
the appeal of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy.
The continued air strikes in the Idlib region are a worrisome signal, as is the
significant instability in the south-west and north-east. We cannot repeat it often
enough — the protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel,
as well as civilian infrastructure, must be a top priority.
Rising humanitarian and medical needs make it more essential than ever
to ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian access to all those in need. We call
on all parties, in particular the Syrian regime, to respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law. The shortcomings in the delivery of medical aid in
the north-east, in particular, are alarming. We regret the lack of consensus in the
Security Council to reopen Al-Yarubiyah crossing point, as well as the closure of the
Bab Al-Salam crossing point, which has resulted in a dramatic lengthening of the
routes of humanitarian convoys.
The politicization and instrumentalization of humanitarian aid in Syria is
unacceptable. The European Union and its member States, which represent 70 per
cent of the commitments made at the fourth Brussels Conference on Supporting the
Future of Syria and the Region, will continue to ensure full respect for the guarantees
of impartiality and transparency in the delivery of aid, and the implementation of the
principles and parameters document in Syria.
Finally, until a credible political process consistent with resolution 2254 (2015)
is firmly under way, France and the European Union will not finance reconstruction.
Our positions on the lifting of sanctions and normalization also remain unchanged.
The instrumentalization of the sanctions issue to mask the responsibility of the
Syrian regime in this humanitarian tragedy fools no one. I would like to recall that
European sanctions are targeted; they are aimed at individuals and entities that
participate in the repression and profit from the fallout of the conflict. They include
strong measures to safeguard the delivery of humanitarian and medical aid. We must
stop instrumentalizing the issue of sanctions.

20-122659/21

S/2020/915

Annex V
Statement by the Minister Counsellor of the Permanent Mission of
Indonesia to the United Nations, Rolliansyah Soemirat
My delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing.
As reported, the humanitarian needs in Syria remain substantial, as the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the economic downturn continue
to affect millions of people in the country. My delegation welcomes the ongoing
humanitarian response by the United Nations and its humanitarian partners as well
as the increased deliveries of aid during this difficult period. These humanitarian
actors are working in a challenging environment, where they are risking their lives
to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people; some have even paid the ultimate
price. And we are certain that expressing our gratitude will never suffice in the face
of the enormity of this sacrifice. In this regard, allow me to convey my delegation’s
deepest condolences to the families of the three humanitarian workers who were
killed in northern Aleppo a few days ago.
Today I wish to stress the following points.
First, my delegation welcomes the continued cross-border operations and
efforts to scale up deliveries through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing. We are fully aware
that, after the 10 July decision (resolution 2533 (2020)), the cross-border deliveries
have met with various challenges.
Indonesia therefore encourages all relevant parties to enhance coordination
and redouble their efforts aimed at finding ways to close the gaps created by the
closure of the Bab Al-Salam border crossing. After hearing Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock’s briefing earlier, we strongly believe that we should give appropriate focus
to closing these existing gaps.
Genuine and active coordination is also needed for the cross-line convoys to
the north-west of Syria. We note that, in this regard, there is an ongoing discussion
to complement the cross-border operations. My delegation looks forward to the
immediate deployment of these cross-line convoys.
Secondly, there should be no interference in the process of humanitarian
aid deliveries. We urge all parties to refrain from impeding the delivery process
of basic and life-saving assistance. It is critical that safe, unimpeded and sustained
humanitarian access be assured to all areas in Syria and to all civilians in need.
This also includes ensuring the availability of such basic services as access to safe
drinking water. We are pleased to note that the water supply from the Allouk water
station has reached people in Al-Hasakah since the end of August. A long-term
solution is key to preventing future disruption of this vital infrastructure.
On access to the north-east, my delegation is pleased that, despite some gaps,
aid deliveries are continuing to the area, both by air and land convoys. We urge
immediate approval for the remaining humanitarian assistance.
Thirdly, it is urgent that any kind of tension or escalation be avoided. The Syrian
people need sustained calm, and they need it now more than ever. Humanitarian
and medical workers also need a safe environment so that they can execute their
tasks effectively.
Indonesia reaffirms that all parties to the conflict must not avoid their
obligations to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure, pursuant international
humanitarian law. Supporting and maintaining relative calm and creating new
conditions for peace must be our priority. And we must continue to pursue peace
10/21

20-12265

S/2020/915

through diplomacy. Some might say that it is very difficult for Syria, but it is indeed
possible. We must therefore work to make it happen for the Syrian people in the
hopes of achieving a better future.

20-1226511/21

S/2020/915

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing.
The year 2020 has been no ordinary year, with the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic that has shaken the world. For many children, autumn marks
the end of summer fun and the beginning of the new school year. The start of the
new school year is a particular challenge for pupils and students in various countries
living in conflict zones, who have to return to school in the era of COVID-19.
My delegation welcomes the continued cooperation of the Syrian authorities
with the World Health Organization and national organizations in their efforts to
prevent and combat the spread of COVID-19, but also remains concerned about
the deterioration of the Syrian health infrastructure as a result of years of conflict.
A large number of vulnerable people, including internally displaced persons and
refugees, are at a high risk of contracting the virus. This is a major risk factor for a
larger crisis, as social distancing is virtually impossible in overcrowded camps.
The Niger reiterates its support for the daily efforts of humanitarian agencies
aimed at assisting people in need. It also calls for an optimization of the level of
humanitarian assistance, in view of the situation on the ground. Our thanks go to those
countries that are already making enormous efforts. As Mr. Lowcock communicated
to us in his briefing — in which, with great eloquence and deep emotion, he described
the realities of life for Syrians — if we are to improve humanitarian assistance, we
must listen to the messages of humanitarian organizations working in the field in
order to respond in the most adequate way to the appeals for help of thousands of
women and children in destitution and distress.
As I have said before on several occasions, the strength of the Security Council
lies in its unity. It is a pity that it is taking so long to find such unity on the Syrian
dossier. However, the gravity of the humanitarian situation and the hope that many
people place in the Security Council for a permanent and secure solution — and one
that will allow the displaced to return to their homes — must be found. The Council
simply must do better.
That is why my delegation calls on all stakeholders to echo the appeal launched
by the Secretary-General last March for the removal or easing, on humanitarian
grounds, of sanctions imposed on countries in crisis, in order to guarantee access
to food and essential medical supplies to combat the pandemic. On this issue,
too, I know that the Council is divided, and it is time that we overcome this other
divergence. Of course, no positive progress on this issue, which has been taken up
several times by the Council, will be possible without a ceasefire, which is the only
way for dialogue to continue within the Constitutional Committee, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015).
My delegation reiterates its appeal to all parties to uphold their obligations in
terms of protecting civilians and allowing rapid, safe and unimpeded access to all
humanitarian workers and assistance to people in need throughout the Syrian Arab
Republic. Humanitarian assistance must be free from political considerations.
In conclusion, my delegation also remains concerned about the deterioration
of the Syrian economy. The continued decline in the exchange rate of the Syrian
pound and the shortage of certain basic necessities are early warning signs that must
be addressed in order to prevent the economic crisis from further complicating the
current situation, which is already so difficult for the Syrian people.
12/21

20-12265

S/2020/915

Annex VII
Statement by the Counsellor of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to
the United Nations, Diani Jimesha Prince
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his comprehensive briefing.
Unfortunately, in Syria the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is
now a nationwide issue, with cases steadily rising throughout the country. With
limited testing capacity the true magnitude of the outbreak has not yet been realized.
Syria’s health-care system has been debilitated by conflict, and an acute shortage of
personal protective equipment and other essential medical supplies impairs efforts
to combat the virus. It is evident that significant gaps remain, and the scaling-up of
timely, safe, sustained, and unimpeded humanitarian support, utilizing all available
modalities, therefore remains imperative.
The dreadful complications associated with economic decline — food
insecurity, hyperinflation and diminished access to basic necessities — are well
documented and have regrettably become commonplace in the lives of millions of
Syrians. We appeal to the international community to assist with the resuscitation
of the economy by lifting all unilateral coercive measures imposed on Syria. These
measures will serve only as the basis for further economic deterioration, increasing
the burden on the Syrian people, and could significantly impede the country’s
COVID-19 response.
We welcome the resumption of the operations of the Allouk water station,
albeit at only 30 per cent capacity. Further disruptions threaten the survival of nearly
half a million people and could precipitate an increase in COVID-19 cases in the
north-east. We remind all parties of their obligations and urge them to pursue a
sustainable solution to ensure its full and uninterrupted functioning.
We are concerned by the fires that have engulfed forests and agricultural land
in recent days. A combination of factors, including rising temperatures in the region
owing to the climate crisis, have contributed to the recurrence of these incidents,
which undoubtedly have a harmful environmental impact and exacerbate the current
humanitarian challenges. It is our hope that these fires will be swiftly subdued to
protect vital land and prevent further displacement.
The stabilization of Syria’s security situation is necessary for the preservation
of a robust humanitarian response. The prolongation of hostilities substantially
hinders humanitarian actors from coordinating and carrying out life-saving work.
Furthermore, it deters the cultivation of conditions necessary for the safe, dignified
and voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced persons. In this context,
we emphasize the importance of preserving the ceasefire in the north-west and we
echo the call for a complete nationwide cessation of hostilities.
There remains no military solution to the conflict in Syria and we continue to
support a political settlement in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). The Syrian
people have endured and continue to endure immeasurable suffering. Let us not lose
sight of our responsibility to them.

20-1226513/21

S/2020/915

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
Mark Lowcock for his briefing on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
As we have heard today, the lingering effects of nine years of conflict on the
health and social sectors in Syria, the deteriorating economic situation, the impact of
sanctions and complications due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
have had a cumulative and detrimental impact on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
That impact continues to severely affect the most vulnerable sectors of
society. Women and children, in particular, endure the most devastating effects of
the humanitarian situation.
In the past six months, the number of food-insecure people has reached the
highest level ever recorded in Syria, at 9.3 million. South Africa is deeply concerned
that, due to the inability of many households to meet their most basic requirements,
negative coping mechanisms are increasingly being adopted.
In that regard, South Africa appreciates and commends the efforts of the
United Nations and its personnel, implementing partners and agencies for their
sterling efforts to provide the necessary aid and assistance in particularly challenging
circumstances in one of the most insecure countries for aid workers.
We therefore reiterate the importance of ensuring the safe, unimpeded and
impartial delivery of humanitarian aid and assistance to all those who require it, in
line with the provisions of international humanitarian law and the need to ensure the
safety and security of humanitarian workers.
Reports indicate that the delivery of this essential aid in the north-west of
Syria has been further impacted by the closure of the Bab Al-Salam border crossing
in July. Additionally, while efforts have been made to scale up operations at the Bab
Al-Hawa crossing point, challenges still remain to providing effective and efficient
cross-border aid. In that regard, it is important for the authorities to work with the
United Nations to streamline the approval processes for both cross-border and crossline assistance throughout Syria, which should continue to be scaled up to meet the
increasing demand.
We welcome the recent interventions and developments that have led to
the restoration of the water supply from the Allouk water station to Al-Hasakah.
However, a long-term, sustainable solution to ensure the regular supply of water
from the Allouk water station must be found and maintained.
In conclusion, South Africa reiterates its support for the Secretary-General’s
call to waive all economic measures imposed on Syria, particularly in the light of the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, we call on the Secretary-General
to include, in his reports to the Council, an overview of the effects and impact of
unilateral sanctions on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
The situation in Syria can be resolved only through negotiations and
mediation. South Africa calls on all parties to make every effort to ensure the full
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
With regard to the comments of the Permanent Representative of Germany
on the sanctions imposed by the European Union on the then apartheid regime in
South Africa, we fail to see the correlation between the situation in apartheid South
Africa and Syria, which are entirely different situations. Broad generalizations
14/21

20-12265

S/2020/915

like these are disingenuous and try to mask the harm that sanctions do under the
current situation, where the COVID-19 pandemic is having a devastating impact on
humanitarian situations across the world.
We will continue to support the appeal made by the Secretary-General for the
lifting of unilateral coercive measures and sanctions that impact the ability of States
to fight the COVID-19 pandemic.

20-1226515/21

S/2020/915

Annex IX
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, James Roscoe
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned that the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) continues to compound the humanitarian crisis across Syria. As I
mentioned before, we are doing what we can to support the Syrian people and we
provided $30 million to tackle the threat of COVID-19 in Syria. That is in addition
to almost $400 million this year in humanitarian support.
That support is a clear demonstration of our unwavering commitment to the
Syrian people and to the aid community. I want to join others in expressing our
steadfast support, in particular, to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the World Health Organization, both of which play a critical role in the
coordination of the humanitarian and health responses in Syria.
That support is all the more important as aid workers continue to work
in incredibly challenging circumstances, having to deal on a daily basis with
obstructions to their vital work and threats to their health and safety.
In particular, I want to condemn the attack against the Turkish Red Crescent
Society in Al-Bab on Monday, which resulted in the death of an aid worker and the
wounding of another. The deliberate targeting of aid workers is a clear violation of
international humanitarian law, and such attacks are abhorrent. We call on all parties
in Syria to uphold their obligations.
We also remain concerned about the lack of adequate personal protective
equipment and medical equipment, as well as the continued rise in cases of
COVID-19 among United Nations staff and aid workers. This increased pressure on
aid workers comes against the backdrop of devastating reports of avoidable civilian
deaths, which further add to the humanitarian caseload. As we heard from UnderSecretary-General Lowcock, the combination of the devastated health system and
the challenges of COVID-19 can result in many more unnecessary deaths and illness.
We were also deeply saddened to hear of the 11 deaths caused by a car bomb in
Afrin. It is unacceptable that pro-regime forces continue to launch indiscriminate
attacks that result in the death of civilians.
As the Human Rights Council’s Commission of Inquiry again makes clear this
week in its latest report (A/HRC/45/31), these attacks may amount to war crimes.
Indeed, the report further shines a light on the brutal crimes against humanity that
the regime continues to commit through enforced disappearances, murder, torture
and imprisonment. If we ever needed evidence that the regime does not have the best
interests of its people at heart, then this is it.
As we also heard today, access problems persist in north-eastern Syria, with
a continued lack of cross-line access into the regions where vulnerable people
need it most. It was striking to hear Under-Secretary-General Lowcock’s example
of Al-Tabqa. It is especially galling to hear of 100 aid trucks being delayed from
crossing into north-east Syria because of bureaucratic procedures. That is another
sign that despite the assurances of the allies of the Syrian regime in the Council that
we could make cross-line access work, obstruction continues. Let us be clear — the
obstruction is calculated. It is also unacceptable. The United Nations must be given
unfettered access and must be allowed to deliver aid to those who need it most.
Like others, we remain concerned about persistent water and electricity
shortages and disruptions to the Allouk water station. We urge all parties to take
16/21

20-12265

S/2020/915

steps to swiftly resolve water supply disruptions and to deconflict and minimize
further conflict-related damage to civilian infrastructure.
At the last Council meeting on this issue (see S/2020/758), we talked about
the 9.3 million people who are currently food insecure. Fires have since then ripped
through north-western Syria. Given that October and November are the sowing
seasons for wheat and barley, and with the fires destroying large swaths of arable
land, there is a risk now of devastating famine and further impacts on people’s
livelihoods. So, the picture is bleak.
It is vital that the Council come together to prevent a worsening of the
humanitarian disaster as we approach the winter months in Syria. As a priority,
civilians and aid workers urgently need to be given the access and tools they need to
alleviate suffering while there is still time to prepare for the coming months ahead.
Finally, I am glad that Ambassador Heusgen raised the ongoing trial in
Germany. The reality is that the testimony there represents the tip of the iceberg.
The Syrian regime, as we know, is willing to indiscriminately bomb innocent
civilians in schools and hospitals. One can only imagine what they are capable of in
Al-Assad’s dungeons.
Before supporters of this regime raise the question of sanctions and the lifting
of sanctions, let us again reiterate that the path to the removal of sanctions is clear.
Rather than interfering with aid, bombing schools and hospitals, detaining and
torturing people, the Syrian regime must heed the calls of its population and engage
seriously with Special Envoy Pedersen and the United Nations-led political process
to achieve a peaceful end to the conflict.

20-1226517/21

S/2020/915

Annex X
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to
the United Nations, Pham Hai Anh
I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his informative
briefing today.
The gravity of the humanitarian situation in Syria continues to be a great
cause for concern. This concern also grows week after week with the spread of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Given the dire conditions of health care, the number confirmed cases may
not reflect the actual situation and the risks faced by the people and health workers.
Contact tracing may well be a crucial method of containing COVID-19. However,
around 89 per cent of cases in Syria are untraceable. Testing and quarantine capacity
is also very limited. We are also troubled by the worsening impact of the pandemic
on the condition of health workers, humanitarian workers and United Nations staff
on the ground. If infected, they cannot perform their crucial tasks of helping people
and peace. On top of that, social and economic strains, food insecurity and the lack
of development continue to be great challenges to sustainable peace and stability.
While a relatively calm situation on the ground has largely been maintained
during the past period, it is not sustainable. The protection of civilians continues to
be a source of concern, with reported loss of lives and injuries caused by explosive
devices and unrest in several parts of Syria.
In order to facilitate the humanitarian response and best support the Syrian
people, my delegation would like to stress the importance of two key aspects: access
and support.
First, full, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access is of the utmost
importance to assisting millions of people throughout Syria. We urge all parties
to preserve the relative calm on the ground and fulfil their obligations under
international law, including humanitarian law, in order to maximize the impact of
humanitarian efforts in Syria. We fully support the call made by the SecretaryGeneral and the Special Envoy for a nationwide ceasefire in order to facilitate the
pandemic preparedness and response in Syria.
We take note of the increase in aid delivery to the north-east, which includes
health items provided by the World Health Organization. We also welcome the
continuation of humanitarian assistance throughout north-western Syria. However,
there are still shortages in the north-east and access challenges in the north-west,
even after the adoption of resolution 2533 (2020). We therefore urge all parties in
Syria to fully cooperate with the United Nations and other humanitarian partners to
maintain the provision of assistance to all people in need.
Attention should also be paid to improving access for the people living in
various camps, such as Rukban and Al-Hol, and to finding a sustained solution to the
water security issue concerning the Allouk water station.
Regarding support for the Syrian people, we would like take this opportunity
to commend the tireless efforts of humanitarian and health workers as well as the
international community. We salute the dedication of all humanitarian and health
workers on the ground.
Against the current backdrop, we believe that special focus needs to be placed
on controlling the spread of COVID-19 and mitigating its grave impacts on the dire
humanitarian situation in Syria. Providing needed technical assistance and medical
supplies is now becoming more and more urgent as the danger of undermining peace
18/21

20-12265

S/2020/915

and humanitarian efforts looms large. It is also important to make sure that the
COVID-19 response capacity of Syria is not impacted by sanctions.
The humanitarian situation in Syria needs a sustained solution. The most
viable path is a comprehensive political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
and in full accordance with international law.

20-1226519/21

S/2020/915

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun Hadi Sinirlioğlu
Let me start by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing
and commend the devoted efforts of humanitarian workers in Syria.
As one of the largest humanitarian organizations worldwide, the Turkish
Red Crescent Society has been among the first to respond to the emerging needs of
Syrian people.
This week, terrorists targeted a Turkish Red Crescent convoy in Al-Bab,
killing one and injuring another. We strongly condemn that heinous terrorist attack,
which is a blatant violation of international humanitarian law and constitutes a crime,
according to the Geneva Conventions. We will hold the perpetrators accountable.
Syria is one of the most dangerous places on Earth, not only for Syrian
civilians but also for all humanitarian aid workers. Last week, the Council discussed
the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on peace and security
(see S/2020/897). A serious outbreak could happen at any time in Syria.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs indicates that during
the past two months, the pandemic across Syria has rapidly evolved. Given the
limited testing in the country, it is likely that the majority of the cases are undetected
and that the actual number of cases may far exceed official figures.
Syria is a country with a highly vulnerable population and a devastated
health system. There is also a shortage of personal protective equipment. Under the
pressure of a regime that kills its own people, it is not surprising that these front-line
workers are being exposed to the pandemic without any means of protection. The
high number of confirmed cases among doctors and nurses indicates the gravity of
the situation. In the north-west, COVID-19 continues to have a multiplier effect visà-vis the already dire humanitarian situation.
Together with the United Nations, we strive to channel medical aid via the
cross-border mechanism to the more than 4 million people living in the area. Since
the adoption of the resolution 2533 (2020), we have ensured the safe passage of
718 trucks full of humanitarian assistance through the Bab Al-Hawa border gate.
Around 3 million people in the north-west are highly vulnerable and rely on
humanitarian assistance to meet their basic needs, such as shelter, food and water.
The failure of the Security Council to re-authorize the Bab Al-Salam crossing point
in July continues to create various challenges and has put millions of lives at risk.
It is obvious that the limited cross-border delivery will have grave repercussions
on the health situation, which is already deteriorating at a large scale. We call on the
Security Council to uphold its responsibility and immediately consider re-authorizing
the Bab Al-Salam gate for cross-border humanitarian operations.
As to the disruption challenges regarding the Allouk water station in the northeast, we continue our efforts, in cooperation with the United Nations and relevant
countries, to find a durable solution. Let me repeat once again that the sustainability
of the water system and the provision of water to Al-Hasakah at full capacity depends
on the uninterrupted supply of electrical power to the station. The Kurdish Workers
Party/Kurdish People’s Protection Units has regularly and deliberately disrupted
electricity to the water station for almost a year. As of today, electric supply to the
region corresponds only to 29 per cent of the actual needs. Those with influence on
the disrupters should take necessary actions.
20/21

20-12265

S/2020/915

The Al-Assad regime started 2020 with an indiscriminate military campaign
that targeted densely populated areas in Idlib, such as homes, hospitals and schools.
We saw the worst humanitarian disaster that Syria has seen in nine years of conflict.
Now the regime is trying, at each and every single meeting of the Security
Council, to divert attention from the enormous destruction, suffering and
displacement it has inflicted on its own people. We should not forget about the
innocent victims who are still waiting for justice to be served. We should not forget
about the brave Syrian people who risked their lives in not surrendering to Al-Assad.
Last week, after months, the Council was finally able to meet in an open format to
shed light on the appalling crimes committed by the regime with chemical weapons
(see S/2020/902). We should not forget the devastating humanitarian consequences of
the use of chemical weapons and how the courageous Syrian doctors saved countless
lives in underground hospitals. Let us also not forget the millions of Syrians who
escaped the mass murderer in Damascus by taking refuge in neighbouring countries.
My country is hosting one fifth of the pre-war population of Syria and is strictly
implementing the principle of non-refoulement. We continue to mobilize all our
resources for the well-being of these people.
It is with deep regret that we are witnessing the use of the COVID-19 pandemic
in our neighbourhood as a pretext for abandoning or pushing back hundreds of
migrants at sea. We continue to conduct rescue operations in order to save these
people from death. Let me remind Council members that, under these precarious
circumstances, the situation of refugees and migrants requires our close attention
more than ever. We all have to abide by our international obligations.
Turkey will continue to stand by the Syrian people and seek accountability for
the blatant violations of international law and international humanitarian law by the
Syrian regime.
As to the statement of the previous speaker, he does not represent the Syrian
people and does not deserve a reply from me.

20-1226521/21
