S/2007/212

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 April 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 17 April 2007 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
The Security Council welcomes the confirmation in the letter dated 16 April
2007 from the Representative of the Sudan that the Government of the Sudan
accepts in full the heavy support package for the African Union Mission in the
Sudan proposed by the African Union and the United Nations (see annex).
The Security Council recalls its presidential statement of 19 December 2006
welcoming the commitment of the Government of National Unity in the Sudan to
the conclusions of the Addis Ababa high-level consultation on the situation in
Darfur and the communiqué of the 66th meeting of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union. The Council reaffirms its endorsement of those agreements,
including the immediate deployment of the light support package and heavy support
package to the African Union Mission in the Sudan and a hybrid operation in Darfur.
The Council further endorses the final report on the African Union/United Nations
consultations on the United Nations proposed heavy support package to the African
Union Mission in the Sudan of 21 January 2007 and requests that you take all
necessary steps to implement the arrangements specified in the report.
The Security Council supports in particular the proposals made in section VI,
paragraphs 35 to 41, of your 23 February 2007 report (S/2007/104) on the situation
in Darfur, with respect to the heavy support package, and urges their implementation
through the use of additional and existing United Nations resources.
The Security Council reaffirms that there is no military solution for the parties
to end the crisis in Darfur. The Council endorses the approach in the Addis Ababa
conclusions of an immediate ceasefire, reinvigorated political process and
deployment of an effective hybrid African Union/United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Darfur, including the role envisaged for the tripartite mechanism. The
Council welcomes the appointment of the African Union and the United Nations
envoys for the Darfur Peace Process and calls for their work to advance with all
possible speed and with the cooperation of all relevant groups.
(Signed) Emyr Jones Parry
President of the Security Council

07-31157 (E) 180407

*0731157*

S/2007/212

Annex
Letter dated 16 April 2007 from the Permanent Representative
of the Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General
With reference to the high-level technical meeting held in Addis Ababa on
9 April 2007, regarding the heavy support package to the African Union Mission in
the Sudan, and the options and clarifications given during that meeting, I am
pleased, upon instructions from my Government, to convey to you Sudan’s approval
of the helicopters component.
It is the sincere hope of the Sudan that implementation of the heavy support
package will proceed expeditiously.
(Signed) Abdalmahmood Abdalhaleem
Permanent Representative

2

07-31157
