S/PV.8084

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8084th meeting

Monday, 6 November 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cardi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic (S/2017/865)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-36466 (E)
*1736466*

S/PV.8084

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic (S/2017/865)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Central African Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic; Mr. Bédializoun Moussa Nébié, Special
Representative of the African Union to the Central
African Republic; and Mr. Mauro Garofalo, Head of
International Relations, Community of Sant’Egidio.
Mr. Nébié is joining us via video-teleconference
from Bangui.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/865, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga.
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (spoke in French): It is an
honour for me to address the Security Council only a
few days after the important visit of Secretary-General
António Guterres to the Central African Republic. It
was a visit rich in symbolism, which he undertook as
a signal of the solidarity of the United Nations and the
international community with the Government and the
people of the Central African Republic so as to ensure
that the Central African Republic will remain on the
busy international agenda.
I am pleased to take part in this meeting of the
Security Council along with other key partners of the
Central African Republic and the United Nations, as
2/13

06/11/2017

you noted earlier, Mr. President. This reflects the rich
and indispensable collaboration among us.
As noted in the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2017/865), this year has been marked by a great many
serious incidents. Many more Central Africans have
lost their lives. As the deteriorating security situation
has not allowed for the sustainable return of those
affected since the beginning of the crisis, the country
now has nearly 600,000 internally displaced persons
and half a million refugees in neighbouring countries.
Their fate and the volatility of the security situation
have further overshadowed an already disastrous
humanitarian environment.
But I must also deplore the violent deaths of many
humanitarian workers — 13 in total, the latest of which
occurred yesterday — making the Central African
Republic the most dangerous country for humanitarian
action. It is in that context of unprecedented brutality,
where there is often no peace to be preserved, that Blue
Helmets are engaged and risk their lives every day.
Twelve have succumbed since the beginning of this
year, victims of violent targeted attacks, and several
others have been wounded. Their hard work and their
sacrifice alongside the Central African security forces
have maintained a appreciable calm in the capital,
Bangui, and elsewhere in the country.
But wherever the presence of the State is lacking,
brutal attacks on civilians have persisted, particularly
in the south-east and north-west of the country.
Although limited in resources, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) increased
the number of road patrols, as in Pombolo, to limit the
risks to civilians. Redeployment in the affected areas
is particularly slowed by the rainy season and acts of
sabotage by armed groups.
In addition, with the onset of the dry season and
transhumance, there is reason to fear a resurgence of
clashes in the west of the country, particularly between
local anti-balaka fighters and armed members of
the Fulani community or armed elements affiliated
with ex-Séléka. Despite the hard work on the ground
and the negative impact of the misunderstanding that
arises from excessive expectations of the mandate of
MINUSCA and inevitably disappointed — although
understandably so — the Mission continues to carry out
its mandate with courage and determination. That was
17-36466

06/11/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

recently the case in Bocaranga, where it rebuffed the
armed group Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation, or
in Bang against elements of the Mouvement patriotique
pour la Centrafrique.
The multiplication of hotbeds of tension and
the exacerbation of armed violence over a large part
of the vast Central African territory highlight the
limits of the MINUSCA force, which the withdrawal
of Ugandan forces under the mandate of the African
Union has accentuated.
It was also in order to better understand the
dynamics of the conflict that continues to rage in many
parts of the territory, and to appreciate the complexity
of our mission, on the eve of the renewal of the
MINUSCA mandate, that the Secretary-General visited
the Central African Republic from 24 to 27 October. In
Bangui and Bangassou, he paid a well-deserved tribute
to our troops, recognizing their immense sacrifice and
invaluable contribution to the efforts to restore lasting
peace in the Central African Republic. The SecretaryGeneral and President Faustin-Archange Touadéra also
honoured the thousands of Central Africans who have
fallen victim to the armed conflicts that have affected
the Central African Republic for decades.
When he left Bangui on 27 October, the SecretaryGeneral noted that the Central African Republic
was at a turning point in its history, the outcome of
which will depend primarily on the Central Africans
themselves. But to succeed, it is undeniable that, at
this stage of the country’s capabilities, the decisions of
the Security Council and the continued support of the
international community will continue to be critical to
further progress.
That is why the Secretary-General has called for
greater solidarity with the Central African Republic,
stressing that it is a country that faces immense
challenges but also has real opportunities to achieve
a political resolution to the crisis and to launch an
economic recovery to benefit as many citizens as
possible. He pleaded for the strengthening of the
legitimate institutions of the country and a substantial
increase in the resources of MINUSCA to enable it to
better protect the civilian population and support the
expansion of State authority.
The Secretary-General also supported greater
national responsibility for the security of the country,
including through the gradual deployment of Central
African armed forces battalions that were retrained

S/PV. 8084

by the European Union Military Training Mission in
the Central African Republic, in line with paragraph
9 of resolution 2301 (2016). And in order for the peace
dividend to be felt without further delay by the Central
African people, the Secretary-General also advocated
the effective implementation of the National Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan, both in the mobilization of
the promised resources and in the carrying out, at the
national level, of the selected programmes.
To succeed on all fronts, all actors must be committed
to an inclusive political process under the auspices of
the President of the Central African Republic. In that
respect, the 17 July adoption in Libreville of the road
map for peace and reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, initiated by the African Union, offers real
hope for a lasting exit to the crisis through the voices
of dialogue. My brother Moussa Nébié, in Bangui, and
I have been having daily discussions on that issue and
we are ready to work hand in hand to ensure the success
of that important initiative.
MINUSCA will fully support the efforts of the
panel of facilitators of the African Initiative and the
Government of the Central African Republic so as
to ensure its success. Working together, we will also
promote local dialogue aimed at achieving a sustainable
reduction of violence, better humanitarian access and
the return of local Government. Ensuring stability
throughout the country will require strengthening
the presence and capacity of State institutions at
the local level, especially to support dialogue and
reconciliation efforts.
I am pleased to report notable progress in
the implementation of the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan and the Framework for Mutual
Engagement, which provide key strategic instruments
for strengthening institutions and promoting the
economic recovery of the country. But it is regrettable
that more than 2 million people in the Central African
Republic are in urgent need of food assistance. The
humanitarian response plan was revised upwards in
August to reflect increased needs, but has only been
34 per cent funded.
Communities devastated by violence often have to
take refuge around places of worship, in hospitals and
near MINUSCA camps. This forced displacement has
created new enclaves in many localities in the east of
the country. In Bangassou, Mbomou prefecture, some
1,500 displaced persons — primarily Muslims — found

17-364663/13

S/PV.8084

The situation in the Central African Republic

shelter in the Catholic church premises under the
protection of MINUSCA. In Bria, Kaga Bandoro and
Bocaranga, thousands of displaced people are suffering
the consequences of merciless clashes between
anti-Balaka and ex-Séléka elements. The prospects for
the return of displaced persons and refugees remain
significantly reduced by persistent tensions.
(spoke in English)
The Secretary-General’s request to increase
MINUSCA force level by 900 troops is part of a
comprehensive strategy to address the deteriorating
situation in close collaboration with the Government,
and to create an opportunity to advance the political
process. The proposed increase should include highly
mobile troops that would provide the force with greater
flexibility to rapidly deploy in areas of heightened threat
to civilians. We intend to increase our support for and
engagement in the political process, as requested by the
authorities of the Central African Republic, supported
by the African Initiative, together with other important
stakeholders, such as the Economic Community
of Central African States and the Community of
Sant’Egidio — and I am glad to see Mr. Garofalo here
with us today — in the knowledge that only a political
solution will bring lasting peace to the Central African
Republic. We will seek to improve the protection of
civilians with a stronger emphasis on early warning and
prevention, and we will make greater efforts to ensure
humanitarian access to populations in need.
The Mission will also continue to support the
restoration of State authority, working together with
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.
We will strengthen our support to Central Africa’s
judicial system and to the security sector, including
the gendarmerie, the police and the gradual
operationalization of the Central African armed forces
units trained by the European Union. In that regard,
we applaud the tripartite agreement between the
Government, the European Union Military Training
Mission in the Central African Republic and MINUSCA
for a joint deployment and use of the Central African
armed forces.
The Mission I have the honour to lead will spare
no effort in helping the Government and the Central
African authorities, as well as all national actors
committed to peace, to realize the aspirations of
their people, especially its valiant youth, women and
children, to a safer and more prosperous future. We
4/13

06/11/2017

will do that while ensuring that all of our civilian
and uniformed personnel respect more than ever the
spirit of the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy
against sexual exploitation and abuse. During his
visit to the Central African Republic, the SecretaryGeneral himself reaffirmed that imperative and when
he met the victims of sexual exploitation and abuse, he
assured them of all his compassion and determination
to eradicate this scourge.
I thank troop-contributing countries that have taken
important steps to curb this type of criminal behaviour.
Our concerted actions have already resulted in a
significant reduction in cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse. We can and must do even more.
(spoke in French)
I wish to sincerely thank the Council for
recognizing the crucial role that MINUSCA plays in
the Central African Republic. Significant progress has
been achieved through the adoption of resolution 2301
(2016) towards establishing the national and legitimate
institutions that are essential to the future of the
country. The creation of the Special Criminal Court and
the deployment of judicial authorities outside Bangui
will allow the slow but gradual return of the rule of law,
which will end impunity and the spiral of violence.
During his visit, the Secretary-General called on
Central African politician and the leaders of public
opinion to take urgent measures to put an end to the
political manipulation and instrumentalization of
ethnicity or religion, which fuel hatred and violence.
There will be no peace in the Central African Republic
for some so long as there is no peace for all. The Council’s
continued commitment will be crucial to the country’s
long-term stabilization and development efforts. We
count on the Council’s support to ensure that the current
cycle of violence in the Central African Republic is
broken and that the resilience and hope shown by so
many Central Africans continue to benefit from the
unwavering support of the international community.
I should like to borrow an idea from Saint
Augustine in saying that, in the case of the Central
African Republic, it is better to progress slowly in the
right direction — even at a limp — than quickly in the
wrong direction. Today, the Central African Republic is
moving in the right direction. We must do our utmost to
help it to that end. The Secretary-General is committed
to that effort, and has called for a great deal of sacrifice,
endurance and patience.
17-36466

06/11/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Nébié.
Mr. Nébié (spoke in French): At the outset, allow
me to thank the President of the Council for having
invited me to make a briefing on the implementation
of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic. My briefing will focus
on the following points, as the President has requested:
the status of implementation of the road map for the
African Initiative, the agenda in the coming months,
the action of the African Union mission in Bangui, the
elements hindering the peace process in the Central
African Republic, the regional dimension of the crisis
and, finally, recommendations.
First, with regard to the state of implementation of
the Libreville road map, on 11 September in Bangui, all
the structures for the operationalization of the road map
for the African Initiative were put in place. Those include
the panel of facilitators, the technical committee and the
focal point for the Central African State. The panel of
facilitators was set up on 11 September and held its first
session immediately on 11 and 12 September in Bangui.
The participants were the representatives of Angola, the
Central African Republic, Congo-Brazzaville, Gabon,
Chad, the African Union, the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) and the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR). Those
were the panel members referred to in the road map.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) was present as an observer.
During the meeting, it was suggested that the
panel be extended to all neighbouring countries and to
other observers who wished to join. The extraordinary
conference of Foreign Ministers of ECCAS, held on
21 October in Libreville, endorsed that proposal, which
seeks to strengthen the presence of all countries on
the panel.
The technical committee was also formed on
11 September to establish the secretariat of the panel.
The committee is made up of representatives of ECCAS,
the African Union, the Central African Government
and MINUSCA. It holds two meetings per week in
preparation for the implementation of the road map.
Since its establishment, the technical secretariat has
produced a programme of activities and a draft budget.
A first programme of activities had been developed, but

S/PV. 8084

could not be undertaken due to interference from other
regional and subregional agendas. A second programme
has been developed that includes the second meeting
of the panel of facilitators on 24 and 25 November,
followed by a field trip to meet the commanders of the
armed groups.
The secretariat has also prepared a draft budget,
which is estimated at $4.14 million. ECCAS has
already contributed $100,000. The contribution of the
African Union is expected in the coming weeks. The
African Union’s representation in Bangui and the panel
secretariat are working hard to mobilize contributions
from panel member countries and various partners.
MINUSCA provides threefold support to the Initiative
in terms of logistics, financial resources and security. It
will also manage the first field trip.
Finally, with regard to the focal point, as provided
for in the road map, the Central African Government
has appointed its focal point, which is already involved
in all preparatory processes.
Secondly, with regard to the Initiative’s agenda for
the coming months, the new programme is established
as follows. From 22 November to 15 December, the
second meeting of the panel is to be held in Bangui, to
be followed by a first field trip to meet armed groups.
From 15 to 31 January 2018, the third meeting of the
panel will take place, to be followed by the second
field trip to meet the armed groups. In February 2018,
a dialogue will be held between the Government and
the armed groups. In March 2018, an ECCAS summit
will be held, with the participation of the African
Union, for the signing of a comprehensive peace and
reconciliation agreement between the Government and
the armed groups.
Thirdly, with regard to the actions of the African
Union mission in Bangui, since the formalization of
the African Initiative, the African Union and ECCAS
have conducted information, awareness-raising and
promotion activities, both in the Central African
Republic and in neighbouring countries. Following its
first meeting in September, the panel of facilitators met
with the President of the Republic, the President of the
National Assembly, the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
MINUSCA, the African Ambassadors Forum, the
Coordination Group for the Preparation of and Followup to the Meetings of the International Support Group
on the Central African Republic, and the international
press. Those various meetings allowed the Chair of

17-364665/13

S/PV.8084

The situation in the Central African Republic

the panel to bring to the attention of the authorities the
conclusions of the panel’s meeting and to solicit their
support for the African Initiative and their commitment
to dialogue and reconciliation for lasting peace in the
Central African Republic. Regarding armed groups,
some were sensitized to the African Initiative.
Fourthly, without being exhaustive, the main
elements of the blockage of the peace process in the
Central African Republic concern the lack of trust
between the Government and the governed, the absence
of State authority throughout the national territory and
the weakness of governance, the persistence of violence
committed by armed groups, poverty, the political
and religious manipulation of which my colleague,
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, has just spoken, and the low
levels of training and education.
Fifthly, with regard to the regional dimension of the
crisis, aware that the Central African crisis has serious
consequences for neighbouring countries and the
subregion, the various subregional organizations — the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region — took up the issue and put it on their agenda.
Several summits and meetings have thus been held on
the question of the Central African Republic to discuss
issues concerning security, the economy, refugees
and migration.
As Mr. Onanga-Anyanga told the Council earlier,
there are 600,000 displaced persons and 500,000
refugees, in addition to the issue of transhumance.
The subregional organizations have reaffirmed their
determination to contribute to resolving the crisis. At
the continental level, on 14 November I will make a
presentation to the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union on that issue.
Finally, I shall now move on to my recommendations.
The Security Council will soon have to renew the
MINUSCA mandate. In view of the crisis situation in
the Central African Republic, I take this opportunity
to make some recommendations, on the one hand, to
support the process of dialogue, reconciliation and
peace in the Central African Republic, and, on the
other, to contribute to the economic recovery that is
essential to improving the living conditions and wellbeing of the population.
First, support for the implementation of the road
map for the Initiative will require mobilizing significant
6/13

06/11/2017

financial resources. However, the panel has few
resources at its disposal apart from MINUSCA, which
is willing to support its first outings in the field. I have
already pointed out that the budget is $4.14 million, and
the contribution of the African Union is being assessed.
I seek the support of Council members for the panel’s
timely implementation of the programme that I have
just outlined.
As for the MINUSCA mandate, given the increased
activity of some armed groups, the presence of a deterrent
force is necessary to compel armed and uncooperative
groups to avoid violence. It is therefore essential that
the mandate of MINUSCA not only be renewed, but that
it be strengthened to increase its effectiveness on the
ground in view of the resurgence of attacks. Similarly,
an increase in the number of Blue Helmets would be
very useful, as it would increase their presence and
visibility on the ground, which should significantly
improve the protection of civilian populations.
Thirdly, in the same vein, it is important to relax
the arms embargo so as to enable the Government of
the Central African Republic to equip its defence and
security forces in the greatest possible transparency.
These forces were created in a republican spirit to be
deployed on the ground and enhance the security of
populations, with the support of MINUSCA.
Fourthly, with regard to the promotion of quickimpact projects and humanitarian assistance, widespread
impoverishment among the population of the Central
African Republic, especially among its young people, is
helping to fuel armed groups. That is why humanitarian
action must be extended to areas that have not yet
been served, and quick-impact and income-generating
projects developed for young people and women. In
addition, special emphasis should be placed on school
enrolment and the education of children, as well as on
accelerated and large-scale training for young people
in the trades. Such a policy would allow young people
to be shielded from the influence of armed groups and
prevent them from joining their ranks. Similarly, there
is a need to continue providing reintegration assistance
to internally displaced persons.
Fifthly, with regard to the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan, I appeal to the Central African
Republic’s partners to urgently honour the pledges
made at the Brussels Conference, because only 30 per
cent of pledges made at the Conference have been
fulfilled to date.
17-36466

06/11/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

Sixthly, as regards fighting impunity and the
expansion of State authority, fighting impunity does
not only concern the armed groups that commit abuses
against civilians; it must also include the perpetrators
of economic crimes, who, through corruption and
embezzlement, deprive the State of the means it needs
to assert its authority. We therefore encourage the
Government to continue taking appropriate measures
to substantially strengthen its authority to combat
that scourge.
The people of the Central African Republic have
suffered enough. It is therefore extremely urgent that
the international community, as represented by the
Security Council, take strong and concrete measures
and actions to mitigate its unspeakable suffering. I
also take this opportunity to make a strong appeal to
the political classes, civil society, the forces and all
the people of the Central African Republic to make an
exceptional, patriotic and collective demonstration for
peace and reconciliation in their country.
For my part, I reaffirm the commitment
and determination of the African Union and its
representatives in Bangui to remain with the people
of the Central African Republic in order to find a
peaceful solution to the crisis. The sole objective of the
African Union is peace and reconciliation for Central
Africans. I reaffirm what Mr. Onanga-Anyanga said
earlier, namely, that we are working hand in hand, in
perfect symbiosis, to effectively implement the African
Initiative, to which the Secretary-General has publicly
reaffirmed his support.
In conclusion, I wish the Council every success in
its work and thank members for their attention and for
placing the Central African Republic at the heart of the
Council’s agenda.
The President: I thank Mr. Nébié for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Garofalo.
Mr. Garofalo (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, on behalf of the Community
of Sant’Egidio, for the second invitation to address the
Security Council regarding the situation in the Central
African Republic.
The Secretary-General’s visit to Bangui and
Bangassou has certainly had a positive impact on the
peace and reconciliation process. Through its presence
at the highest level, the United Nations is reiterating
its full commitment to finding a way out of the crisis

S/PV. 8084

in the Central African Republic, despite unanimous
agreement that the situation in the country remains
very precarious.
The affection with which the Secretary-General
was welcomed by the population — which I witnessed
first hand — clearly demonstrates that, in spite of
difficulties, there is a real need for positive signals to
counter the exclusively pessimistic narrative to which
I fear we have become too accustomed. We should
never lose sight of the fact that the country’s chronic
instability did not start in 2013, but dates back more
than 20 years. In that respect, the deficiencies of the
process that are noted by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2017/865) are also the toxic consequences of a
long-standing lack of trust, to which we all must react.
In that difficult context, Sant’Egidio has taken the
political initiative of holding a meeting in Rome on
19 June, with the specific goal of moving forward and
demonstrating that something concrete could be done.
With its own means, Sant’Egidio is helping to rebuild
the social fabric of the country, improve relations among
groups and communities, and strengthen institutions.
We believe that direct political dialogue and listening
to people on the ground are effective measures. In that
regard, I also underscore the positive steps taken by
President Touadra towards greater inclusiveness, by
expanding the Government.
Following the agreement, we also launched a
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation (DDRR) pilot project, in collaboration with
the State and with the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). By the end
of the year, we hope to demobilize 600 men in armed
groups and to reintegrate them into the Central African
Republic armed forces and other civilian programmes.
Following on from the Rome agreement, confidence­
building measures were taken with the leadership
of political and military movements. We are also
committed to providing food to the fighters who will
be reintegrated into civil society in the three months
between the disarmament process and the start of the
reintegration programme. The first concrete results
are that some 200 fighters have been disarmed, in
accordance with the rules of the DDRR programme,
and have been provided with assistance. We now enjoy
have greater security and practicability, for example

17-364667/13

S/PV.8084

The situation in the Central African Republic

regarding commercial access to the Bouar-Cameroon
corridor, the country’s main lifeline.
Not all armed groups have reacted in the same
way, obviously. Some of them, including the Front
démocratique du peuple centrafricain, the renewed
Séléka and the Union des forces démocratiques pour le
rassemblement, have reacted more quickly than others.
However, the implementation of the pilot project in the
eight sites envisioned with all 14 groups is essential
to verify the capacity of the movements to respect
their commitments.
That initial success should contribute to fostering
a new climate of trust throughout the whole country.
Hope must become contagious and act as an incentive.
We hope to quickly go beyond the initial figures
agreed — to disarm 1,000 men. Such a step will
demonstrate the feasibility of the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration process
and reassert the progressive expansion of the authority
of the State on broad swaths of territory. Indeed it is a
positive step, although lacking an efficient solution in
an atmosphere polluted by hatred.
There are others, as underscored in the report of
the Secretary-General, in terms of political dialogue,
training and rehabilitation of the national armed
forces and socioeconomic steps. We are also providing
assistance in that regard through sanitation programmes.
I believe that the initial success of the disarmament
process will determine the credibility of the entire
process. We need to demonstrate that it can work. It is
important to prove that disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration is possible, and not just
wishful thinking.
At the same time, we need to remain steadfast in
protecting civilians, international justice, territorial
integrity and the legitimacy of the authority of the
State. That is the aim of the road map of the African
Union. I would like to thank Special Envoy Moussa
Nébié for having demonstrated leadership and a very
inclusive approach. The Community of Sant’Egidio is
committed to the full success of that initiative. I would
also like to thank Economic Community of Central
African States — whose member States obviously
suffer the main impact of the crisis in the Central
African Republic.
Allow me, by way of conclusion, to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General OnangaAnyanga for his devotion and, by extension, thank
8/13

06/11/2017

all of the MINUSCA personnel. Their presence and
tireless daily efforts are the major bulwark against
chaos and violence.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Garofalo for his briefing.
(spoke in English)
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to express my appreciation
for the briefings by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Central African
Republic, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga; the Special
Representative of the African Union, Mr. Bedializoun
Moussa Nébié; and the Head of International Relations
of the Community of Sant’Egidio, Mr. Mauro Garofalo.
For several months now, the Central African
Republic has swung between consolidating the
achievements made since the completion of the political
transition period and election of President Touadéra,
especially the headway made in the areas of Bangui
and Bambari, and a serious deterioration in security
conditions in other parts of the country, which has
negatively impacted both the humanitarian situation
and human rights of the local population.
Uruguay would like to express its profound concern
about the ongoing clashes between armed groups in
the Central African Republic and the attacks targeting
civilians in specific communities, as well as United
Nations peacekeeping personnel and humanitarian
workers. Those groups continue to destabilize the
country and cause the loss of many lives, in addition to
the significant displacement of the population.
I take this opportunity to underscore the heroism
demonstrated by Spanish Bishop Juan José Aguirre of
the Diocese of Bangassou, who, on various occasions
since 2014, has served as a human shield to protect all
Christian and Muslim followers alike from ruthless
militia attacks. We therefore exhort the leaders of
the armed groups to spread awareness among their
members with a view to committing to an immediate
and total ceasefire of hostilities and fulfilling, without
restriction, their commitments to the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation process.
In order to reverse the downward spiral in which
the country unfortunately finds itself immersed, it is
17-36466

06/11/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

critical that the international community continue to
encourage and support the efforts of the Government of
the Central African Republic in the name of peace and
stability, which requires urgent, decisive and consistent
measures. I would like to commend the active role
played by Secretary-Genera António Guterres in that
regard. The organization of the high-level ministerial
meeting on the political, security and humanitarian
situation in the Central African Republic, which was
held on the margins of the seventy-second session of the
General Assembly in September, and his recent visit to
the country from 24 to 27 October are clear examples
of his resolute commitment, which all Member States
should support decisively.
We also recognize the important efforts made
by the African Union through the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation, as well as the efforts
of the Community of Sant’Egidio through the Rome
agreement of 19 June, representatives of which are
present today and have reiterated their commitment
to continue supporting the Government and the
people of the Central African Republic in their quest
for peace. Uruguay encourages all Central Africans,
the Government, armed groups and all segments of
society to commit to those initiatives and work towards
their implementation.
The current mandate of the Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), established in accordance with
resolution 2301 (2016), is drawing to a close. In our
opinion, the Mission has played a key role in keeping
the peace in Central African Republic, especially
through its good offices and support for the peace
process, protecting civilians and monitoring human
rights violations, as well as through its support to the
Government to expand the authority of the State and
strengthen its institutional capacities.
Uruguay commends the work carried out by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations with respect
to the strategic review of the Mission. We express our
full support for its assessment of the current situation,
its findings and its recommendations for the future
mandate of MINUSCA, including the suggestion to
increase the maximum amount of authorized resources.
The new mandate of the Mission will require greater
prioritization of tasks so as to better adapt to the current
situation on the ground.

S/PV. 8084

However, it is worthwhile to point out that,
however much improvement in capacity-building and
strengthening of the Mission’s mandate, a peacekeeping
mission in and of itself cannot, nor is it its responsibility,
to substitute for a State or stabilize an entire country.
Such achievements can be made only through the shared
work of all national stakeholders, with the ongoing
support from their international partners.
To conclude, allow me to pay tribute to the Blue
Helmets who have lost their lives this year in the
discharge of their duties as the consequence of cowardly
attacks, which we condemn in the strongest possible
terms. The security of the members of MINUSCA must
be at the heart of our attention — a necessary condition
for them to be able to fulfil their mandate. We must
remember that attacks against Blue Helmets may be
considered to be war crimes and that their perpetrators
must be held accountable and brought to justice.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia is grateful for
the briefings provided by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Central African
Republic, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, and by the
Special Representative for the African Union for the
Central African Republic, Mr. Bedializoun Moussa
Nébié, as well as the important statement delivered
by Mr. Mauro Garofalo on behalf of the Community
of Sant’Egidio. We also welcome the presence of
Her Excellency the Permanent Representative for the
Central African Republic.
We would like to again express our concern
about the continuing environment of violence in the
Central African Republic. The situation of insecurity,
asymmetrical attacks and ongoing intercommunal
clashes severely impact the civilian population, in
particular those who are most vulnerable, including boys
and girls. It is also further eroding the humanitarian
situation. In that regard, Bolivia condemns the
constant attacks perpetrated by armed groups against
civilians and the personnel of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
We value and commend the members of the
Mission — military, police and civilian personnel — who
carry out their work in a volatile and extremely highrisk environment. The protection of civilians, security
coverage, support to the Central African Republic State
to expand its authority, inter alia, are activities that

17-364669/13

S/PV.8084

The situation in the Central African Republic

06/11/2017

unquestionably strengthen the peace process, which,
unfortunately, has not been concluded to date.

and stabilize the country and submit to demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration.

It is clear that the difficult challenges in the process
of building political stability in the country must
be addressed through inclusive dialogue, consistent
demonstration of political will by all stakeholders in
the country, as well as through a serious and sustained
commitment by all parties to the conflict.

Aware of the difficult process that the Central
African people are going through without having
achieved stability and peace, we see with concern that
entire communities have been torn apart by the vicious
cycle of violence. Opportunities to achieve progress in
the establishment of peace and stability seem distant.

We welcome and value the recent visit of the
Secretary-General to the Central African Republic, in
which he reaffirmed the solidarity of the international
community, in particular in dealing with the challenges
of maintaining peace and security, the building of
State institutions and its establishment throughout
the territory, as well as national reconciliation
and development.

Against that backdrop, we welcome the active
support and constant participation of regional
organizations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region and neighbouring
countries, whose support has been and will continue
to be essential, through political pacification and
cooperation initiatives in a lasting reconciliation
process based on the principle of African solutions for
African conflicts and strict respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Central
African Republic.

Furthermore, fighting and violence have led
to worrisome consequences, and therefore drastic
humanitarian consequences. According to data from
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/865),
during the reporting period approximately 50 per cent
of the population depended upon external support to
survive, 2.4 million Central Africans required urgent
humanitarian assistance, and there had been 600,000
new internally displaced persons, totalling 1.1 million
people since 2016; in other words, one in five people
suffer the effects of forced displacement. Five hundred
tousand refugees live in neighbouring countries, such
as Cameroon, Chad, the Congo and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Food insecurity affects one in
four people, reaching the figure of 2 million people at
risk in the Central African Republic.
Furthermore,
violations
of
international
humanitarian law further aggravate the situation
of hundreds of victims; men, women and children
who are subjected to sexual violence, trafficking in
persons and other crimes. We believe it is crucial to
at last operationalize the Special Criminal Court.
We encourage MINUSCA and the United Nations
Development Programme to continue efforts to that
end with a view to combaingt impunity and prosecuting
those responsible for war crimes.
With that in mind, Bolivia once again calls on all
the armed groups to lay down their arms, set aside
sectarian interests that prevent fruitful dialogue and
achieve agreement to benefit of the civilian population
10/13

We must underscore all the efforts of the
Government of the Central African Republic, led by
President Touadera, in the search for ways to establish
an inclusive dialogue and understanding, in addition to
carrying out important reforms, such as establishing
the national strategy for security sector reform, which
was approved on 4 September; the establishment
of 14 courts around the country; in addition to the
adoption of the national reconciliation programme on
11 September, the establishment of a truth, justice,
reparations and reconciliation commission; and the road
map for the operationalization of the National Human
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms Commission. Those
are important steps to be added to the efforts of the
international community.
In conclusion, we echo the observations and
recommendations of the Secretary-General, first,
with regard to the strengthening of the capabilities of
MINUSCA, and to provide it greater flexibility and
enable it to better deploy in the areas of greatest risk.
However, and as mentioned by the Secretary-General,
the Mission will not restore peace alone; the people
of the Central African Republic themselves have the
primary responsibility for bringing peace and stability
to the country.
The full and committed support of the international
community, the United Nations and regional
17-36466

06/11/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

S/PV. 8084

organizations must assist the people of Central Africa
to establish peace and security.

includes the gradual transfer of responsibility for State
affairs in the country to the legitimate authorities.

Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, as well
as the Special Representative of the African Union,
Mr. Moussa Nebie, and the representative of the
Community of Sant’Egidio, Mr. Mauro Garofalo, for
their detailed briefings.

We note the efforts by the Government of the Central
African Republic aimed at ensuring operational and
combat readiness and rapidly deploying two battalions
of its armed forces, which, as we understand it, should
form the backbone of the future unified armed forces
of the country. The Central African authorities will
need to work together to ensure that the justice system
starts working properly, with a focus on building
national capacities.

We share the concerns about the continuing situation
of military and political tension in the country and the
fact that clashes between groups are increasingly ethnic
and confessional in nature. Of course, civilians are the
ones who suffer the most. The top priority of all parties
to the conflict should be to provide humanitarian
access to the victims. The authorities must create the
conditions for a safe and voluntary return of refugees
and internally displaced persons to their homes.
The already difficult situation is further complicated
by the fact that the authorities actually control only
the capital, Bangui, and the local Government bodies
are paralysed or lacking in the rest of the country. The
adoption of the national strategy for the restoration of
State authority on 8 September and the appointment of
prefects and subprefects are certainly steps in the right
direction, but much remains to be done to do.
With the signing in Rome, on 19 June, of a
peaceful political agreement between the Government
and armed groups, real prospects for normalizing the
situation in the Central African Republic have opened
up. We support the steps outlined in that document
towards stabilization and establishing a ceasefire
throughout the country, lifting restrictions on the free
movement of goods and people, releasing illegally
detained persons and ensuring that illegal armed
groups recognzie authorities elected in the 2015-2016
elections as legitimate. We believe it is necessary for all
parties to the agreement to undertake additional efforts
to quickly implement its provisions.
We support the steps being taken by Bangui to
reform the security sector and resume control over the
entire territory of the country. Those steps are aimed
at contributing, including with the support of the
international community, to resolving the issues and
tasks, many of which were justly mentioned in the recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/865), and they
contribute to implementing the national defence plan
approved by President Touadera on 4 September, which

Temporary emergency measures by peacekeepers
and the delayed establishment of the Special Criminal
Court are not a panacea for the country’s problems
in combating impunity. International experience has
shown that various courts with international support
are not very effective and are costly.
It is also important to create favourable conditions
for the implementation of the African Initiative for
Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. Also, the road map for a Central African
settlement adopted in the Libreville on 17 July must
be fully implemented. In that connection, we stress the
importance of coordinating and harmonizing all the
peace initiatives related to the Central African Republic.
The Blue Helmets are playing an important
stabilizing role in the Central African Republic.
We are ready to carefully study the proposal of
the Secretary-General on increasing the military
component of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), given the difficult situation in
the country. At the same time, we want to stress once
again that we must be careful in cooperating with
troop-contributing countries. It is unacceptable for an
entire contingent to be removed due to sexual abuses
committed by a few individual peacekeepers and to
have no substitute for the unit for an extended period
of time, which seriously undermines the operational
potential of the mission.
It is essential to take coherent steps to address
the challenges facing the Central African community
and to allocate funds from international partners and
donors, including the resources pledged at the Brussels
Conference for the Central African Republic in
November 2016. In that context, we encourage Bangui
to create a transparent and effective national system in
order to manage international aid.

17-3646611/13

S/PV.8084

The situation in the Central African Republic

06/11/2017

Russia, as a participant in the international support
group on the Central African Republic, intends to
continue actively promoting the peace process in the
Central African Republic, where Russian air transport
resources have already made a significant contribution
to MINUSCA operations.

on an integrated and coordinated approach under the
principle of national ownership. We call on all donors
to fulfil their Brussels commitments to ensure that
the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan is
fully funded, so that it can realize its impact on the
stabilization of the country.

Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Parfait OnangaAnyanga for his insightful briefing, and we thank
African Union Special Representative Bédializoun
Moussa Nébié for joining us today. We would also
like to warmly welcome the Head of International
Relations of Sant’Egidio, Mr. Mauro Garofalo, who
brings the invaluable expertise of the Community in
the mediation process for national reconciliation in the
Central African Republic and the wider region.

We commend the efforts of the Central African
Republic Government for its initiatives, such as
implementing the national defence plan, developing
a national strategy to combat the illicit trafficking
in natural resources, operationalizing the Special
Criminal Court, reforming the security sector and
preventing impunity with the support of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
Another priority focus is to work closely with the
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, combat sexual violence against women
and implement the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme.

Kazakhstan is deeply concerned about the
progressively deteriorating security and humanitarian
situation, marked by growing sectarian and ethnic
violence in the Central African Republic. That is despite
the significant achievements of the Government, as well
as regional and international partners, in advancing
peacebuilding initiatives in the crisis-torn country.
We are confident that the recent visit and active
solidarity by Secretary-General Guterres to the Central
African Republic will provide an impetus for further
progress in all the efforts to consolidate peace. We
strongly believe that our focus should be on the four
interlinking components highlighted by the SecretaryGeneral during his trip to the Central African Republic,
namely, security, State-building, national reconciliation
and development. Religious factions in different parts
of the country that had not existed before are alarming
indicators. We urge all political, community and
religious leaders in the Central African Republic to
work towards true national reconciliation.
The international community must be engaged
in supporting national authorities to continue the
political process at this critical moment. We welcome
the various mediation initiatives of the European Union
and the African Union, including the African initiative
for peace and reconciliation for accelerating the peace
process, together with the World Bank. The role of the
subregional efforts such as those of the Sant’Egidio
Community are significantly critical.
At the same time, it is crucial to implement the
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan, which
brings together all the relevant stakeholders based
12/13

We express our full support for the mandate of
MINUSCA, particularly in its ongoing efforts to
restore security. In the wake of the resurgence of
violence in the east and south of the country, which
exposed the limits of the overall operational response
of MINUSCA, we agree that the Mission should focus
on its core peacekeeping tasks and prioritize support
to the national and local political processes. It should
adjust its capacity to protect civilians and facilitate the
creation of a secure environment for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.
In conclusion, we would like to stress the need to
support the national dialogue, reinforce the legitimacy
of the Government and its authority and to revitalize
mediation, given that the solution is political and not
military. Likewise, MINUSCA, in coordination with
the United Nations system, will need to strengthen
the security-development nexus through greater
investments in socioeconomic development and the
provision of basic services, youth education and
employment, while simultaneously addressing the
deteriorating humanitarian situation.
Finally, we pay tribute to Special Representative
Onanga-Anyanga and MINUSCA for their valiant
service under such hazardous conditions, and we
endorse the extension of the MINUSCA mandate.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the floor
to the representative of the Central African Republic.
17-36466

06/11/2017

The situation in the Central African Republic

S/PV. 8084

Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in
French): I would like to begin by paying special tribute
to His Excellency Secretary-General António Guterres
for having kept his promise to visit my country, the
Central African Republic, a few months after taking
office. It is our hope that his visit will bring about
change to the tragic situation we are experiencing in
the Central African Republic.

Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
In that regard, I would like to commend the tireless
efforts of Head of Mission Onanga-Anyanga, whose
presence in this Chamber is a source of encouragement
for us. We cannot praise him enough for his dynamism
and unwavering commitment to working with Central
African authorities in order to find ways and means to
extricate our country from this crisis.

Like those who preceded me, I would like warmly
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November, while wishing you every success in the
accomplishment of this noble task. I am certain that
your rich diplomatic experience and great personal
qualities are an indicator of the success of your mandate.
Allow me to also express my deep admiration to your
predecessor, His Excellency Mr. François Delattre, for
the enormous workload to which he brought so much
energy during his mandate.

I must also commend the outstanding collaboration
and dialogue between the Government and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in addressing
all the delicate aspects of the crisis situation in the
Central African Republic. The briefing that he has
made on the situation in the Central African Republic
was very eloquent, and therefore I will not repeat
what he said. The situation continues to be of grave
concern at all levels. I also wish to thank the Special
Representative of the African Union for his briefing,
which provided us with a greater understanding of the
situation and that it requires greater attention and many
resources to assist the African Union in carrying out
the road map.

The visit of the Secretary-General recently made
to Bangui is a historic and symbolic journey of great
significance for the Central African people, who have
been cut to the quick. His four-day stay certainly
provided an opportunity for the Secretary-General and
the large delegation that accompanied him to measure
the extent of the challenges still to be met, particularly
the security and humanitarian challenges. His meetings
with all stakeholders of the Central African crisis
enabled him to take stock of what remains to be done.
His appeal to the international community to pay
closer attention to the situation in our country reinforces
our conviction that the United Nations — and especially
the Security Council — will take substantial decisions
and measures in the preparation and adoption of the
draft resolution renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization

We are turning to the members of the Security
Council, calling on them for their support in the form
of providing MINUSCA with a new mandate that is
commensurate with the challenges that the Mission’s
Head has just outlined for us. Those challenges, as I
said, are numerous, and we are expecting flexibility
and understanding from Council members.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I would like to thank the briefers
for the quality of their statements.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

17-3646613/13
