A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/84
13 January 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 80
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/48/685)]
48/84.

Maintenance of international security
A

Maintenance of international security
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/60 B of 9 December 1992 on maintenance of
international security,
Recalling also its resolution 47/54 G of 8 April 1993, in which it,
inter alia, decided that the First Committee of the General Assembly, in
pursuing its efforts to respond to the new realities of international
security, should continue to deal with questions of disarmament and related
international security issues,
Welcoming the relaxation of global tensions and the emergence of a new
spirit in relations among nations as a result of the end of the cold war and
of bipolar confrontation,
Expressing its serious concern over new threats to international peace
and security, the persistence of tensions in some regions and the emergence of
new conflicts,
Recalling with appreciation the ideas and proposals of the SecretaryGeneral aimed at the enhancement of the potential role of the United Nations
in the area of preventive diplomacy, peacemaking, peace-keeping and postconflict peace-building, as well as in multilateral disarmament,

/...

A/RES/48/84
Page 2

contained in his reports entitled "An Agenda for Peace" 1/ and "New dimensions
of arms regulation and disarmament in the post-cold war era", 2/
Reaffirming the importance of multilateral mechanisms in the areas of
disarmament and international peace and security,
Bearing in mind the crucial contribution that progress in the field of
disarmament, arms control, non-proliferation, transparency in arms transfers
and confidence-building measures can make to the maintenance of international
peace and security,
Emphasizing that international peace and security must be seen in an
integrated manner and that the efforts of the international community to build
peace, justice, stability and security must encompass not only military
matters, but also relevant political, economic, social, humanitarian,
environmental and developmental aspects,
Noting with satisfaction the progress achieved at the Conference on
Disarmament towards negotiations on a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban
treaty, 3/
Stressing the importance of global and regional approaches to
disarmament, which should be pursued to promote regional and international
peace and security,
Reaffirming the need to strengthen the mechanism for collective security
provided for in the Charter of the United Nations,
Affirming its conviction that all Member States should endorse and
support the role given by the Charter to the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
1.
Reaffirms that, with the end of the cold war and of bipolar
confrontation, the United Nations faces new tasks in the area of maintaining
international peace and security;
2.
Recognizes the need for effective, dynamic and flexible measures,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, to prevent and remove
threats to peace and to suppress acts of aggression or other breaches of the
peace, and in particular for measures to build, maintain or restore
international peace and security;
3.
Emphasizes its commitment to preventive diplomacy and the need to
develop appropriate political mechanisms for the early solution of disputes
and for the timely and peaceful resolution of any situation that might impair
friendly relations among States, so as to preserve peace and strengthen
international security;
__________
1/

A/47/277-S/24111.

2/

A/C.1/47/7.

3/
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/48/27), para. 31 (para. 2 of the quoted text).

/...

A/RES/48/84
Page 3

4.
Stresses the need for the full implementation of Security Council
resolutions;
5.
Recognizes that it has an important role to play in helping to
address situations that might lead to international friction or dispute, in
close cooperation and coordination with the Security Council and the
Secretary-General in accordance with the Charter;
6.
Stresses the great importance of the role of regional arrangements
and organizations and recognizes the need to coordinate their efforts with
those of the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security;
7.
Urges all States to strive for sustainable progress in the field
of disarmament, arms control, non-proliferation, transparency in arms
transfers and confidence-building measures, which can provide a crucial
contribution to the maintenance of international peace and security;
8.
Recognizes the importance of humanitarian concerns in conflict
situations and welcomes the increasing role of the United Nations system in
providing humanitarian assistance;
9.
Decides to continue consideration of the question of maintenance
of international security and invites Member States to provide their views on
further consideration of this question;
10.
Also decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fortyninth session the item entitled "Maintenance of international security".
81st plenary meeting
16 December 1993
B
Development of good-neighbourly relations among Balkan States
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, the annex to
which contains the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, and 46/62 of 9 December 1991,
Affirming its determination that all nations should live together in
peace with one another as good neighbours,
Emphasizing the urgency of the consolidation of the Balkans as a region
of peace, security, stability and good-neighbourliness, thus contributing to
the maintenance of international peace and security and so enhancing the
prospects for sustained development and prosperity for its peoples,
Noting the desire of the Balkan States to develop good-neighbourly
relations among themselves and friendly relations with all nations in
accordance with the Charter,
/...

A/RES/48/84
Page 4

1.
Calls upon all Balkan States to endeavour to promote
good-neighbourly relations and continually to undertake unilateral and joint
activities, particularly confidence-building measures as appropriate, in
particular within the framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation
in Europe;
2.
Emphasizes the importance for all Balkan States to promote mutual
cooperation in all fields and, inter alia, in trade and other forms of
economic cooperation, transport and telecommunications, protection of the
environment, advancement of democratic processes, promotion of human rights
and development of cultural and sport relations;
3.
Stresses that closer engagement of Balkan States in cooperation
arrangements on the European continent will favourably influence the political
and economic situation in the region, as well as the good-neighbourly
relations among Balkan States;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States,
particularly those from the Balkan region, of international organizations, as
well as of competent organs of the United Nations, on the development of
good-neighbourly relations in the region and on measures and preventive
activities aimed at creation of a stable zone of peace and cooperation in the
Balkans by the year 2000;
5.
Decides to consider the report of the Secretary-General on the
subject at its fiftieth session.
81st plenary meeting
16 December 1993
