General Assembly-Thlrty-flfth Session

146

whenever possible in the form of grants, to enable
Djibouti to cope with its special economic hardship;
6. Ca/Is upon the international community to contribute generously to the special account which was
established at United Nations Headquarters by the
Secretary-General for the purpose of facilitating the
channelling of contributions to Djibouti;
7. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
lJnited Nations, the World Bank and the lnternational
Fund for Agricultura! Development to bring to the attention of their governing bodies, for their consideration, the special needs of Djibouti and to report the decisions of those bodies to the Secretary-General by
15 August 1981;
8. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to
report periodically to the Secretary-General on the steps
they have taken and the resources they have made
available to assist Djibouti;
9. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financia!, technical and material assistance to Djibouti:
(b) To keep the situation in Djibouti under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States,
regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the
specialized agencies and international financia! institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1981, of the
current status of the special economic assistance programme for Djibouti;
(e) To arrange for a review of the economic situation of Djibouti and the progress made in organizing
and implementing the assistance programme for that
country in time for the matter to be considered by the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.

84th p/enary meeting
5 December 1980

35/90.

Assistance to the drought-stricken areas in
Djibouti, Somalia, the Sudan and Uganda 174

The General Assembly,
Having heard the statement made by the United
N ations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator before the Second
Committee on 3 November 1980,' 81
Noting with satisfaction the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on assistance to the drought-stricken areas
in Djibouti, 182 Somalia, 183 the Sudan 184 and Uganda, 1' ;
to which were annexed the relevant reports of the multiagency mission sent to study the humanitarian needs of
the drought-affected victims in those countries,
Noting with concern the grave effects in Djibouti,
Somalia, the Sudan and Uganda of successive years of
drought and the resulting shortage of food-stuffs, livestock, fodder and water,
1
"
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session.
Secon[Commillee, 36th meeting, paras. 6-17.
1
"
A/35/559.
1
"
A/35/560.
1
"
A/35/561.
"' A/35/562.

Bearing in mind that it is in conformity with the principie of international solidarity enunciated in the Charter
of the United N.1tions to render assistance to Member
States which are the victims of major natural disasters,
A ware of the adverse effects of the drought on the
economic and social development of Djibouti, Somalía,
the Sudan and Uganda,
A ware a/so of the regional nature of the existing
drought situation in the countries ofthe Horn of A frica,
Recal/ing the resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council concerning assistance in cases of natural disaster, in particular Assembly rcsolutions 2816 (XXVI) of 14 Dccember 1971 and 2959 (XXVII) of 12 Decembcr 1972,
Recognizing the very high costs in volved and the great
problems of distribution to the remole arcas of Djibouti,
Somalía, thc Sudan and Uganda,
1. Expresses its deep sympathy to the pcople and
Governments of Djibouti, Somalía, the Sudan and
Uganda for the loss of human and animal lives caused
by the drought;
2. Endorses the recommendations made by the multiagency mission in the reports annexcd to the relevant
reports of the Secretary-Gcneral; ""
3. Commends the Secretary-General for his speedy
and positive response to the urgent situation of the
drought-stricken countries of Djibouti, Somalía, the
Sudan and Uganda. and for his action in dispatching a
multiagency mission to those countries to ascertain their
immediate needs for assistance to the affected populations;
4. Notes with appreciation the measures already
taken by the Secretary-General, in co-operation with the
Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator and other agencies and organizations of the
United Nations system, to ensure the speediest and most
effective relief aid for the victims of drought and other
natural disasters in Djibouti, Somalia, the Sudan and
Uganda;
5. Appeals to Member States and to international
governmental and non-governmental organizations to
make generous contributions towards helping the affected populations in the form of financia!, material and
technical assistance, as described in the reports of the
multiagency mission;
6. Recommends that Governments of the droughtstricken countries of the region should consider thc
establishment of an intergovernmental body with the responsibility for co-ordinating and supporting the countries' efforts to combat the effects of drought and other
natural disasters and to deal with the problem of
medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and other organizations concerned
within the United Nations system, to assign, as early as
possible, the responsibility for assisting those countries
in the region to the appropriate body, within the system,
which will be funded from voluntary contributions, will
be responsible for the co-ordination of the activities of
the United Nations system in support of the recovery
and rehabilitation efforts of the countries con cerned and
will also provide direct assistance to the Governments of
those countries in co-ordinating inputs from donor
sources and in strengthening their national and regional
----·

,,,. A/J5/559-Ad'> 562.

V.

capabilities to mitiga te the effects of future droughts and
promote sustained economic and social development;
8. A/so requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To mobilize international assistance for the populations affected as a result of drought and other natural
disasters in the four countries concerned;
(b) To send, as a matter of urgency, a multiagency
mission to Djibouti, Somalia, the Sudan and Uganda to
assess the medium-term and long-term needs of the
Governments of those countries for their droughtafflicted populations;
9. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of 1981 on the results of the multiagency mission concerning the medium-term and long-term needs
of the Governments concerned and also to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the progress
achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.

84th p/enary meeting
5 December I 980

35/91.

147

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second C ommittee

Assistance to the drought-stricken areas of
Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to the drought-stricken areas of Ethiopia, 187 prepared pursuant to General Assembly resolution 34/54 of 29 November 1979, with regard to the
progress made in the implementation of all the relevant
resolutions of the Assembly and the Economic and Social Council,
Having heard the statement made by the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator before the Second
Committee, on 3 November 1980, ' 88
Noting the statement by the Commissioner for Relief
and Rehabilitation of Ethiopia' 8" outlining the measures taken by the Government of Ethiopia to deal with
relief and rehabilitation in the drought-stricken areas of
that country as well as the critica) food situation for the
year 1980/81,
Noting further the call made in the report of the recent
multi-donor mission for urgent assistance to the
drought-stricken areas of Ethiopia,
Noting with appreciation in this regard the continued
efforts of the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, the United N ations Development
Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the World Food Programme,
Noting a/so with appreciation the determined efforts
being made by the Government of Ethiopia, through its
National Development Campaign, to mitigate the effects of the drought and to make the country selfsufficient in food,
Deep/y concerned at the gravity of the food situation
due to the devastating drought that has affected two
thirds of the country,
·
Recal/ing that, despite the generous assistance offered
to Ethiopia by the Governments of Member States, or"1 A/35/584.
'" Official Records of the General Assemb/y, Thirty-fifth Session,
Second Commillee, 36th meeting, paras. 6-17.
'" !bid., 42nd meeting. paras. 42-45.

ganizations ofthe United Nations system and voluntary
agencies, the persistent and recurring drought and other
natural calamities have rendered the task of recovery
and rehabilitation of the drought-stricken areas extremely difficult,
1. Take1> note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General on assistance to the drought-stricken
areas of Ethiopia;
2. Requests the Office of the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, the United Nations Development Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund and other
organizations of the United Nations system to continue
and intensify their assistance to Ethiopia in its relief and
rehabilitation efforts, particularly the Government's resettlement programme, in their respective areas of competence and to implement promptly and fully the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutions 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974. 3441 (XXX) of9 December 1975
and 31 / 172 of 21 December · 1976, and Economic and
Social Council resolutions 1876 (LVII) of 16 July 1974,
1971 (LIX) of 30 July 1975. 1986 (LX) of 6 May 1976,
1978/2 of 2 May 1978, 1979/2 of 4 May 1979 and
1980/2 of 16 April 1980:
3. Appeals to the Governments of Member States
and to intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and ali voluntary agencies to continue and
increase their assistance to the Government of Ethiopia
for the relief, rehabilitation and recovery of the droughtstricken areas;
4. Calls upon all concerned to ensure that the international assistance provided shall be used for the sole
purpose of relief and rehabilitation;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator
and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme, to report to the Economic and Social
Council at its first regular session of 1981 and to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the implementation of paragraphs 2 and 3 above and of the
other relevant resolutions of the Assembly and the
Council.
84th plenary meeting
5 December /980

35 /92.

Assistance to Chad'"º
A

ASSISTANCE FOR THE RECONSTRUCTION.
RF.HABILITATION ANO DEVELOPMENTOFCHAD

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/120 of 14 December 1979
concerning assistance for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of Chad,
Taking into account the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 26 September 1980'"' on the reasons why
that resolution has not been implemented,
Deep/y concerned about the massive destruction of
property and the serious damage to the economic and
social infrastructure of Chad caused by the progressive
deterioration of the political situation marked by armed
contlict during the past fourteen years,
'"' See also sect. X.B.J, decision J5/42:l.
,.,, A/35/488.
.
