UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
TWENTY-

COUNCIL
RECORDS

FIFTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

6 MARCH

1970

YORK
CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l530)

. . . . , . . . , . . . , . ., . . . . . . , , . . . , , , . . . . . . 1

Expression of thanks to retiring Presidents . . . . , , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , I
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.,*....,*,,*........*.....

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 3 March 1970 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9675) . . . . . . , , . 1

S/PV. 1530

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , , ,) are normally published
, in quarterly Supplements of the OfJicial Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND THIRTIETH

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 6 March 1970, at 10.30 a.m.

President:

Mr. Joaquin VALLEJO
(Colombia).

Question concerning the situation in
Southern Rhodesia
Letter dated 3 March 1970 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9675)

ARBELAEZ

Present:
The representatives of the following
States: Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Zambia.

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
porn Spanish):
Before we begin the debate I should like to draw the
attention of members of the Council to the fact that
a draft resolution has been submitted for the consideration of the Council. It is sponsored by the United Kingdom and appears in document S/9676. The Council
will proceed now to consider the item on its agenda.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l530)
1.

Adoption

of the agenda.

2.

Question
concerning the situation in Southern+
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 3 March 1970 from the Permanent
Representative
of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

5. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I wish first
of all to thank Ambassador Liu for being restrained
and modest enough to give us, with his customary consideration and courtesy, some breathing space during
February.

(S/9675).
.

6. At the same time I warmly welcome you, Sir, as
our President for this month. Simdn Bolivar once paid
your country the compliment of saying that it was like
a university-an
unusual tribute. He meant by that,
I am sure, that your nation seeks no narrowly national
purpose and no merely material aim but always seeks
to set the highest standards of human relations and
aspiration and endeavour in wider freedom and
brotherhood-standards
and ideals of which Bolivar
himself was the champion. Knowing how well you represent your country, we therefore greatly look forward
to working this month under the beneficent direction
and kindly instruction of a distinguished Colombian
President.

Expression of thanks to retiring Presidents
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
I wish to thank the President.s for the months of January
and February who preceded me in guiding the work
of the Security Council: the representative of Burundi,
Ambassador
Terence, who ‘so ably guided the Council’s work during the month of January, and the representative of China, Ambassador Liu, who with great
tact carried on during the month of February.
2. March is traditionally a month fraught with conflict. There is good reason for this month of March
being linked with Mars, the god of war. The omens
of the Ides of March have afflicted mankind ever since
the times of Julius Caesar. I can only express the hope
that this month of March will be a month of peace
for us.

7. I come to the Council, having asked for an urgent
meeting, with a single, clear purpose. That purpose
was set out in the draft resolution which was circulated
earlier this week L&‘/9676].

3. Mr. LIU (China): Mr. President, I thank you for
your generous reference to me. I do not think I can
take any credit since I did nothing, but I am sure that
under your wise guidance the Council will be able,
even in this difficult month of March, to accomplish
much in the interest of peace. On behalf of my delegation I offer you my sincerest congratulations and best
wishes.

8. In speaking today I wish to thank you, Sir, for
the guidance you gave us, and also to thank other members of the Council for the understanding they showed
in the consultations which preceded this meeting. The
right of any member to request an urgent meeting was
recognized and respected. I express my gratitude and
appreciation for the courteous hearing given to me by
other members of the Council during these consultations-consultations
which were conducted in the
best traditions of the Council.

-Adoption of the agenda
The agenda

was adopted.

1

9. I now wish to submit a revised text of the draft
resolution I put forward earlier. The revised text’ reads
as follows:
“The Security Council,
“Recalling
ct~zclreujj%ming its resolutions 216
(1965) of 12 November 1965, 217 (1965) of 20
November 1965,221(1966) of9 AI)rill966,232
(1966)
of 16 December 1966 and 253 (1968) of 29 May 1968,
“ 1. Condemns the illegal acts of the racist minority
regime in Southern Rhodesia, including the purported assumption of a republican status;
“2. Decides, in accordance with Article 41 of the
United Nations Charter, that all Member States of
the United Nations shall refrain from recognizing
this illegal regime or from rendering any assistance
to it, and urges States not Members of the United
Nations, having regard to the principles stated in
Article 2 of the ‘United Nations Charter, to act
accordingly.”

is to be recognized. The regime knows very well that
without international recognition it cannot escape from
the isolation in which it slowly sinks. The regime wants
capital, it wants trade, it wants immigrants. It wants
to achieve a weakening of international will to maintain
and enforce the economic sanctions; but most of all
it wants recognition. Indeed it believes that if it could
obtain recognition it would be able thereby to pursue
and secure its other purposes. In the long haul it has
no hope without recognition.
17. It is of paramount importance that we should at
once, firmly, and I hope unanimously, and on behalf
of the whole world, make it clear that this minority
regime will not be recognized, it will not be accepted,
it will not be permitted to enter into the family of
nations.
18. Recognition is what the minority regime wants
more than anything else. It is recognition that we should
unanimously deny.

10. The new draft resolution is, as the Council will
at once see, in clear and strong terms. We thought
it well to set out our purpose in this explicit and definite
language which will, I trust, commend itself to the
Council.

19. I might add that, looking back over our past discussions on Rhodesia in this Council, I am struck by
the fact that when we have agreed we have been able
to act effectively. When we have disagreed, then progress has been frustrated. When we have disagreed we
have done ,nothing here except to give comfort to the
illegal regime. If we were to disagree now ,and fail
to take the action which seems to me essential we
should merely give comfort to a. regime which all of
us detest. I greatly hope that we shall not make such
an unforgivable error.

11. Having made that reference to the new draft
resolution which will shortly be circulated, I go. on
to say that I have taken part in ‘every debate in this
Council on Rhodesia since the illegal declaration of
independence was made in November 1965. I am very
well familiar with the inany questions which have been
raised, with their far-reaching importance and with the
intensity of feeling which they have aroused.

20. I trust that the message which goes out from this
Council to the world will be a clear rejection of the
blatantly racialist constitution, a constitution which
offends against every principle of equality and justice.

12. I have never wished to advocate delay and certainly have never wished to question either the gravity
of the situation or the ‘motives ‘of those who have
expressed their strong opinions in this’Counci1;

21 a I do not denv for a moment that there are awkward
and intractable problems which we have to consider
together. There may be honest differences of opinion
between us; but in this matter of recognition I cannot
see that there is.any cause or room for doubt or difference or uncertainty. One thing at least we can be sure
about and that is that the door of recognition should
be shut aird barred not only now but for the future.
I trust that we can together make that unmistakably
clear here and now.

13. I do not doubt that the question we consider is
part of a much larger question-indeed
it is’ p’art of
one of the main problems which face the modern world,
The issues involved are issues of equality and freedom
and human dignity. It is right that these issues should
top the agenda of the international community. They
give special urgency to our ,proceedings today.
14. It is against the background of those broad issues
that I trust that we can today concentrate on a single,
immediate purpose. It is a purpose on which I strongly
believe that we can unreservedly and urgently agree.

22. My mind goes back to the debate in this Council
which took place following the illegal declaration of
independence in November 1965. I recall that it was
my friend the Ambassador of Jordan who then spoke
to us as I am speaking today. His argument was that,
whatever else was done, it was necessary to take one
immediate step. He introduced his draft resolution,
very similar to the one which I now present. It was
at once accepted. He used the arguments I now
advance. He said on 12 November 1965:
“We should make it clear that any State that recognizes this illegal regime is a partner to a responsibility-1
would say a partner to an act of defiance
towards every value for which the United Nations

15. Why did the illegal regime in Salisbury seek to
introduce a new constitution and why has it proceeded
to dissolve, its parliament, thereby seeking to assume
a republican status? What were the reasons for that
action? What did they wish to achieve? The answer
to those questions is very clear. They wanted recognition.
16. No country in the world has recognized’the illegal
regime and what that regime wants more than anything
1 Subsequently circulated as document S/9676/Rev. 1.
2

stands. If all States co-operate, we shall be able to
freeze all that regime’s activities. Otherwise, we shall
be opening the door to more acts of defiance, suppression and disorder, to more denials of the elementary principles of justice.
$6. . . The text is not controversial.
There is
nothing in it that leaves room for disagreement or
controversy.
It is urgently and badly needed; it is
needed now. I therefore hope that the Council will
vote on the draft resolution before it proceeds with
its deliberations.”
[1258th meeting, paras. 7 and 8.1

Same. That being the case, my delegation can only
assure You of our fullest co-operation in the performance of Your very important task,
28. Permit me also to pay tribute to another distinguished statesman and diplomat, the Ambassador of
Burundi, for the excellent manner and the vigour with
which he conducted this Council’s affairs during the
month of January.
29. The Zambian delegation has requested the floor
on a procedural point on behalf of the delegation of
Burundi and Sierra Leone as well as on its own behalf.
Members of the Council are no doubt aware of the
importance that these three delegations attach to the
question of Zimbabwe inasmuch as the Council js
aware not only of the importance that the United Kingdom Government attaches to the same question, but
also of the responsibility which that Government has
over the Territory of Rhodesia.

23. Those were the words of the Ambassador of
Jordan in our debate here in this Council in 1965. Those
words were heeded. The Council acted. The world
paid attention.
The result was that no Government
in the world has recognized the illegal regime. That
is what I am advocating now. We need to repeat, to
endorse, to reinforce the action we took when we
adopted resolution 216 (1965) in November 1965.

24. 1 have seen a number of statement and declarations by African leaders about the further illegal act
now carried out by the illegal regime. They raise many
issues; but on this issue of recognition they all speak
with one voice and one mind and with one purpose.
On this all of us, I believe, are fully agreed. No compromise. That is the message which we should all of
us send out. No compromise with racial suppression;
no compromise with racial supremacy; no compromise
with racial inequality and racial injustice. These are
issues on which we must never be on the wrong side.
They are issues on which there must be no doubt,
and there should be no division.

30. It might have seemed strange, therefore, and to
some extent misleading, when the international Press
started to create the impression, following the delay
in convening this meeting as a result of the usual consultations, that the delegations of Burundi, Sierra Leone
and Zambia were in a way trying to obstruct the convening of the Security Council on the question of Rhodesia
at the request of the United Kingdom. Indeed, apart
from our own interest in this matter, we are fully aware
and accept the fact that it is in the interest of the Council
to be convened as urgently as possible whenever one
of its members, or indeed any Member of the United
Nations, requests such an urgent meeting. Indeed, the
very suggestion itself that these three delegations were
trying to stave off quick United Nations action called
for by one of the permanent members is not only ridiculous but mischievous. For this reason, and if only to
counter the irresponsible opinion created by the international Press, the delegations of Burundi, Sierra
Leone and Zambia would like to make a brief
explanation, an explanation with which the members
of this Council are already conversant.

25. No doubt there will be and should be ample opportunities for views to be expressed and for our debate
to continue; but whatever else we do and whatever
else we say, I trust that we shall,, in full agreement
together,
proceed without any delay to take the
immediate action which I believe that we can all readily
support. I trust that the Council will unhesitatingly
and unanimously
adopt the draft resolution which I
present today,

3 1. Almost at the same time as the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom was taking up this
matter with the President of the Security Council, the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity, representative of forty Member States, was considering what action to take in the Security Council
on the same matter. At the end of that Council’s deliberations, it was decided that the Foreign Ministers of
Algeria, Senegal and Zambia, with the assistance of
the African Group at the United Nations, should take
up this matter in the Security Council. If I may give
advance information, a letter requesting a meeting On
the same problem is in fact on its way to YOU, Mr.
President.

26. Let us act together. Let us act without delay or
hesitation.
Qn this issue let our decision be agreed
and clear and swift.
27. Mr. MUUKA (Zambia): Mr. President, allow me
first of all to perform a very pleasant task, that of
paying tribute to you upon your assumption of the
office of President of this Council. We derive this
pleasure at seeing you in that high office from our
knowledge and conviction of the fact that Your stature,
both as a diplomat and a statesman, is second to none.
More pertinent to this present meeting is your Government’s known position with regard to the situation
obtaining in southern Africa. Those of us who have
had the opportunity of working with your delegation,
either on the United Nations Council for Namibia or,
indeed, within the Security Council on the previous
resolutions concerning Zimbabwe, are gratified by the
fact that your views and ours have been one and the

32. It was as a result of this decision that the African
the African members of the
Security Council requested a postponement in order
to await much more specific instructions from the
Council of Ministers.

Group and, in particular,

3

33. In short, the question facing the delegations of
Burundi, Sierra Leone and Zambia was whether it
would not be appropriate, both as a matter of courtesy
and as a matter of procedure, for the Council not to
be convened until the Ministers designated by the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity had arrived in New York. This position was
made very clear to all our colleagues and we believe
that there was no misunderstanding whatsoever about
our reasons for requesting a delay of only a few days.
We are very happy that, in his characteristically
clear
exposition, Lord Caradon explained that position to
our satisfaction.
34. We certainly share the view that this matter is
indeed a very urgent one. In fact, we tend to believe
that this view is probably held more by these three
delegations than by any other in the final analysis.
Nevertheless,
because of the explanation that I have
made on behalf of the three African delegations, and
while we naturally agreed to convene this meeting at
the urgent request of the United Kingdom in order
to afford the representative of the United Kingdom
the opportunity
to address this Council with a view
to its taking further action in this matter, we still find
ourselves in a somewhat difficult situation. As three
of our Ministers have been given a mandate by the
Council of Ministers to take up this matter with the
Security Council as a matter of urgency, it would seem
improper to us to proceed with the debate, especially
as we have no intention of requesting a separate meeting to deal with the same problem. Besides, after the
proposals of the representative of the United Kingdom
we would consider it appropriate, even on that score
alone, to adjourn the meeting until early next week
to give us time to begin consultations on the proposals
either made or to be made in the course of this debate.
May I therefore formally request, on behalf of the
delegations of Burundi, Sierra Leone and our own,
that the meeting be adjourned until early next week?
35. Permit me at this stage briefly to outline the preliminary reaction of my own Government to the very
limited proposals as submitted earlier by the delegation
of the United Kingdom and as elaborated upon in the
course of this meeting. In saying that, I am not in
any way casting doubt on the concern of the United
Kingdom Government over the unfortunate developments in Zimbabwe. The British delegation itself is
aware that we have always tried to work together to
find a solution to that problem both at the level of
the Commonwealth
Prime Ministers’ Conference and
here at the Security Council.
36. Furthermore,
my delegation still remembers the
call made by the illustrious Lord Caradon on 24 June
1969, at the 1481st meeting, on the occasion of the
holding of a referendum by the rebels to prepare for
the step they took tl;is week. These were the words
of his Lordship: “The Council well knows that I have
advocated that we should act together and act unanimously and act within our clear capacity. I greatly regret
that we have not done so, We have not ghne forward;
we have gone backward.” I was happy when I heard
His Lordship repeat that call for unanimity and action.

37. It is the hope of my delegation that on this occasion we shall be able not only to act together in unanimity and within our capabilities but, most important,
to do so on the understanding that our action will be
a definite step forward.
38. What is that step forward? Allow me to say that
again oti this we would hope that the goal of the United
Kingdom Government would be the same as that of
my own Government, namely, to bring an end to the
existence of an illegal rkgime in Zimbabwe and to grant
independence to that Territory on the basis of the
accepted principle of universal suffrage, with a constitution that is designed to protect the interests of
all the people-and,
I repeat, all the people--of
Rhodesia. The question I would like to ask the Council,
therefore, is whether or not, in its considered judgement, the proposals made today are in fact a step forward towards achieving that goal.
39. My delegation has time and again reminded this
Council that the root cause of the problem is neither
the referendum of June 1969 nor the declaration of
an illegal republic this week. The British Foreign Secretary, the Honourable Michael Stewart, put it succinctly in the House of Commons only a few days
ago ivhen he said: ‘ ‘Rhodesia’s self-declared republican
status [is’] as illegal as its unilateral declaration of
independence in 1965.” So we see eye to eye on that
stand. It seems obvious, therefore, that the right course
of action to take is not merely to condemn an act which,
in any case, all of us know and accept as condemnable
and illegal or merely to reiterate the appeals that we
have been making to countries which have had dealings
with Rhodesia since 11 November 1965. While we have
no quarrel with efforts to perpetuate the so-called international isolation of the rCgime, we would be much
happier if our efforts, even at this late hour, were
directed towards the bringing down of that rigime,
That is a step ,forward we should like to see. It is
also in that regard that we view the proposals made
today, if I may be permitted to say so, as being
extremely inadequate. This Council should not be content with merely creating uncomfortable pinpricks for
the rebels in Zimbabwe, for to do so would be tantamount to, an indirect licensing of a continuing
abomination.
40. In our view, therefore, this Council should now
embark on a serious search for ways and means of
toppling the rCgime in Salisbury. It would be disastrous
if this Council were to prefer to entertain peddling in
rhetoric rather than to put an end to that regime.
41. As I stated before, these have been merely the
preliminary
observations of my delegation. I expect
my Minister to be here to participate in this debate
and I hope that the Council will accede to the humble
request of the thre \ members to adjourn. I have no
doubt that my Mini Pter will present the formal position
of my Government zn the course of the debate.
42. Mr. TERENC ’ (Burundi) (interpretation from
French): Mr. Preside 1 t, it is an honour for my delegation to be able to take part in the proceedings of the

Security Council under your distinguished guidance.
The importance that we .attach to the role you are
to play impels me to defer what I have to say in regard
to you until a later date, when I shall have occasion
to speak again as the Security Council takes up the
substance of the problem.
43. I should like to ask your indulgence, with respect
to my delegation which, for compelling reasons relating
to the convening of the Security Council, delayed its
arrival. This request is also addressed to all the representatives in the Council. Far from being aimed at
boycotting the work of the Council, it is rather bound
up with the motives which necessitated this meeting,
namely, that the necessary communications
with my
Government were the cause of this brief delay.

49. The Organization of African Unity, in its meetings
at Addis Ababa, had just instructed three Foreign
Ministers to bring the problem of Rhodesia before the
Security Council. That decision was the outcome of
the efforts urgently mobilized on behalf of a country
at the mercy of colonial usurpers. One need hardly
ask what would be the reactions of European Governments if their representatives at the United Nations
should seek to take over the role and the powers of
their Foreign Ministers. I hope the Council will forgive
this digression, despite the difference that exists
between the Council of African Unity and the Council
of Europe. It was clearly the duty of the African Group
not to let itself be carried away by hasty representations
aimed at substituting it for the Council of Ministers
of the entire continent.

44. In first of all endorsing what has been said by
the representative of Zambia and the position that he
has made known to the Council as our spokesman,
I should like in turn to State, on instructions from
my Government
and within the context of the African
group, what our position is.

50. Secondly, the African Governments are not
unreasonably astonished at the eager zeal displayed
by the Labour Government, whereas it was that very
Government which, by its refusal to employ force-the
only alternative-pushed
Smith into theattitude of alea
jacta est, the die is cast.

45. Despite the brevity of the prior consultations
necessitated both by the nature and,the importance
of the Rhodesia question, certain circles have taken
it upon themselves to suspect the African group of
engaging in obstructionist
manoeuvres. Such deductions undoubtedly
fail to take account of the Press
release of Monday, 2 March, which was circulated following an urgent meeting at which the African delegations reviewed the whole question of Rhodesia and
pondered the various possible alternatives for dealing
with this crowning act of illegality by Ian Smith.

51. Finally, is it not proper to ask what motives could
have impelled the African delegations to oppose a cause
which is their own-their own not by reason of mere
sentimental ties with the people of Zimbabwe, but
rather by IWiSOhof the dictates of nature, of necessity
and of reason? One need be no genius to recognize
that it is we Africans who are most affected, since
it is our own’brothers that are the victims of colonial
oppression in Rhodesia.
52. It would therefore be strange for the African
Group to have raised obstacles to their own supreme
interest.

46, Everyone knows, first of all, that any Member
of the United Nations, and, a priori,
a permanent
member of the Security Council, has the right to request
a meeting of this body, However, the established custorn of the Council requires the President to set the
date for the initial meeting on the basis of the results
of consultations
between himself and the other
members.

53. The foregoing reasons, and others that are
implied, constitute solid arguments against allegations
that the representatives of Africa have sought to
obstruct a meeting of the Security Council.
54. In the light this version, the only true one, it is
for the Security Council and the world Press to decide
what credence should be attached to prior allegations
which represented only one side of the story.

47. In accordance with this procedure, undeniably
established by tradition, it follows that the requesting
State is subject to imponderables which are not always
necessarily to its advantage. For example, it would
have been difficult to hold a meeting of the Council
yesterday afternoon inasmuch as the four great Powers
were engaged in another matter of equal importance
which, in certain respects, is of greater concern to
the United Nations.

55. In conclusion, the indivisible character of the
Rhodesian problem, in both its nature and its scope,
requires an examination as broad as it is deep. It would
therefore be hazardous, to say the least, to confine
the Council’s debate to a condemnation of the dummy
republic foisted on the rightful owners of Zimbabwe.
To be sure, the crocodile tears are flowing freely, particularly in the Labour Party and Government. And
on top of this, the Africans are described as lovers
of “rhetoric”, according to certain reports.

48. In applying this general principle to the particular
case now before us, namely the calling of an urgent
meeting of the Security Council by the United Kingdom
delegation,
the African Group, far from obstructing
the meeting of the Council, engaged in intensive activity aimed at clearing the ground. As demonstrated by
the contents of the press release circulated four days
ago, certain factors prompted the African representatives to resist any attempt to short-circuit them, among
them the following:

56. Thus, sensationalist oratory in British circles is
supposed to appease and disarm the indignation felt
throughout Africa on a mere wave of the magic wand.
57. It is our belief, however, that the problem must
be placed in its proper context; that is to say, we simply
5

osal. I repeat that I believe we should act on the question of recognition,
on which we are all agreed
immediately and I trust that when we meet again, which
will be in only a day or two I believe, we shall take
this subject first. I shall so urge when we meet again,

must change the lot of the Zimbabwe people instead
of confining ourselves to a denunciation of the new
status that the colonial clique in Rhodesia has arrogated
to itself.
58. It is the enormous complexity of this situation
and the activity that characterizes it which makes it
necessary to postpone discussion of the problem until
next week.

65. As I say, I would not oppose the proposal which
was put forward by the representatives of Africa. In
waiting for a day or two to resume our debate and
in the hope that we can then deal with the question
of recognition first, I would merely say that I have
the confident belief that there is no member of this
Council that does not agree that it is right that a call
should go to the whole world that the illegal rkgime
and the illegal Republic should be recognized by no
one.

59. This is a formal proposal along the same lines
as that just put forward by the representative of
Zambia.
60. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I wish to
speak very shortly with reference to the two statements
to which we have just listened from African representatives.

66. It is in that confidence that I am prepared to
acquiesce in the proposal that our debate should be
idjourned for a day or two for the purposes which
have been stated.

61. First I wish to say that I do not think it would
be profitable or useful for us to go over in this Council
the consultations
that were privately undertaken
between members of the Council before we met. All
I would say is that in discussions with other members
of the Council what I had to say was very courteously
considered. When there was a request for a postponement I readily agreed with it, and when I urged that
we should meet today there was acceptance by those
with whom I had those discussions. I had the opportunity of saying before that I appreciate the spirit in which
those discussions were undertaken and I am grateful
to those with wh’om I talked this matter over under
your wise direction, Mr. President. Certainly I have
no complaint.

67. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi) (interpwtation
fimn
French): In the light of the statement of the representative of the United Kingdom, I believe that in so far
as possible I should explain the position of my
delegation, which is also the position of the African
delegations in this Council.
68. It goes without saying that no African Government would or could oppose the condemnation of Ian
Smith’s proclamation
of the alleged Republic of
Rhodesia. Neither would any African Government
encourage or, much less, approve the recognition of
the Republic which was just established at Salisbury.
However, we believe that in the light of the situations
that developed in the past-that
is to say, from 11
November 1965 to 1 March 1970-the United Kingdom
Government knew that the attitude of the Rhodesian
settlers would force it into the position in the United
Nations in which we find it today.

62. Then, with reference to the statement made by
the representative of Zambia, I would thank him for
the spirit in which he spoke. There was much that
he said with which I can readily agree, particularly
with regard to the starting-point of our purposes: to
see an end to the illegal rkgime and to see that the
interests of all the people of Rhodesia are given full
weight. I was glad to hear him speak as he did and
I thank him for the way in which he referred to what
I had said.

69. Thus, to rectify the positions taken previously,
where we contented ourselves with condemnations,
in my delegation’s opinion, we must find an over-all
solution which would come to grips with both the substance as well as the superficial aspects which, after
all, serve only to compel us to keep this problem constantly on the Security Council’s agenda.

63. With regard to the statement made by the Ambassador of Burundi, I would merely say that I believe
the question of recognition is of very great consequence; I do not think that it should be minimized,
and I doubt if he would wish to minimize it. The purpose
of the statement I made today was to say that here
was a single purpose which I believed we should
pursue, and that I myself felt that we should pursue
it without delay. On that, at least, we could be fully
agreed on immediate action.

70. The problem is indivisible. For when we condemned the Constitution of the Ian Smith rCgime, when
we decreed selective sanctions and later general sanctions, were those remedies so effective that we can
again adopt fragmentary and ineffective solutions?
Would it not be in the interest of the Security Council
and of the United Nations as a whole to put a final
end to the situation we are,dealing with?

64. I would go on to say, with reference to both
speeches from the African representatives, that certainly we shall welcome the intervention ofthe Foreign
Ministers who are to come here and who were previously in session in Addis Ababa. I am sure that their
participation in our debate will facilitate our consideration of these vital issues. Since a proposal has been
made by the two African representatives for a short
postponement, I could certainly not oppose that prop-

71. We should therefore like to make our position
abundantly clear. Far be it from us to maintain that
it is not urgent to appeal to every Government in the
world to ensure that no one ventures to recognize the
republican Government of Ian Smith; but we are convinced that if the Security Council were again to adopt
6

this unusual situation which has arisen for Lord
Caradon, for the African representatives in the Council
and for all of us. I therefore feel that the explanations
given by the representatives of Zambia and Burundi
are fully justified and natural. The Security Council
should unquestionably take them into account and
express regret that the special circumstances that have
arisen in cohnexion with the discussion on which we
are about to embark have been disregarded and that
today’s meeting of the Security Council has begun in
the absence of three Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
African States who had received special authority to
represent Africa and its international organization at
this meeting for the discussion of such a critical and
important question as the-1 think we all recognize-unilateral
and illegal acts of the racist rkgime
in Southern Rhodesia vis-&-vis the African population
of that country, the people of Zimbabwe.

the draft resolution as it has been submitted, to us
this would again be a duplication
of effort because
within a few days we would have to take up the matter
anew and try to consider it as a whole.
72. I think the representative of the United Kingdom
will understand that we are not opposed to having this
question, which on his initiative has been inscribed
in the agenda, considered as an integral part of the
entire question of Rhodesia.
73.

Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Mr. Ambassador, briefly
before turning to the question under discussion I should
like on behalf of my delegation to welcome you as
you assume the high office of President of the Security
Council. May I say that we fully share your hope that,
despite its history and the associations with its name,
March will be a peaceful month? We are also firmly
convinced that, with your distinguished diplomatic
experience, tact and great practical knowledge of diplomatic affairs, you will discharge the responsible functions of the Presidency of the Security Council with
the brilliant effectiveness that characterizes your work.
(tmnslated

from

Russian):

77. The question of recognition and non-recognition
has also arisen. The matter of refraining from recognizing this illegal rkgime is unquestionably of great international importance. However, it is also appropriate to
approach the question from another point of view: is
non-recognition alone sufficient? My delegation will
have occasion at a later stage to state its views on
the question under discussion. Even at today’s
meeting, however, the question inevitably arises: is
it sufficient for all States to withhold recognition from
this illegal rbgime? We share the opinion of the African
States and their representatives that it is not sufficient.
That goes without saying. We should therefore not
pretend that this is some sort of particularly important
political act. It is self-evident that the illegal racist
rCgime in Southern Rhodesia must not be recognized
by any self-respecting State. However, that is not
enough. I imagine that all of us, including the United
Kingdom representative, would find it useful if we
agreed to call a regular meeting on this question for
next week. I will not name a day, because I do not
know the wishes of the African representatives-we
shall support them in this matter-but
let us assume
that it will be Tuesday. We can aI1 put the time to
good use by considering the question of what more
effective measures must be taken in the present
situation. We hope that the United Kingdom representative will also ponder this matter.

74. We listened very closely to the statements made
by the representatives of Zambia and Burundi, which
shed light on the behind-the-scenes aspects of the preparations for today’s meeting and for the Council’s
discussion of this important question. We were most
pleased to hear those representatives refer to the attention and courtesy they had shown the United Kingdom
representative, who had taken the initiative in bringing
this question before the Security Council.
75. Nevertheless, we cannot help feeling that it would
have been natural and logical for the United Kingdom
representative to show the same attention and courtesy
with regard to the observations and wishes of the African representatives in the Security Council. There are
three of them, but they speak on behalf of more than
forty African States. When a clash of this kind takes
place in the Security Council, it is obvious that both
sides, or, more precisely, all members of the Council,
must take account of such observations and wishes
and must not reckon with those wishes alone, regardless of whether they emanate from a member of the
Security Council, or from some other member or members of the Council having an interest in the questioh
under discussion.

78. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I do not
wish to prolong this discussion. I would say only that
with regard to the speech made by the Soviet representative I am glad that he would publicly state his agreement with me that the question of recognition is important and urgent. I suspect that he did not intend to
take part in otir discussion this morning, but unfortunately the Soviet representative finds the temptation
to make mischief irresistible. I would merely wish to
say to him that his intervention today was misguided
and misdirected.

76. Three Ministers for Foreign Affairs of African
States have been given special authority by a distinguished international organization, the Organization
of African Unity, to represent Africa in the Security
Council’s
discussion of the question of Southern
Rhodesia, which is of very great importance for the
whole of africa and the entire world. They would
unquestionably
have been pleased to attend this meeting and hear Lord Caradon’s statement. Unfortunately,
this was not kept in mind, and Lord Caradon delivered
his statement today in their absence. That, of course,
will inevitably have an effect on the further course
of our discussion. It seems to me that it would have
been logical and natural if account had been taken of

79. What happened was-he was not aware of the
fact, perhaps, but I will tell him-that the African representatives had asked for a postponement from the
first day on which it was proposed that the Council
7

should be called. I agreed. Subsequently, in view of
the importance and urgency of the recognition question, I asked that we should meet not later than today.
They agreed. This is the way consultations are carried
out and this is the way they should be conducted. I
have no complaint and I paid tribute to the way in
which the discussions had been undertaken.

82. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfiom
Spanish):
As no one else wishes to speak at this time, allow
me first to thank the representative of the United Kingdom for his very kind words concerning my country.
For the people of Colombia, it will always be a source
of pride that we should have been likened to a university.

80. I think it is unhelpful and unfortunate that, at
this stage, when we have agreed together-and
I have
not raised objection to the postponement for a few
days, although I believe we should act as soon as we
can-we should be forced to consider and continue
discussions which can bring no benefit, or indeed no
prestige, to our Council,

83. I also wish to thank the representatives ofzambia,
Burundi and the Soviet Union for the words of encouragement they expressed to me in my capacity as President of the Security Council.

8 1.

Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Russian): I can assure Lord Caradon
that 1 made my brief comments not because I was
yielding to temptation but out of a sense of justice,
I do not believe that it is Lord Caradon’s intention
to deprive me of the right to have my own views on
this question and on the situation that has arisen.
(Lranslatedfrom

84. The representatives of Zambia and Burundi have
proposed that the meeting should be adjourned, and
if I hear no objections I shall proceed accordingly,
Pursuant to the consultations I have held with the members of the Council, the next meeting of the Council
on the item before us will be held Tuesday, 10 March,
at 3 p.m.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATtONS

PUBLICATIONS

’

United Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
lo; United
Nations,
Sales Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
des Notions
Unies rant en vente dans ler libroiries
et ler agenccs
d6positoires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aup&
de votre libroirie
ou adresses-vous
ri:
Notions Unies, Section des venter, New York ou Genbve.
KAK

COMO

IlOflY’fHTb

CONSEGUIR

K3AAHHH

OPrAHM3AUHH

PUBLICACIONES

06bEAHHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES

HAUKR

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas aston en venta en librerlos
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partei del mundo. Consulta
a su librero o dirtlose
at Nacionas
Unidas,
Section
Ventas, Nueva York o Gtnebro.

Litho

in

United Nntions.

New

York

Price:

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalentin other

currencies)

de

82015-June

197%-2,050
