S/PV.8271

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8271st meeting

Wednesday, 30 May 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Hickey
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Eighteenth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security
Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2018/353)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolution 2367
(2017) (S/2018/359)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-16335 (E)
*1816335*

S/PV.8271

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Eighteenth report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2018/353)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to Security Council resolution 2367 (2017)
(S/2018/359)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq; Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism;
and Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/353, which contains the eighteenth
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013), as well
as to document S/2018/359, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2367
(2017).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: On 12 May 2018 — within the
constitutional time-frame — Iraq held elections for its
national Parliament, the Council of Representatives.
Prime Minister Haider Al Abadi, after the closing of
the polls, noted that the country had held the elections
on time, that people had been able to cast their votes
and select their representatives freely and safely and
that the liberated areas had experienced a free voting
process for the first time after the victory of the Iraqi
forces and the defeat of Da’esh.
The Secretary-General, on 13 May, congratulated
the people of Iraq on the holding of parliamentary
2/14

30/05/2018

elections and stated that, following the military defeat
of Da’esh, the elections represented further progress
in building a stronger Iraqi democracy. He saluted
the tireless efforts of electoral officials, party agents
and the security forces in making the elections largely
peaceful and orderly.
Following the elections, international partners,
including the Governments of Kuwait, Qatar, Iran,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the United States
of America and the United Kingdom and the European
Union, also congratulated the Iraqi people.
The elections, held in a generally calm and stable
environment, were marked by a low voter turnout: the
Independent High Electoral Commission informed about
the participation of 44.5 per cent — just 10.8 million out
of 24.3 million eligible voters — a significant decrease
in comparison with previous national elections in Iraq
after 2003. The new Parliament will also experience a
massive turnover; according to the preliminary results,
less than 100 of the incumbent members — the total
number of which in the current Parliament is over
300 — have secured their place in the new Council of
Representatives. The decision by more than half of the
voting population not to exercise their democratic right
sends a strong signal to the elites ruling the country
since 2003. I urge the Iraqi political elites to draw
the necessary conclusions on the need for improved
representation, justice for all, democratic accountability
and good governance, devoid of corruption, a sectarian
quota system, nepotism or patronage.
I also urge political leaders to ensure the full
participation of women in negotiations on the formation
of the next ruling coalition and the Government, and
their representation at the highest levels in Iraq’s
political and decision-making structures in the
Parliament and the Government, as pledged by many
political leaders in the election campaign.
Following the closing of the polls and the
announcement of the preliminary results, many Iraqi
political leaders publicly endorsed the electoral process,
including the Prime Minister and the President. They
continue to urge a timely conduct and conclusion of the
complaint process, certification and acceptance of the
results, and a speeding-up of the formation of the new
Government, within the constitutional timeline and in
accordance with relevant legal procedures. Some other
political forces and leaders have raised concerns over
some of the technical shortfalls encountered with the
18-16335

30/05/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

electronic vote tabulation devices, as well as reports of
fraud and vote rigging, active intimidation of voters,
including by some armed formations, and political
interference. They have demanded the recount of votes
in some governorates, the annulment of results of
out-of-country voting and the voting of the internally
displaced persons (IDPs), and even fresh elections. Amid
questions about the legality of their decisions, including
from the Independent High Electoral Commission, on
28 May, the Council of Representatives voted to request
the Commission to undertake the manual counting of
10 per cent of the ballot boxes, which could trigger
the manual counting of all the ballots in the case of a
discrepancy of 25 per cent or more. It also requested
cancellation of the out-of-country and IDP voting.
On 24 May, the Council of Ministers decided
to form a High Commission to investigate reports
and documents pertaining to the elections. The High
Commission already referred the Independent High
Electoral Commission to the Integrity Commission, a
move rejected by the Commission as interference in
its independence.

S/PV. 8271

We urge the independent electoral management
bodies to adjudicate all appeals properly, fully and in
time to enable corrections of the problems, justice and
the timely certification of the final election results. I
also wish to highlight the readiness and availability of
United Nations electoral advice and expertise in support
of any activities and measures that may be required to
retain confidence in the process, including in the light
of the forthcoming provincial council elections across
Iraq on 22 December and Kurdistan regional elections
on 30 September.
Given the controversies around the Council of
Representatives elections, the Kurdistan regional
Independent High Electoral and Referendum
Commission has decided not to use electronic vote
tabulation machines. The United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) stands ready to advise and
support that electoral process.

In Kirkuk governorate — one of several hotspots
of complaints — the situation remains volatile,
with Turkmen and Arab parties demanding manual
recounting of the election results, while the Independent
High Electoral Commission has complained that they
have obstructed its work.

The post-election phase represents a crucial time
for Iraq. Building on the achievements of the current
Government, we urge political leaders to prioritize
inclusive, non-sectarian dialogue and to ensure the swift
formation of a new genuinely national Government that
reflects the will of the people of Iraq. It is essential
that the new Government works as one across the
sectarian and ethnic divides in pursuing much-needed
political, economic and social reforms, based on the
principles of patriotism and citizenship with equal
rights, responsibilities, justice and opportunity for all
and good governance, while working to improve the
economy, public services delivery and social justice.
A new Government, based on such an approach, will
guarantee the future of Iraq as a stable, prosperous,
united, democratic, fully sovereign and independent
federal State with good relations with all its neighbours,
based on mutual respect, non-interference and common
interests as prerequisites for stability, cooperation and
prosperity, including in the region.

On 17 May, I called on the Electoral Commission to
act expeditiously and seriously address all complaints,
including, as necessary, the conduct of a partial manual
recount in selected locations, notably in Kirkuk. I
stressed the importance of undertaking such measures
in full transparency, witnessed by stakeholders, to
strengthen confidence in the process. I also called on
all political actors to uphold the peace and to remain
committed to resolving any electoral disputes through
the established legal channels.

The humanitarian crisis in Iraq continues. More
than 2.1 million people remain displaced and in need
of humanitarian assistance. However, the funding to
provide the most vulnerable with emergency support is
at critically low levels. Out of the required $569 million
in the humanitarian response plan, only $101 million in
donor contributions — 18 per cent — had been received
as of 15 May. In addition, demining and stabilization
efforts are underfunded. I therefore appeal to the donor
community to further extend its generosity to the people

Six Kurdistani parties have questioned the
credibility of the electoral process in the Kurdistan
region and have been calling for a recount of the votes
in the Kurdistan governorates, and even for a reholding
of the elections. On the other hand, the Kurdistan
Democratic Party and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan
have announced their satisfaction with the outcome of
the elections and their intention to start dialogue on
coalition-building with political parties in Baghdad.

18-163353/14

S/PV.8271

The situation concerning Iraq

of Iraq for humanitarian, stabilization, demining and
rehabilitation needs.
Despite the Prime Minister’s 2017 directive on the
civilian character of IDP camps, a continued military
presence in camps across Iraq, the sexual harassment
of women and girls, the diversion of humanitarian
assistance, the detention and disappearance of their
residents, recruitment activities inside the camps and
attacks by armed actors on humanitarian staff remain
deeply concerning. In April Amnesty International
issued a report that concluded that Iraqi women and
children with perceived ties to Da’esh experience
serious protection issues in camps, including the denial
of assistance, restrictions on freedom of movement
and sexual harassment, rape and sexual exploitation. I
wish to underline that the United Nations in Iraq, in
cooperation with the Government, has been engaged,
notably through the Protection from Sexual Exploitation
and Abuse network, established in 2016, in an urgent
follow-up on reported situations.
With regard to the issue of missing Kuwaiti and
third country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property,
in April, for the second time in 15 years, Iraq hosted
meetings of the tripartite mechanism, demonstrating its
commitment to the missing persons file and a steady
return to normality. I am grateful for the positive
response received with regard to the proposals put
forward by UNAMI during those meetings, namely,
a pilot project to conduct mass grave site surveys in
Iraq with the help of the United Nations Global Service
Centre in Brindisi.
I would like to call upon the Member States in
possession of relevant satellite imagery from 1990
and 1991 to come forward and provide analysis and
information to the Government of Iraq that could assist
in the identification of burial locations. The missing
Kuwaiti property file also did not register any direct
progress during the period under review. UNAMI has
been meeting with the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs
to discuss how best it can support and facilitate the
repatriation of already located Kuwaiti property, which
has been pending for more than a year.
The President: I thank Mr. Kubiš for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.
Mr. Voronkov (spoke in Russian): First of all, I
would like to thank the Polish presidency for convening
today’s meeting. It is an extremely important one.
4/14

30/05/2018

Using Iraq as an example, we will be discussing how
coordinated efforts within the United Nations system
generate speedy and positive results.
(spoke in English)
On behalf of the Secretary-General, I would like to
start by expressing my solidarity with the peoples and
the Governments of countries where terrorist attacks
were recently perpetrated. Regrettably, the list is a
long one and includes Afghanistan, Belgium, France,
Indonesia, Iraq, Libya and Nigeria. Our prayers are
with the victims and the survivors of those heinous
attacks. I also call upon all Member States to redouble
their efforts to strengthen international cooperation to
address terrorism in a comprehensive manner and bring
those responsible to justice.
I thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the joint visit to Iraq
we conducted with Ms. Michèle Coninsx in March.
The visit was conducted within the framework of the
common efforts of the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) to facilitate the delivery
of counter-terrorism-related technical assistance to
Member States in accordance with resolution 2395
(2017). In that resolution the Council underscored
the need for the two United Nations entities to work
closely together.
The visit took place at the invitation of the
Government of Iraq and with the support of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, for which I am
grateful. I am honoured to have the opportunity to
brief the Council today alongside my colleagues CTED
Executive Director Madame Michèle Coninsx and
Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), as well as Permanent
Representative of Iraq, Ambassador Bahr Aluloom.
Iraq has been affected by, and is suffering severely
from, the consequences of terrorism. The military
setback of Da’esh clearly demonstrates the long-term
resolve of the Iraqi authorities in their fight against
terrorism. The continued vigilance and determination
of the Iraqi Government to consolidate the military
victory against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) through a comprehensive approach focused
on both prevention and resilience is of the utmost
importance. In that regard, I would like to stress the
continued commitment of Iraq in addressing the 16
18-16335

30/05/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

recommendations made by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counterterrorism, on advancing Iraq’s efforts to implement key
counter-terrorism priorities.
During our joint mission with CTED to Iraq, we
were able to hold high-level consultations with a number
of ministers and senior officials. In order to understand
better the realities on the ground, we visited Fallujah to
discuss the additional support the United Nations could
provide to the local population.
All our interlocutors stressed Iraq’s continued
commitment to fighting terrorism as it transitions from
a military-focused counter-terrorism approach to a more
comprehensive one, which also includes preventive, law
enforcement and criminal justice components. It was
the conclusion of our Iraqi interlocutors that national
reconciliation and reconstruction, owned and driven by
the Iraqi people, are essential to prevent the resurgence
of violent extremism and terrorism in Iraq. I would like
to express my words of appreciation for that particular
approach.
During our visit to Fallujah, we had an opportunity
to meet with the mayor of the town and a number of
survivors. We witnessed the large-scale devastation
caused by ISIL. I was personally touched by the
admirable resilience of the Iraqi people while observing
the reconstruction work in areas surrounded by mine
fields and booby traps, and the faces of the young
people studying in rehabilitated school premises.
Our joint delegation reiterated the United Nations
strong support for Iraq. Based on the priority needs
identified during the mission and on resolution 2395
(2017), the Office of Counter-Terrorism, together
with CTED, proposed five areas in which it could
provide technical assistance to Iraq: first, advice for
the development of a comprehensive national counterterrorism strategy; secondly, training in countering
the financing of terrorism; thirdly, the prevention of
violent extremism through youth skills development
and vocational training, including for youth in Fallujah;
fourthly, the prevention of violent extremism through
strategic communications; and, finally, capacitybuilding to prevent and respond to weapons of mass
destruction-related terrorism.
In order to advance our fruitful dialogue and
in consultation with the Government of Iraq and
UNAMI, we were able to dispatch a joint Office of
Counter-Terrorism-CTED scoping mission to Iraq at

S/PV. 8271

the beginning of May to identify the specific elements
of programmatic support under the five priorities I
mentioned. The scoping mission held meetings with
a range of Iraqi ministries and national agencies, the
diplomatic community, as well as the United Nations
country team and the World Bank. Based on the
findings of the scoping mission, the Office of CounterTerrorism is now working on the development of project
concept notes on the priority thematic topics. The
projects could have a measurable impact on the ground,
while avoiding duplication with existing initiatives.
The Office of Counter-Terrorism is also planning to
deploy a consultant to support Iraq in finalizing its
national counter-terrorism strategy. The practical
implementation of those projects, in consultation with
the Government of Iraq, will start next month. We took
a total of three months to go from the initial stages to
the start of project implementation.
As the Secretary-General has often emphasized,
the Office of Counter-Terrorism is committed to
delivering on key counter-terrorism capacity-building
priorities of Member States, as one United Nations, in
a coordinated and coherent manner, and as requested
by Member States. Our first joint Office of CounterTerrorism-CTED mission to Iraq, in collaboration with
UNAMI, was a concrete step in that direction. We plan
to further build on that approach in other regions of
the world.
The President: I thank Mr. Voronkov for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Coninsx.
Ms. Coninsx: It is my great honour and pleasure
to address the Security Council today alongside
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, and
Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Iraq. It was indeed a joint and historic
visit, and I can only agree with what was said by
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov in his briefing to
the Council.
I wish to begin by conveying my deepest respect
for the Government and the people of Iraq for their
continued determination to overcome the challenge of
terrorism and for their true resilience. I also wish to
express my continued and unwavering support for all
the victims of terrorism in Iraq, as well as their families.

18-163355/14

S/PV.8271

The situation concerning Iraq

The Under-Secretary-General and I were able to
witness at first-hand the remarkable determination
of the Iraqi people, in both Baghdad and Fallujah,
during our recent high-level consultations with the
Iraqi Government. As Mr. Voronkov just mentioned,
in Fallujah there was a moment where we had to stand
still, look at the class of young students ,with their one
female teacher, in a newly built school in the middle
of rubble and debris. That was the best sign of the
resilience of the population of that small town. It also
demonstrated the need to give those children what they
deserve: the right to development, education, hope and
perspective. It motivated us greatly.
The consultations were conducted in accordance
with the respective mandates of the Office of CounterTerrorism and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), and within the
framework of the strengthened coordination between
the two Offices called for by the Council in resolution
2395 (2017). Our discussions focused in part on the
facilitation and provision of tailored capacity-building
assistance to Iraq, on the basis of the priority needs
identified by the Committee in accordance with the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
I would also like to thank the Iraqi authorities,
especially the Permanent Representative of Iraq to
the United Nations for his instrumental role. I thank
the Iraqi authorities for the hospitality extended
to us during our visit, as well as for their continued
willingness to engage in constructive dialogue with us
on a broad range of issues.
I now wish to inform the Council about the recent
efforts of CTED to assist Iraq in the area of counterterrorism. Acting on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), CTED conducted an assessment
visit to Iraq in September 2015. The visit report was
endorsed by the Iraqi Government in March 2016, and
subsequently adopted by the Committee. At that time,
Iraq’s response to the terrorist threat was primarily
military in nature.
In an effort to assist Iraq to combat terrorism in
non-military areas as well, particularly in the postconflict phase, CTED identified — as was mentioned
previously — 33 key recommendations on ways to
strengthen an overall response. While recognizing
that Iraq had the capacity to implement several of
those recommendations, the Committee nonetheless
noted that Iraq would benefit from receiving technical
6/14

30/05/2018

assistance in half of the recommendations, 16 priority
areas. Those areas included legal and judicial matters,
counter-financing of terrorism, law enforcement and
border control, and countering radicalization and
incitement to commit terrorist acts.
The 16 priority needs were identified on the basis
of CTED’s long-term dialogue and partnership with
Iraqi counter-terrorism officials. They were formulated
in accordance with the international best codes and
practices of our partner organizations, including
INTERPOL, the World Customs Organization, the
International Civil Aviation Organization, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
and others.
In follow-up to the visit, we have endeavoured to
make the findings of the visit accessible to as many
donors and implementing partners as possible. In
that context, we might say that our approach has been
unique. For the first time since its establishment, the
Committee held two informal meetings on Iraq for
donors and partners, in March 2016 and May 2017,
respectively. The meetings enabled the Committee to
follow up on progress achieved since the 2015 visit and
to take stock of recent developments and continued
challenges. That approach has also since been emulated
with regard to Afghanistan.
Since the two informal meetings, CTED has
returned to Iraq on several occasions in an effort
to ensure that the discussions held at Headquarters
continued to reflect the situation on the ground.
The various activities have been organized in close
cooperation with the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) and have involved Iraqi Government
officials, representatives of the donor community,
international and regional organizations and various
United Nations entities.
The focus of our efforts has been on facilitating the
integration of the Committee’s recommendations into
the existing planned programmes of our implementing
partners. We are determined to ensure that our
partnership with the Iraqi Government is complemented
by close cooperation with UNAMI and that our work
on counter-terrorism is fully complementary with
UNAMI’s overall mandate. I wish to thank the Iraqi
Government for its continued commitment to the
process. I also wish to express my sincere appreciation
to the Special Representative and his entire team for
their invaluable cooperation.
18-16335

30/05/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV. 8271

Throughout our engagement with Iraq, whether
in New York, Baghdad or Fallujah, Iraq has retained
full ownership — I think it is really important to
underline this point — of the assistance, facilitation
and delivery process and has continued to endorse
the 16 identified priority areas. Our implementing
partners and organizations have also continued to share
and update information concerning their current and
planned efforts, areas in which they continue to require
financial support and areas in which they might be
able to partner with other implementing agencies and
stakeholders. All this information is entered into a
matrix that is designed to ensure full transparency for
our partners in Iraq, New York and the relevant capitals.
The process helps us not only to avoid duplication and
overlap, but also to develop new partnerships.

I wish to assure the Council that CTED will
continue, in close cooperation with the UnderSecretary-General’s Office, the Office of CounterTerrorism and UNAMI, to engage closely with its
implementing partners to determine the most effective
ways to support Iraq. At the end of the day, it is only
a question of transparency, accountability and impact.
The joint visit was certainly historic in its approach, and
I firmly hope that it will also be historic in its results
and impact and that we finally honour all of the victims
of the past in Iraq and that we avoid future victims there
and in the rest of the world.

An example in that regard was our recent
facilitation of a legislative drafting workshop organized
by the Terrorism Prevention Branch of UNODC. The
workshop led to the development of draft counterterrorism legislation that has been submitted to the Iraqi
National Counter-Terrorism Committee for subsequent
consideration and adoption by the Parliament. I wish
to reiterate the need for Iraq to actively manage the
adoption of counter-terrorism legislation in accordance
with the relevant international standards, in order to
ensure that the perpetrators of terrorist acts are brought
to justice in accordance with human rights and the rule
of law.

Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to thank the briefers for their statements. I
especially want to express our gratitude to Mr. Kubiš,
for his three years of service in leading the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) through
what has been a very challenging period.

The Counter-terrorism Committee is currently
considering ways to strengthen its assessment process
and follow-up mechanisms, pursuant to paragraph 9 of
resolution 2395 (2017). I firmly believe that the example
of CTED’s engagement with Iraq will be very useful
to the Committee’s work in that area. I am absolutely
convinced that this historic joint visit and the follow-up
that was recently organized by the Office of CounterTerrorism,with the participation of CTED, will be a
good example to follow.
We are grateful for the continued efforts of all
implementing partners that have helped Iraq to achieve
such encouraging progress in implementing some of
the Committee’s priority recommendations. We urge
them to continue their efforts and to encourage other
partners to join with the Committee, CTED and the
Iraqi Government in their efforts to strengthen Iraq’s
counter-terrorism capacities in the areas identified by
the Committee.

The President: I thank Ms. Coninsx for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.

Just three years ago, Iraq was in a very different
place. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
controlled Mosul, Iraq’s second-largest city, and it
captured territory stretching to within 30 minutes of
Baghdad. ISIS fighters were committing unspeakable
atrocities against Iraqis, including selling women into
sexual slavery and murdering religious minorities.
They were using their safe haven to plan attacks against
the West.
But that was three years ago. Today Iraq is
liberated. With the support of the United States and
other coalition allies, Iraqis have taken their country
back. Displaced persons are returning to their homes
and beginning to rebuild. Most importantly, Iraqis
have successfully conducted national parliamentary
elections. Iraqi security forces went from taking
territory back from ISIS to protecting polling places in
just a few short months.
Government-formation talks are already under
way. This is a key moment in Iraqi history. Iraq’s next
Government is going to make a series of important
decisions that will set Iraq’s course for decades to come.
It will fall to Iraq’s next Government to decide whether
to truly value diversity and create opportunities for
all of Iraq’s people, including some of Iraq’s most
vulnerable citizens, in towns and villages far from

18-163357/14

S/PV.8271

The situation concerning Iraq

Baghdad. The next Government will have to decide
whether Iraq is serious about elevating female leaders,
and it will be responsible for governing inclusively.
That means setting policies that allow Iraq to close the
door on the extremism and the sectarian politics that
have caused so much suffering before.
Iraq’s next Government has its work cut out for
it. Bold leadership will be required. Government
formation is a challenging process, but once it is
complete, the United States will stand ready to support
Iraq as it continues moving towards a more peaceful and
prosperous future. As Iraq emerges from the shadow
ISIS terror, the Government has to focus on getting the
basics right. Keeping the lights on and paving roads
may seem like small steps, but delivering such services
will be essential for the credibility of the new Iraqi
Government. It will also be vital for the Government
to respect and promote human rights. Especially
after the crimes of ISIS, Iraqis must be confident that
their leaders will uphold the rule of law and pursue
accountability for atrocities. One important part of
that effort will be the work carried out by the United
Nations and Iraq under resolution 2379 (2017) to collect
evidence of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide by ISIS. That collaboration could serve as a
model on how to achieve justice throughout Iraq.
There is no question that Iraq is in a tough
neighbourhood. Surrounded by serious threats, Iraq
must be a force for stability in the region. The United
States looks forward to a partnership with the next Iraqi
Government that will allow us to address these threats,
combat terrorism and strengthen the independence
of Iraq’s institutions. Just as Iraq is starting a new
chapter, the United Nations and its Mission in Iraq must
adapt too.
Last year, the Security Council requested that
the United Nations carry out external assessment of
UNAMI. The review team came back with a long list of
recommendations. Many are quite technical, but they
add up to an important vision for reform, one that would
make UNAMI more efficient and better at coordinating
among the many different United Nations agencies
that operate on the ground. Now the responsibility
falls to the Secretary-General to fully carry out the
recommendations and keep the Council informed on
the progress made on them. The United States will
closely follow that progress.
8/14

30/05/2018

This month we will also launch the most substantial
review by the Security Council of the UNAMI mandate
in years. The new mandate will be more focused,
responsive to the needs of the Iraqi people and tailored
to address the current challenges in Iraq. The United
Nations must target the areas where Iraq needs the
greatest support, such as political reconciliation, the
delivery of humanitarian aid and support to Government
institutions to provide basic services.
Iraq’s achievements in defeating ISIS and carrying
out elections deserve our collective recognition and
praise. Iraq has taken major strides towards a more
stable, secure and democratic future. Now Iraq’s leaders
have the hard task of assembling their Government and
showing that they can deliver on the high expectations
of their people. The United States will be ready to
support Iraq in achieving that goal.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov and Ms. Michèle Coninsx for their briefings. I
commend the efforts of the United Nations in providing
advice and assisting the people and the Government
of Iraq, in accordance with resolution 2367 (2017),
through the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). We renew our support to Mr. Kubiš and we
commend his efforts at the helm of UNAMI. We also
renew our support to the efforts of his Deputy Special
Representative for Political Affairs, Ms. Alice Walpole,
especially when it comes to determining the fate of
Kuwaiti and third-party nationals who went missing,
including as well the missing Kuwaiti national archives,
which are part of Kuwait’s important heritage, pursuant
to Council resolution 2107 (2013).
We congratulate Iraq on the successful holding of
parliamentary elections in mid-May, which took place
in a democratic and transparent environment across
the country, thereby reflecting the high national spirit
in Iraq, in line with the Constitution and international
democratic standards. We hope that those positive
signs will be put to use in order to form the new Iraqi
Government. We also hope that Iraq will be able to
create a national consensus Government that can meet
the aspirations of its people and establish security,
growth and prosperity for this brotherly country.
At the same time, we recognize that this year is
crucial for Iraq, especially with regard to restoring
security and stability and moving forward with
reconstruction. We congratulate the Government and
18-16335

30/05/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

the people of Iraq for fully liberating their land from
the control of Da’esh terrorists. Iraq is starting a new
phase that requires continued international support
and solidarity if it is to confront security, political,
humanitarian and economic challenges. We have sought
to alleviate those drastic conditions given the suffering
of the Iraqi people. Consequently, in mid-February, we
organized the Kuwait International Conference for the
Reconstruction of Iraq. It was a successful conference
with broad international participation to allow for the
start of the reconstruction phase and the return of
internally displaced persons. We have great hope for
the future, security and stability of Iraq, which in turn
are an integral part of the security and stability of the
region as a whole.
Regarding the international commitments and
the remaining humanitarian issues related to missing
Kuwaitis and third-party nationals and Kuwait’s
national archives, we continue to follow the matter
closely through the Secretary-General’s reports and
the briefings of the Special Representative, pursuant
to paragraph 4 of resolution 2107 (2013). We are
disappointed at the lack of progress on that front despite
efforts made in exploration and excavation, as well as
getting further information on possible burial sites.
We share the Secretary-General’s disappointment
that there is no information or evidence so far about the
national Kuwaiti archives. These are highly sensitive
issues that are related to building confidence between
Kuwait and Iraq. We look forward to adopting a new
approach in order to settle these matters and achieve
the required outcome, including through the Technical
Sub-committee of the Tripartite Commission, headed by
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
We welcome the steps taken by the ICRC to achieve
further progress. However, those ongoing efforts are not
sufficient to make significant progress on the ground in
order to end the suffering of the families of the missing
people, which has been going for more than 27 years.
That requires further commitment and determination.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait looks forward
to continuing its cooperation with the Republic of
Iraq, as our two countries seek to settle problems
and build relationships based on the fundamentals
of good neighbourly relations and non-interference
in the internal affairs of other States, pursuant to the
Charter of the United Nations. The State of Kuwait will
spare no effort to assist Iraq in all areas in order for
the country to overcome all its challenges. We hope

S/PV. 8271

that all commitments will be fulfilled according to the
relevant Security Council resolutions, for we believe in
the need to support the Iraqi people to achieve security,
stability and peace so as to help Iraq regain its status
and position regionally and internationally.
We commend UNAMI’s efforts and endeavours in
that regard. We will continue our full cooperation with
UNAMI in order to execute its mandate to the fullest.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to thank
the Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, Mr. Vladimir Voronkov,
the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate, Ms. Michèle Coninsx, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), Mr. Ján Kubiš, for their briefings. My
delegation also acknowledges the outstanding role being
played by UNAMI in the carrying out of its mandate.
We encourage UNAMI to continue advancing dialogue
and coordination for bolstering the peace process and
reconciliation in Iraq.
We highlight the holding of parliamentary elections
on 12 May, which were conducted in an orderly way
in a violence-free environment. We call on the elected
representatives and the political actors concerned to
dialogue and enter into negotiations that will enable
them to establish continuous governance and develop
solid institutions that will take the necessary measures
for the stabilization and rebuilding of Iraq.
We also note the progress made in the establishment
of a State-owned oil company under the supervision of
the Council of Ministers. We are convinced that the
sovereign administration of those resources will be of
great help for the rebuilding of Iraq and the restoration
of basic services for the people in general.
We also encourage ongoing dialogue between the
federal Government and the regional Government
of Kurdistan in order to peacefully resolve pending
issues, since it was through dialogue that the Erbil and
Sulaymaniyah airports were reopened to international
traffic and federal resources were allocated to pay
public servants in Kurdistan. As such, we call on both
parties to continue to work together on a consensual
basis to address and resolve common issues.
Despite the progress made, we regret the
continuation of asymmetrical attacks that claim the lives

18-163359/14

S/PV.8271

The situation concerning Iraq

of innocent civilians. During the reporting period, at
least 170 people were killed and 300 injured, including
women and children. It is important to highlight that a
significant number of those victims occurred as a result
of the detonation of improvised explosive devices and
explosive remnants of war.
In that regard, we highlight the work carried out
by the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS),
which, during the reporting period, identified and
removed almost 500 explosive devices deployed in
different parts of Iraq’s territory. The clearing and
removal of explosive remnants of war is essential, as
the security of the population is essential to beginning
the process of reconstruction in Iraq. We therefore call
upon the international community to support the work
of UNMAS and unite efforts to effectively implement
resolution 2365 (2017).
Noting the efforts spearheaded by Iraq to identify
mass graves and patrimonial goods, such as those
belonging to Kuwait, my delegation commends the
convening of the meeting of the tripartite mechanism in
April in Iraq. To that end, we call upon the international
community to lend its support for the capacity-building
that the Iraqi Government requires to move forward in
the search and identification of possible areas where
mass graves might be located.
The declaration of victory made as a result of
Prime Minister Al Abadi’s campaign to free Iraq
from the control of Da’esh 9 December last year is
an important achievement not only for Iraq but for
the entire international community. However, the
presence of that terrorist group — which still has the
capacity to coordinate and perpetrate attacks against
the civilian population and law enforcement agencies,
such as those carried out earlier this month in Baghdad
and Kirkuk — continues to pose a major threat to
the security of the population and to the process of
reconstruction and reconciliation in Iraq. Also, the
plight of more than 1,500 Yazidi women and girls still
under the control of Da’esh remains a concern that must
be resolved as soon as possible.
In that regard, we welcome the visit made by
the Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism to Iraq in March and
reiterate the need to develop the capacities of Iraqi
institutions to eliminate that threat once and for all
by, inter alia, strengthening the fight against terrorism
financing, countering terrorist narratives and focusing
10/14

30/05/2018

on educating young people to prevent extremism. The
effective implementation of resolution 2354 (2017)
on narratives and arguments for the fight against
terrorism is a useful tool in the areas of prevention and
combating extremist rhetoric. In that understanding,
the commencement of the tasks entrusted by resolution
2379 (2017) to the investigative team to identify those
responsible for the atrocities committed by Da’esh is of
vital importance in bringing those persons before Iraqi
courts to account for their criminal acts, as an essential
element to fight impunity and indemnify the victims.
We reiterate our sincere appreciation for the
courageous, self-sacrificing and determined fight
against terrorism that the Iraqi security forces, and the
Iraqi people as a whole, have waged on behalf of all
of us. That significant achievement must be reinforced
by all sectors of society coming together in unity. To
that end, the role of political actors and the Government
must focus on eliminating sectarian or divisive rhetoric
and calling for unity and reconciliation in order to pave
the way for the stabilization and reconstruction of Iraq.
Finally, we cannot but recall that one of the root
causes of the long-lasting conflict that affected Iraq
is the consequence of implementing regime-change
policies and carrying out interventionist practices
in the internal affairs of States, bringing with it the
emergence of chaos, terrorism and militarization, the
regrettable results of which continue to be replicated
to date.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
commend the convening of this meeting, and thank
Mr. Ján Kubiš for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation in Iraq and for the valuable work he carries
out with his team. We particularly appreciate the
briefings delivered by Mr. Vladimir Voronkov and
Ms. Michèle Coninsx.
Peru congratulates the Government and the
people of Iraq on the successful holding of democratic
parliamentary elections. We would also like to
highlight the support of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to that end, especially in
facilitating the participation of internally displaced
persons. We believe, however, that it is important that
the special electoral commission be able to respond to
the complaints raised about the process, primarily in the
city of Kirkuk, as soon as possible. We encourage and
look forward to the early formation and establishment
of the new Government, which should form a unified
18-16335

30/05/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

and strong front to address the threats still facing Iraqi
society, especially terrorism. We must express our
concern about the presence of Da’esh remnants in Iraq.
We condemn the recent attacks in Baghdad on civilians
and during Ramadan.
We highlight the recent visit to the country by
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) Executive
Directorate to assess Iraqi capacities and needs.
Based on the work of the (CTC), we encourage greater
coordination and complementarity by the United
Nations system in its support for the efforts of Member
States in the fight against terrorism. In that regard,
we welcome the decision of the Iraqi authorities to
share the assessment of their requests for technical
assistance, with a view to guiding cooperating partners
towards projects for the prevention, investigation and
prosecution of terrorism, thereby promoting synergy
and complementarity. We underline the need to utilize a
regional approach, in particular on the challenge posed
by foreign terrorist fighters.
We believe that the international community’s
support for Iraq should also be directed towards
the reconstruction and revival of its economy. The
International Conference for the Reconstruction of
Iraq, held in Kuwait in February, is an important step
in that direction. We encourage the new Government
to promote policies and programmes of assistance and
social development aimed at addressing the root causes
of violent extremism. In that regard, we wish to join the
Secretary-General’s call for international support for
the Iraq recovery and resilience programme.
We consider it urgent to prioritize addressing
the issue of the nearly 9 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance, including the 2 million
displaced persons registered by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in April. We also
encourage the promotion of greater participation by
women and young people in the political, economic and
social spheres. We support the recommendations made
by UNAMI and UN-Women in that regard, including
the strengthening of the intersectoral working group of
the national plan of action and its adequate funding.
I will conclude by highlighting the work of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kubiš and his
team. My country will continue to closely follow the
Iraqi process, especially at this crucial time to move the
country towards sustainable peace.

S/PV. 8271

Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I welcome the
insightful update delivered by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš on the activities
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) and his important contribution to the
Security Council’s deliberations. Kazakhstan highly
values the efforts of UNAMI and the United Nations
system to provide critical services to the population
of Iraq amid grave and challenging threats and in
promoting political dialogue and reconciliation among
the parties. At the same time, we are also grateful for
the briefings provided by Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir Voronkov and Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Director Michèle Coninsx.
Kazakhstan strongly condemns the attack by two
suicide bombers that took place in Baghdad on 15 May,
which killed at least 35 people and injured 90 others in
an attack on a square where daytime labourers gather
to look for work. We consider that attack hideous and
cowardly, showing little respect for human life or the
holy month of Ramadan.
Kazakhstan congratulates the leadership and
the people of Iraq for the successful parliamentary
elections held on 12 May. Following the military defeat
of Dae’sh, the elections represent further progress
in building a stronger Iraqi democracy. With those
encouraging results, we call on all Iraqi political actors
and their supporters to uphold peace as the results
are processed. We furthermore urge political actors to
resolve any electoral disputes through the established
legal channels and to complete the electoral process by
forming an inclusive Government as soon as possible.
The world community should remain committed to
supporting the Government and the people of Iraq in
that endeavour.
The successful operations of the Iraqi Government
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) have been commended by all and are greatly
appreciated. It is obvious that we must enhance the
effectiveness of counter-terrorism mechanisms in
Iraq and strengthen security measures at the borders,
following the expulsion of ISIL from Iraq. We would be
glad to see Iraq join Kazakhstan’s initiative on a code
of conduct for achieving a world without terrorism. The
international community must make every effort to
consolidate stability and restore peace in Iraq after the
expulsion of ISIL.

18-1633511/14

S/PV.8271

The situation concerning Iraq

30/05/2018

Kazakhstan is in favour of preserving the territorial
integrity of Iraq as a State. There can be no lasting
consolidation of peace efforts without bringing about
reconciliation among the parties, together with justice
and the rule of law throughout the country.

Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, and
Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Assistant Secretary-General
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, for their briefings.

We underscore the inadmissibility of extrajudicial
acts of retaliation against the supporters of ISIL,
their family members and those with any connection
to the group. We urge the Iraqi authorities to take
urgent measures to bring perpetrators to justice, while
upholding international law and international human
rights law, and to refrain from actions that violate
human freedom and justice. We were deeply shocked
by the fate of 42-year-old housewife Amina Hassan, a
Turkish woman who had two minutes to defend herself
against charges of supporting the Islamic State. We
have learned that the entire trial lasted just 10 minutes,
before the judge sentenced her to death by hanging.
Approximately 14 death sentences were handed out in
a span of two hours to those accused of supporting the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, together with the
sentencing of workers, wives and bystanders.

On 12 May, Iraqis went to the voting polls to elect
the members of the Council of Representatives. Those
elections were particularly important because they
came on the heels of the defeat of Da’esh terrorist gangs
in Iraq, which means that the 2018 Iraqi elections were
another chapter of the war against terrorism in Iraq.

At the same time, we support measures to achieve
the most critical goals in Iraq, which are, preserving
unity, re-establishing stability and fostering peaceful
coexistence among all segments of the population,
including minorities. That commonly accepted
approach should be based on equal rights and justice for
all citizens. The challenge for Iraq now is to uphold the
paramount principles of good democratic governance
with deep, stable foundations.
Finally, we must support without hesitation the
Special Representative’s efforts to bring about a stable,
post-ISIL Iraq with a new vision.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate the Republic of
Poland on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to express my gratitude
for its efforts in organizing the Council’s work. I also
thank the Republic of Peru for its efforts during its
presidency of the Council last month. I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI), Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his briefing
and to express my gratitude to him and his team for
their hard and sincere work. I also would like to thank
12/14

The large and unprecedented participation by
female candidates in the elections for the Iraqi Council
of Representatives was a positive sign and showed
that Iraqi women have begun to prove themselves on
the political scene. A large number of young people
also participated in the elections as both voters and
candidates, and, in doing so, sought to choose who
would represent them and meet their expectations in
the Parliament.
The Government of Iraq, based on its legal and
constitutional duties, was able to provide a secure
electoral environment, which enabled the various Iraqi
segments of society to cast their votes in a safe and
satisfactory manner. The Government also ensured all
the conditions necessary to allow displaced persons to
cast their votes, and thereby contribute to consolidating
the democratic process in the country.
After the announcement of the election results,
the Independent High Electoral Commission allowed
complaints and appeals to be submitted by political
entities and parties that had any observations or doubts
about the results of the elections. The Commission will
examine and audit those appeals in accordance with the
rules and legal standards provided for by law in order
for the Commission to then announce the final results
and submit the names of the winners to the Federal
Court for formal approval and adoption. The Council
of Ministers and the Council of Representatives also
focused on that matter so as to reassure all stakeholders.
During the next phase, Iraq will focus on
revitalizing its economy and restoring normal social
conditions. It will seek to support development and
stability in all provinces and to create an attractive
climate for investment in line with the approach taken
by the previous Government. Iraq will also seek to
implement the following strategies.
18-16335

30/05/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

First, we will work to implement the strategic
reconstruction plan, which will be a platform for
launching projects in accordance with certain
criteria and priorities that take into consideration
the requirements for achieving the 2030 Sustainable
Development Goals, as well as Iraq’s vision for 2030.
Secondly, we will carry out the 2018-2022 National
Strategy to Alleviate Poverty in Iraq with a view to
significantly reducing overall poverty and creating
more jobs and opportunities for young people.
Thirdly, the recovery and resilience programme
launched by Secretary-General António Guterres
consists of nine elements, three of which are to be
implemented in high-priority communities where
extremism is more likely to take root.
Fourthly, our national youth strategy, which
was launched in cooperation with the United Nation
Population Fund and is the first of its kind in the
country, aims at preparing a generation that is
productive and well educated, enjoys good mental,
social and psychological health, maintains its national
identity, plays a pivotal role in local communities and is
immune to radical terrorist ideologies.
The Da’esh terrorist organization has shown
extraordinary cruelty towards its victims, including
men, women and children.
The Security Council’s adoption of resolution
2379 (2017) was a victory for justice and fairness for
the victims. The implementation of the resolution is
currently under way, including procedures to set up
the international investigative team. The team will be
responsible for collecting evidence of crimes committed
by Da’esh terrorist gangs and submitting it to the
national judiciary in order to punish criminals. Iraq
looks forward to cooperating fully and constructively
with the investigative team.
Iraq will continue its efforts to provide redress
and compensation to all the victims of horrendous
crimes of sexual violence. It will involve women in
all peacebuilding, reconciliation and reconstruction
initiatives. We reaffirm our commitment to addressing
the suffering of the victims of conflict-related sexual
violence, which was made clear through the signing
of the 2016 joint communiqué by the United Nations
and Iraq to prevent and address conflict-related sexual
violence, and the endorsement of the implementation
plan of the joint communiqué, which outlines specific

S/PV. 8271

measures on justice, accountability and services.
The signing took place during the latest visit to Iraq
by Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
upon an invitation from the Government, between
26 February and 5 March. Iraq looks forward to
concrete outcomes from the implementation plan and a
timetable for its assessment.
Iraq also issued the Iraqi national report on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on 7 March,
on the occasion of International Women’s Day, which
will be presented to the United Nations. Iraq will be
the first country in the Middle East to report on the
implementation of the resolution with regard to the role
of women in conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
Iraqi authorities received Mr. Vladimir Voronkov,
Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism, and Ms. Michèle Coninsx,
Assistant Secretary-General of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, during their joint
visit to Iraq on 7 and 8 March. The visit yielded fruitful
results, including continued efforts to meet Iraq’s 16
priorities set by the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
its Executive Directorate in 2015 and the implementation
of capacity-building projects to meet five of the 16
priorities. They include developing skills among youth
through capacity-building in vocational and technical
training institutes in Baghdad and Fallujah, supporting
the development of a comprehensive national strategy to
combat terrorism, combating the financing of terrorism
through the most effective national and regional action
plan, combating terrorist discourse through capacitybuilding for strategic communications and preventing
terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction.
Iraq has established normal and balanced relations
with all neighbouring countries and the with region to
safeguard the interests of the Iraqi people on the basis
of respect for sovereignty, mutual interests and the
quest for common denominators, instead of conflicts
that have destroyed the region. Iraq seeks to build a
new foreign policy based on positive neutrality, while
avoiding siding with one side against another. It is in
Iraq’s interest to stay away from conflicts in the region.
Iraq believes that cooperation, partnership and mutual
interests in various areas is the only way to achieve
the aspirations of our people for security, stability
and development, by enhancing political, security,
economic and trade cooperation.

18-1633513/14

S/PV.8271

The situation concerning Iraq

Iraq looks forward to building genuine and strategic
partnerships based on the principle of integration with
friendly and allied countries to help Iraq create a sound
economic investment environment and thousands of job
opportunities for young people and improve the living
conditions and standards of its citizens. Development
in Iraq is linked to the development of the entire region
and of all its neighbours. It should be recalled that
Iraq as a whole, and due to the war against terrorism,
suffered from a decline in sustainable development.
There are considerable opportunities for investment in
all Iraqi provinces.
My country’s Government has sought to fulfil
the obligations related to outstanding issues between
Iraq and the sisterly State of Kuwait. With regard to
the issue of Kuwaiti missing persons, the competent
Iraqi authorities continue to conduct their research
and investigation. According to witness testimony,
they have begun exploration and excavation processes
in Shakhat and Ain Tamr in Karbala, Salman Pak in
Baghdad, Khamisiyah in Dhi Qar, Salman Road in
Muthanna and Al-Razi Street in Diyala. No remains
have been found. The Iraqi Government is in the
process of handing over the first recently found batch of
Kuwaiti property and archives, following an agreement
with UNAMI. The material will be transported to the
State of Kuwait by air.
Lastly, I am pleased to highlight Iraq’s willingness
to extend the mandate of UNAMI for an additional year,
according to the letter of His Excellency the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq addressed to Secretary-General

14/14

30/05/2018

António Guterres, on 3 May. That is in accordance with
the letter and spirit of resolution 1770 (2007), as well
as the political mandate of the Mission, which has the
ability to meet Iraq’s needs in the post-victory period
over Da’esh with a view to extending State authority
across the country. Given the challenges faced by Iraq,
UNAMI’s mandate must remain as is in order to allow
it to meet its commitments and provide advice and
assistance to the Government and the people of Iraq,
in particular on social and economic issues that affect
the lives of Iraqi citizens. Iraq hopes that UNAMI and
all the relevant United Nations agencies in Iraq will
play a major role in rebuilding the country following
the devastation caused by the war and the subsequent
decline in basic services infrastructure, especially to
restore stability in liberated areas and ensure the return
of internally displaced persons.
In conclusion, I would like to clarify that the
current criminal trials in Iraq cannot be concluded in
minutes, as stated by my colleague the representative
of Kazakhstan. Legal and judicial processes require
that the investigating judge conduct a full investigation
over an extended period before the case is referred to
another judge, who will then adjudicate on the matter,
according to Iraqi law.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

18-16335
