238

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

terms of Chapter XI of thc Charter, the administering
Power concerncd should cont111ue to transmit information
under Article 7 -1 e of the Charter with respcct to that T('l·
ritory;
3. Requests thc administering Powers concerned to
continue to transmit to the Secretary-General the information prescribed in Article 7J e of thc Charter, as well a~
the fullest possible information 011 political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned, within a
maximum period ofsix Ill(lnths following the expiration of
the administrative year rn t hose Territones;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, rn connection with
the preparation hy the Secretaria! of the working paper~
for the Special Committee on the Territories concerned, to
ensure that adequate information ¡,, drawn from ali available published sources;
5. Request.1 the Special Committee to continue to d1scharge the functions entrusted to 11 under General Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established procedures, and to report thereon to the Assemhly
at its forty-third session
92nd plenury meeting
4 l>cce111ber l 91?7

42/74.

Activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in Namibia and in ali other Territories under colonial
domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism,
apartheid and racial discrimination in southern
Africa

The General Asse111hly,
Having considered the itern entitled "Activities of fór
eign economic and other interests which are irnpeding the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in Namibia
and in ali other Territorics under colonial domination and
efforts to eliminate colonialism, upurihC/d and racial discrimination in southern AfriL·a",
Having exumined the chapter ofthe report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation ofthe Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the item, 4
Taking into considerntio11 the relevan! chapter of the rcport of the United Nations Council for Namibia,~
Recalling its resolutions 1514(XV) of 14December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting oflndependencc to Colonial Countries and Peoplc~. 2621 (XXV)
of 12 October 1970, containing the prograrnrne of action
for the foil implementation of the Declaration, ]5/118 ol
11 December 1980, thc annex to which contains the Plan
of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration,
and 40/56 of 2 Decemher 1985 on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration, as well as ali other resolution,
of the United Nations relating to the item,
Reaffirming the solernn ohligation of thc administering
Powers under the Charter of the United Nations to promote the political, economic, social and educational advancement of the i11hahita11h, >f tlw -, c1 rilorie, uIHkr thcir

4
Officiul Records ,f thc General ~h\cnthlv. I orn',.\ecowl .)~e\.\lOl'I
Sufplement No. 23 (A/42/2,¡, chap IV
/bid., Supplcmrnr \'o _,.¡ '-\ l' ,.¡ L p,11 t t w,, , hap VII. a11d
part four, chap I\'
1 (

administration and to protect the human ami natural re,ources of those Territories against abuses,
Rrnjjirming that any economic or other activity that impedcs the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and obstructs cfforts aimed at the elimination of
colonialisrn, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa and other colonial Territories is in direct violation ofthe rights ofthe inhabitants and ofthe principies of
the Charter and ,di relevan! resolutions of the United Nations,
Reajjirming that the natural resources of ali Territories
under colonial ami racist domination are the heritage of
t he peoples of those Territories and that the depletive exploitation of !hose resources by foreign economic interests, in particular in Namibia, in association with the
occupying régimc of South Africa, constitute a direct violation of the rights of the peoples and of the principies of
the Charter and ali relevant resolutions ofthe United Nations,
Bearing in mind the relevan! provisions of the Final
Document of the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of
t he Co-ordinating Bureau of the Movement of NonAligned Countries on the question of Namibia, held at
New Delhi from 19 to 21 April 1985, 6 the final documents
of the Eighth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Harare from
1 to 6 September 1986 7 and the relevan! resolutions
adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its twentythird ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from
27tn29July 1987, 8
foking into uccount the relevant provisions of the docurnents adopted by the Second International Conference on
Namibia, held at Brussels from 5 to 7 May 1986, t he
World Conference on Sanctions against Racist South
Africa, 9 the International Conference for the Immediate
lndependence of Namibia, 10 the Seminar on Support for
the Immediate lndependence ofNamibia and the Effective
Application of Sanctions against South Africa, held at
Buenos Aires from 20 to 24 April 1987, 11 and the Luanda
Declaration and Programrne of Action adopted by the
United Nations Council for Namibia at its extraordinary
plenary rneetings, held at Luanda from 18 to 22 May
1987, 12
Noting with profound concem that the colonial Powers
and certain States, through their activities in the colonial
rerritories, havc continued to disregard United Nations
decisions relating to the subject and that they have failed
to implement, in particular, the relevan! provisions of
General Assemhly resolutions 2621 (XXV) of 12 Octoher
1970 and 41/14 of 31 October 1986, by which the Assemhly called upon the colonial Powers and those Governments that had not yet done so to take legislative, administ rative or other measures in respect oftheir nationals and
the bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that own and
operate enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly in

"A/40/.l07-S/171H4 a11d Cmr.I, arnwx_
7 A/41/697-S/18.1'12, arma_
x See A/42/699, a11nex 11.
4
See Repvrr ofthc World Co11fere11cc on Sancrions ugainsr Rucist S0111h
·l}ricu, Parí,. 16-2/i Junc /91/6 (l'nited Nation, puhlícation, Sales
'so. E86 1.23), chap IX.
ro See Report oj rhe l11tematio11al Conjére11ce ji,r rhc lmmedwr,,
l•1de¡"'11dc11ce oj .\umibiu, Vie1111u, 7./ l Ju/y 1986 (U1111ed Nations
¡,uhlication, Sales No. E.86.1.16 and addendurn), par! three.
11 A/AC 1.11/24'12 Ojficiul Record, o{ rhe General Assc111/,lv, Forty-sccond Scs\/1>11.
'11pp/,•¡,r,•1J! :\'o ]-1, .\ i4: 1 ;>4), par! (\\O, ch:ip 111, para 20-1

V 11.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Africa, that are detrimental to the mterests of the inhabitants of those Territories, in order to put an end to such
enterprises and to prevent new investments that run counter to the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories,
Condemning the intensified activities of those foreign
economic, financia! and other interests that continue to exploit the natural and human resources of the colonial Territories and to accumulate and repatriate huge profits to
the detriment of the interests of the inhabitants, particularly in the case of Namibia, thereby impeding the realization by the peoples of the Territories of their legitimate aspirations for self-determination and independence,
Strongly condemning the support that the racist
minority régime ofSouth Africa continues to receive from
those foreign economic, financia! and other interests that
are collaborating with the régime in the exploitation of the
natural and human resources of the international Territory of Namibia, in the further entrenchment of its illegal
racist domination over the Territory and in the strengthening of its system of apartheid,
Strongly condemning the investment of foreign capital in
the production of uranium and the collaboration by certain Western and other countries with the racist minority
régime of South Africa in the nuclear field which, by providing that régime with nuclear equipment and technology, enable it to develop nuclear and military capabilities and to become a nuclear Power, thereby promoting
South Africa's continued illegal occupation of Namibia,
Reaffirming that the natural resources of Namibia, including its marine resources, are the inviolable and incontestable heritage of the Namibian people and that the exploitation and depletion of those resources, particularly
the uranium deposits, as a result oftheir plunder by South
Africa and certain Western and other foreign economic interests, in violation of the Charter, of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council
and of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, 13 enacted by the United Nations
Council for Namibia on 27 September 1974, and in disregard of the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice of 21 June 1971, 14 are considered to be illegal, that
they contribute to the maintenance of the illegal occupation régime and are a grave threat to the integrity and
prosperity of an indcpendent Namibia,
Recalling its endorsement of the decision by the United
Nations Council for Namibia that, in the exercise of the
Council's rights under the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, 15 the Council would proclaim an exclusive economic zone for Namibia, the outer limit of
which would be 200 miles, and recalling also its statement
that any action for the implementation of the Council's
decision should be taken in consultation with the South
West Africa People's Organization, the sole and authentic
representative of the people of Namibia, 16
Taking note of the legal proceedings instituted by the
United Nations Council for Namibia in the district court
of The Hague against U renco Nederland V.O.F. and UItracentrifuge Nederland N.V., as well as against the Government of the Netherlands, as part of its elfort to give ef-

13 /bid., Thirty-jijth Sessio11, Supplement No. 24 (A/35/24), vol. 1,
annex II.
14 Legal Consequences for Sta tes of the Continued Presence of South
Africa in Namibia (South We,·t Ajrica) ,wrwirlistanding Securi1y Council
Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion, l. C.J Reports, /971, p. 16.
15 Officia/ Records ofthe Third United Na1io11s Co11fere11ce on the Law
of the Sea, vol. XVII (United Nation, publicat1on. Sales No. E.84.V ..ll.
document A/CONF.62/122
16 Resolution 41/39 A, para. W

239

fect to Dccree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural
Resources of Namibia,
Concerned about any foreign economic, financia! and
other activities which continue to deprive the indigenous
populations of colonial Territories, including certain Territories in the Caribbean and the Pacific Ocean regions, of
their rights over the wealth of their countries, where the
inhabitants of those Territories continue to suffer from a
loss of land ownership as a result of the failure of the administering Powers concerned to restrict the sale of land
to foreigners, despite the repeated appeals of the General
Assemhly,
Consc1ous of the continuing need to mobilize world public opinion against the involvement offoreign economic, financia! and other interests in th~ exploitation of natural
and human resources, which impedes the independence of
colonial Territories and the elimination ofracism, particularly i11 South Africa and Namibia, and emphasizing thc
importance of actions by local authorities, trade unions,
religiow. bodies, academic institutions, mass media,
solidarity movements and other non-governmental organizations, as well as individuals, in applying pressure 011
transnational corporations to refrain from any investment
or activity in South Africa and Namibia, in encouraging a
policy of systematic divestment of any financia! or other
interest in corporations doing business with South Africa
and in counteracting ali forms of collaboration with the
occupation régime in Namibia,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of dependen! Territories to self-determination and independence and to the enjoyment of the natural resources of
their Tcrritories, as well as their right to dispose of thosc
resourccs in their best interests;
2. Reiterates that any administering or occupying
Power that deprives the colonial peoples of the exercise of
their legitimate rights over their natural resources or
subordinates the rights and interests of those peoples to
foreign economic and financia! interests violates the solemn obligations it has assumed under the Charter of the
United Nations;
3. Reaffirms that, by their depletive exploitation of
natural resources, the continued accumulation and repatriation of huge profits and the use of those profits for
the enrichment of foreign settlers and the perpetuation of
colonial domination and racial discrimination in the Territories, the foreign economic, financia! and other interests
operating at present in the colonial Territories, particularly in Namibia, constitute a major obstacle to political
independence and racial equality, as well as to the enjoyment of the natural resources of those Territories by the
indigenous inhabitants;
4. Condemns the activities of foreign economic and
other interests in the colonial Territories impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial
discrirnination;
5. Condemns the policies of Governments that continue to support or collaborate with those foreign economic and other interests engaged in exploiting the natural and human resources of the Territories, including, in
particular, illegally exploiting Namibia's mineral and sea
resources, violating the political, economic and social
rights and interests of the indigenous peoples and thus
obstructing the foil and speedy implementation of the
Declaration in respect of those Territories;
6. Strongly condemns the collaboration of certain
We<.tcrn and other countries with the racist minority

240

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

régime ofSouth Africa in the nuclear field and calb upon
those and ali other Governmenh cnncerned to refrain
from supplying that régimc, direclly or indirectly, with i11stallations, equipment or material that might enable it to
produce uranium, plutonium and l>lher nuclear materials,
reactors or military equipment:
7. Strongly condemns the collahoration with the racist
minority régime of South Africa of certain Western and
other countries as well as transnational corporations that
continue to make new investments in South Africa and
supply the régime with armarnents, nuclear technology
and ali other materials that :1re likely ll' huttress it and
thus aggravate the threat to world peace:
8. Calls upon ali States, in particular certain Western
and other States, to take urgent, effective measures to terminate ali collaboration with the racist régirne of South
Africa in the political, econornic, trade, military and nuclear fields and to refrain frorn entering into other relations with that régime in violation of the relevant resolutions of the United Natiom, and of the Organization of
African Unity:
9. Calls once again upon ali Governrnents t hat have
not yet done so to take legislative, adrninistrative or other
measures in respect of their nationals and the bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that own and opera te enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly in Africa, that
are detrimental to the interests of the inhabitants of those
Territories, in order to pul an end to such enterprises and
to prevent new investments that run counter to the interests of the inhabitants of t hose Territories;
10. Calls upan ali States to termínate, or cause to have
terminated, any investments in Namibia or loans to the racist minority régime of South A frica and to refrain from
any agreements or measures to promote trade or other
economic relations with that régirne;
11. Requests ali States that have not yet done so to take
effective measures to end the supply of funds and other
forms of assistance, including military supplies and equipment, to the racist minority régime of South Africa, which
uses such assistance to repress the people of Namibia and
their national liberation movement;
12. Strongly condemns South Africa for its continued
exploitation and plundering of the natural resources of
Namibia, leading to the rapid depletion of such resources,
in complete disregard of the legitima te interests of the Namibian people, for the creation in the Territory of an economic structure dependen! essentially u pon its mineral resources and for its illegal cxtension of the territorial sea
and its proclamation of an economic zone off the coast nf
Namibia;
13. Reitera tes that ali activities of foreign econornic interests in Namibia are considered to be illegal under international law and declares that consequently South Africa
and ali the foreign economic interests operating 111 Namibia are liable to pay damages to the future legitimate
Government of an independent Namibia;
14. Ca/Is upon those oil-producing and oil-exporting
countries that have not yet done so to take effectivc measures against the oil companies concerned so as to termínate the supply of crude oíl and petroleum products to the
racist régime of South Africa;
15. Reiterates that the exploitation and plundering of
the marine and other natural resources of Namibia hy
South African and other foreign economic interests, including the activities of those transnational corporations
that are engaged in the exploitation and export of the Territory's uranium ores and other resources, in violation of
the relevan! resolutions nf th(· General Assemblv and the

Security Council and of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of
the Natural Resources of Namibia, are considered to be
illegal, that they contribute to the maintenance ofthe illegal occupation regime and are a grave threat to the integrity and prosperity of an independent Namibia;
16. Condemns the plunder of Namibian uranium and
calls upon the Governments of al! States, particularly
those whose nationals and corporations are involved in the
rnining and processing of Namibian uranium, to take ali
appropriate measures in compliance with the provisions of
Decree No. 1 for the Protection ofthe Natural Resources
of Namibia, including the practice of requiring negative
certificates of origin, to prohibit and prevent State-owned
and other corporations, together with their subsidiaries,
from dealing in Namibian uranium and from engaging in
uranium prospecting activities in Namibia;
17. Appeals to the Governments ofthe Federal Repubhc ofGermany, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, which operate the
lírenco uraniurn enrichment plant, to have Namibian
uranium specifically excluded from the Treaty of
Almelo, 17 which regulates the activities of Urenco;
18. Reiterates its request to ali States, pending the imposition of comprehensive mandatory sanctions against
South Africa, to take legislative, administrative and other
measures, individually or collectively, as appropriate, in
order effectively to isolate South Africa politically,
economically, militarily and culturally, in accordance
with General Assembly resolutions ES-8/2 of 14 Septemher 1981, 36/121 B of 10 December 1981, 37/233 A of
20 December 1982, 38/36 A of 1 December 1983,
V)/50 A of 12 December 1984, 40/97 A of 13 December
1985, S-14/1 of 20 September 1986 and 41/39 A of 20
Novernber 1986, and encourages those Governments that
have recently taken certain unilateral sanction measures
against the South African régime to take further measures;
19. Ca/Is once again upan ali States to discontinue ali
economic, financia) and trade co-operation with the racist
minority régime ofSouth Africa concerning Namibia and
to refrain from entering into any relations with South
A frica, purporting to act on behalf of or concerning Namibia, that may lend support to its continued illegal occupation of that Territory;
20. Invites al! Governments and organizations of the
United Nations system, having regard to the relevant
provisions of the Declaration on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, contained in General
Assembly resolution 3201 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974, and of
t he Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, contained in Assembly resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, to ensure, in particular, that the permanent sovereignty of the colonial Territories over their natural
resources is fully respected and safeguarded;
21. Urges the administering Powers concerned to take
effective measures to safeguard and guarantee the inalienable right ofthe peoples ofthe colonial Territories to their
natural resources and to establish and maintain control
over their future development, and requests the administering Powers to take al! necessary steps to protect the
property rights of the peoples of those Territories;
22. Ca/Is upan the administering Powers concerned to
abolish ali discriminatory and unjust wage systems and
working conditions prevailing in the Territories under
their administration and to apply in each Territory a uniform system of wages to ali the inhabitants without any
discrimination;
17

llnited Nation,. Treo/y S<'ries, vol. 795. No. 11326.

VII.

--------

-

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

23. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake,
through the Department of Public lnformation of the Secretariat, a sustained and broad campaign with a view to
informing world public opinion ofthe facts concerning the
pillaging of natural resources in colonial Territories and
the exploitation oftheir indigenous populations by foreign
economic interests and, in respect of Namibia, the support
they render to the racist minority régime of South Africa;
24. Appeals to mass media, trade unions and nongovemmental organizations, as well as individuals, tocoordinate and intensify their efforts to mobilize international public opinion against the policy of the apartheid
régime of South Africa and to work for the enforcement of
economic and other sanctions against that régime and for
encouraging a policy of systematic and genuine divestment from corporations doing business in South Africa;
25. Decides to continue to monitor closely the situation in the remaining colonial Territories so as to ensure
that ali economic activities in those Territories are aimed
at strengthening and diversifying their economies in the
interests of the indigenous peoples, at promoting the economic and financia! viability of those Territories and at
speeding their accession to independence and, in that connection, requests the administering Powers concerned to
ensure that the peoples of the Territories under their administration are not exploited for política!, military and
other purposes detrimental to their interests,
26. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to continue to examine this question and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-third session.
92nd plenary meeting
4 December 1987
42/75.

lmplementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the
international institutions associated with the
United Nations

The General Assemb/y,
Having examined the item entitled "Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the
United Nations",
Having examined the reports submitted on the item by
the Secretary-General, 18 the Chairman of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation ofthe Declaration on the Grantin~ of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples 1 and the SubCommittee on Petitions, Information and Assistance,2°
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, the Plan of
Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration,
contained in the annex to its resolution 35/ 118 of
11 December 1980, and its resolution 40/56 of 2 December 1985 on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration, as well as ali other resolutions adopted hy the General Assembly on this subject, in particular resolution
41/15 of31 October 1986,
18 A/42/264 and Add.1
19 A/AC.109/L.1620.
20 A/AC.109/L.1616 and

Add.l

241

Recal/ing a/so its resolutions ES-8/2 of 14 September
1981, S-14/1 of 20 September 1986 and 41/39 of 20
November 1986 on the question of Namibia,
Taking into account the relevan! provisions of the Declaration of the International Conference for the Immediate
lndependence of Namibia and the Programme of Action
on Namibia, 10 the Declaration adopted by the World Conference on Sanctions against Racist South Africa, 9 and the
Luanda Declaration and Programme of Action adopted
by the United Nations Council for Namibia at its extraordinary plenary meetings. held at Luanda from 18 to
22 May 1987, 12
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the final
documents of the Eighth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Harare
from 1 to 6 September 1986, 7 and ofthe resolution on the
quest ion of Namibia adopted by the Council of Ministers
of the Organization of African Unity at its forty-sixth ordinary -;ession, held at Addis Ababa from 20 to 25 July
1987) 1 as well as of the Declaration on Southern Africa,
adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of that organization at its twenty-third ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 27 to 29 July 1987, 8
Awarc that the struggle of the people of Namibia for selfdetermination and independence is in its crucial stage and
has sharply intensified as a consequence of the stepped-up
aggression of the illegal colonialist régime of Pretoria
against the people of the Territory and the increased support rendered to that régime by its allies, coupled with efforts to deprive the Namibian people of their hard-won
victories in the liberation struggle, and that it is therefore
incumhent upon the entire international community decisively to intensify concerted action in support of the people ofNamibia and their sole and authentic representative,
the South West Africa People's Organization, for the attainment of their goal,
Concerned that the policy of "constructive engagement"
with the apartheid régime of South Africa and the "linkage", as well as economic and military collaboration maintained by certain Western powers, Israel and other countries with Pretoria, have only encouraged and
strengthened the racist régime in its continued illegal occupation and massive militarization and exploitation of
Namibia in violation of the relevan! resolutions and decisions <>f the United Nations,
Grave/y concerned at the continued imperialist and neocolonialist support for South Africa's oppressive and aggressive policies in Namibia and with respect to independent States in southern Africa, in particular the front-line
States, as exemplified by the discussions and resolutions of
the SeL·urity Council,
Con1cwus of the worsening of the situation in southern
Africa because of South Africa's racist policies of oppression, aggression and occupation, which constitute a clear
threat to world peace and security, and condemning the
continuing breach by South Africa of the obligations as<;umed bv it under the Charter of the United Nations and
its persisÍent non-compliance with the relevant resolutions
and dccisions of the United Nations,
Deep/y conscious of thc continuing critica! need of the
Namihian people and their national liberation movement,
the South West Africa People's Organization, and of the
peoples ,1f other colonial Territories for concrete assistance l'rom the specialized agencies and other organization, <'f the llnited Nations system in their struggle for lib-
