TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
nd
MEETING: 18 SEPTEMBER 1973

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1742) . . . . . . . . , . , . . , . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . .

Page

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Cuba:
(a) Letter dated 13 September 1973 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Cuba to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/10995);
(b) Letter dated 12 September 1973 from the Chargk d’Affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Cuba to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/ 10993) . . . . . . , _ . . . . . . . , . . , . . , , . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1742

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FORTY-SECOND

Held in New York on Tuesday, 18 September
President: Mr. Lazar MOJSOV (Yugoslavia).

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 742)

2.

1973, at 10.30 a.m.

2. The PRESIDENT: In addition, I should like to inform
members of the Security Council that I have received a
letter, dated 18 September 1973, from the representative of
Senegal, and a letter also dated 18 September 1973, from
the representative of Madagascar, asking to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the question before the
Council. If I hear no objections, therefore, I shall take it
that the Council agrees to invite the representatives of
Senegal and Madagascar to participate in the discussion of
the item on our agenda today, without the right to vote. In
view of the limited number of places around the Council
table, I shall invite the representatives mentioned to take
places at the side of the Council chamber, it being
understood that they will be called upon to take a place at
the Council table when it is their turn to address the
Council.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

1. Adoption

MEETING

of the agenda.

Complaint by Cuba:
(a) Letter dated 13 September 1973 from the Charge
d’Affaires a,i. of the Permanent Mission of Cuba to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/ 10995);
lb/ Letter dated 12 September 1973 from the Charge
d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Cuba to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/10993).

At the invitation of the President, Mr, M. Fall (Senegal)
and Mr. B. Rabetafika
(Madagascar) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT: Before I call on the first speaker I
wish to inform members of the Council that, in my capacity
as President of the Security Council, I have received a
number of communications from private groups and organizations concerning the item on our agenda. Members of the
Council who wish to see those communications are kindly
requested to get in touch with my office.

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

4. I want to take this opportunity also to issue a warning
to the visitors in the public gallery, In the light of the
disturbances which occurred yesterday, I must indicate to
the visitors that the proceedings of the Security Council
must take place in an orderly manner. Visitors are
requested not to give any indications of approval or
disapproval. Should any visitor disregard this warning the
security guards will be obliged to escort him out of the
chamber. Furthermore, if disorders should be repeated, it
may be necessary to clear the gallery. I must point out to
everybody here that this chamber is not a battlefield. This
chamber is here, and the whole Organization of the United
Nations was founded to serve mankind in the search for
peace, security and international co-operation, even in the
cases when in other places of the world real battlefields
exist.

Complaint
by Cuba:
(@ Letter dated 13 September 1973 from the Charge
d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Cuba to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/10995);
(b) Letter dated 12 September 1973 from the ChargC
d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Cuba to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/10993)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken by the Security Council at its 1741st meeting
yesterday afternoon I propose now, with the consent of the
Council, to invite the representatives of Cuba, Chile and the
People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote.

5. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): Mr. President, on
behalf of my delegation, allow me to join previous speakers
in congratulating you upon your accession to the presidency of the Council for this month. It gives my delegation
great pleasure indeed to see the chair occupied by a
distinguished colleague and good friend as well as an

At the invitation of the President, Mr. R Alar& (Cuba)
and Mr. R. Bazrin (Chile) took places at the Security
Ci?uncil table, and Mr. A. S. Ashtal (Democratic Yemen)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.
1

experienced diplomat in whose competent
success of our deliberations is assured.

13. Turning now to our agenda, we are here at the request
of the Government of Cuba to examine certain specific
charges made by that Government against the armed forces
of Chile, which are accused of having on 11 September
attacked the Cuban Embassy in Santiago and a Cuban
merchant vessel in international waters, in violation of the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations,
of 1961,’ and the recognized international rules of nayi.
gation. These are grave charges of a kind that must give rise
to serious concern on the part of all our Governments,
sharing as we do the obligation to respect the inviolability
of diplomatic personnel and property and to permit the
free and unmolested passage of merchant ships going about
their business on the high seas. It is of course true,
unhappily, that in situations of revolutionary violence l&e
that in Chile innocent bystanders, including diplomats, have
often found themselves in the direct line of fire. This is
serious enough but it becomes doubly serious when dip.
lomats and their families and property are alleged to have
been singled out for harassment and violence. In the case
that is before us we can, first of all, regret the serious injury
reported to have been suffered by a member of the Cuban
Embassy staff in Santiago and any damage to the Embassy
premises and to the merchant vessel-and we can be
thankful that the Ambassador and his staff and their
families were safely evacuated from Chile-but it seems to
my delegation to be altogether another thing, on the
evidence that the Council has heard, for us to find the
Chilean armed forces guilty of grave violations of Chile’s
international obligations.

hands the

6. My delegation also wishes to express its thanks to the
outgoing President, the representative of the United States,
for guiding our work during the month’ of August and to
assure Ambassador Scali of our highest appreciation for the
excelIent manner in which he has acquitted himself as
President of the Council.
7. My delegation has listened with great interest to the
statement of the representative of Cuba; we have listened
with equally great interest to the statement of the
representative of Chile.
8. Let me state at the outset that my delegation is of the
view that acts constituting harassment of embassies and
endangering the life and safety of embassy personnel
cannot be condoned. As a matter of principle we are against
any action which may endanger the life and safety of
innocent people. Having said this, it is also the position of
my delegation that we must respect and uphold the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of a
country. Indonesia will not interfere in the internal affairs
of other countries, and it will absolutely reject any
interferehce by others in its internal affairs.
9. The contentions made in his statement by the representative of Cuba have been contradicted by the representative
of Chile. My delegation is not in a position to give a
judgement on what has happened and is happening in Chile.
We have no means of verifying the contradictory contentions made by the representative of Cuba and the representative of Chile. Indonesia has no representative in Santiago
who can report on the developments on which our
judgement can be based.

14. We listened carefully to the statements made yestcl
day by the representatives of Cuba and Chile and we fin,
them diametrically opposite and completely contrary tl
each other in their versions of the events that form thl
subject of the Cuban complaint. Some other members o
the Council may have independent information from othe;
sources that might enable them to form a judgement a!
between these two different versions. My delegation is in nc
position to make such a judgement.

10. My delegation would like to express its sincere
condolences on the passing away of President Allende. We
sincerely hope that the situation in Chile will soon return to
normal, when the Chilean people can continue, in peace
and harmony, with their endeavour to achieve progress,
prosperity
and social justice for themselves and their
country, thereby contributing to world peace and security.

1.5. The PRESIDENT: Before I call on the next speaker,
should like to inform the members of the Security Counci
that I have just received a letter dated 18 September197:
from the representative of Algeria, in which he asksto be
invited to participate in the discussionof the question
before the Council. If I hear no objection, therefore, I shall
take it that the Council agreesto invite the representative
of Algeria to participate in the discussionof the item on
our agendawithout the right to vote. In view of the limited
number of places around the Council table, I invite !he
representativeof Algeria to take a place at the side of the
Council chamber, it being understood that he will be called
on to take a place at the Council table when it is his turnIO
addressthe Council.

11. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia): Mr. President,
let me first of all join with previous speakers in welcoming
and congratulating you on your accession to the presidency
of this Council and in expressing my delegation’s high regard
for the ability and energy displayed by your predecessor.
Ambassador Scali, during his term of office last month.
12. My remarks will be very brief. First of all, I feel
bound, even at the risk of departing from the substance of
our agenda, to place on record the profound sense of shock
felt by the Government and people of Australia at the
violent overthrow of the constitutionally elected Government of Chile and the tragic death of President Allende.
My Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, said in Canberra last
Thursday that, as a democrat and a socialist, he had been
greatly saddened by the grievous blow that had befallen
Chile’s long and noble democratic tradition, of which
Salvador Allende had been the authentic representative.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Rahal (Algeria/
took the place reservedfor him at the side of the Coirricil
chamber.
16. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): Mr. President, I take this
opportunity to congratulate you on your accessionto the
1 United

2

Nations,

7’reaf.vSeries, vol. 500,

P. 95.

high office of President of the Security Council for the
month of September 1973. I also congratulate your
predecessor, Mr. Scali of the United States, who so wisely
guided our work during the month of August 1973. In
congratulating you on your accession to your high office
and assuring you of my delegation’s full support and
co-operation in the discharge of your duties, I am but
reflecting the very warm and cordial relations between the
Governments and peoples of our two countries. I recall
with profound pleasure the visit of President Tito to Kenya
and can assure you of the very high regard and loye my
people have for him, not only as the leader of Yugoslavia
and a pillar of the non-aligned movement but also as a
world statesman. Personally, I have no doubt, knowing you
as I do, that you will steer the Council during this month
with your well-known devotion to duty, diplomatic skill
and understanding, to your own credit and that of your
great country. I wish you well in this service to humanity
and again assure you of my delegation’s support and
co-operation.

“2. The receiving State is under a special duty to take
all appropriate steps to protect the premises of the
mission against any intrusion or damage and to prevent
any disturbance of the peace of the mission or impairment of its dignity . . .“.
21. The International Law Commission, in considering the
question of the protection and inviolability of diplomatic
agents and other persons entitled to special protection
under international law, reaffirmed the principles of inviolability in its report on the work of its twenty-fourth
session, in which it said:
“By making the person of diplomatic agents inviolable,
international law has long since acknowledged the fact
that certain immunities and privileges for such agents are
essential to the conduct of relations among sovereign and
independent States. Inviolability includes imposing on the
States to which diplomatic agents are accrediteda duty of
specialprotection, that is, a protection higher than that
which they are obliged to accord to a private person.
Under international law, inviolability is attached alsoto
the premisesof the diplomatic mission.Theseprinciples
have been codified in articles 29 and 22 of the Vienna
Convention , . .“.2

17. Turning to the subject before the Council today, my
delegation would like to state at the outset that it does not
intend to bend its principle of non-interference in the
internal affairs of any State Member of this Organization, a
principle it has held dear and respected since acceding to
independence. The Charter of the United Nations is very
specific on the question of non-intervention in the internal
affairs of States Members of the United Nations. The
bloody coup d’&at in Chile is, therefore, not a subject that
GUI
OT should be discussed in this forum. It is strictly a
matter within the domestic jurisdiction of the people of
Chile themselves. We in Kenya, as just we value and treasure
OUT sovereignty, with no less enthusiasm value and respect
the sovereignty and independence of other States.

22. I should alsolike to draw the attention of the Council
to articles 44 and 45 (a) of the Vienna Convention which
regulate relations between Statesin the event of breachof
diplomatic relations.
23. It is clear, in international relationstherefore, that in
the event of an insurrection in a given country the highest
standardsof protecting foreign missionsremainparamount.
In no case should any governmentalauthoritieslaunch an
attack on a specific missionor its diplomatic agentson a
discriminatory basis.

18. Therefore, I shall deal only with the permissible legal
and political issues in the circumstances of this case. In
doing so, I shall not repeat the facts adduced before the
Council
by the various previous speakers, notably the
representatives of Cuba and Chile.

24. In trying to apply these international norms to the
Cubancomplaint that its Embassyhad beenfired upon, and
diplomatic personnel,including the Ambassador,wounded,
we have the counter charge by Chile that the Cuban
Embassyhad beeninterfering in Chileaninternal affairs and
that the first shots were actually fired from the Cuban
Embassy. My delegation has no independent sourcesto
verify these obviously contradicting versions. What is
obvious and what is concededby both sidesis that the
Embassywas a target of shotsby the Chileanarmy.

19. In the conduct of international relations, States are
obliged to act in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations
and other instruments to which they are parties
and, in general, in accordance with international law.
Acting in the manner just stated, States have the duty to
fulfil their obligations in good faith. Acts or omissions
contrary to the foregoing stipulation may, unless extenuating circumstances arise, entail liability.

25. Consideringthat the CubanEmbassy,howeverlargeits
staff, could not possibly have poseda threat to the Chilean
army, and that the international community should not
idly sit by in silencelest this incident were to provide a
precedent for future shooting at embassies
elsewhere,my
delegationcannot but expressconcern.

20. The law of nations which generally regulates diplomatic relations between States is the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. The choice whether to
establish or maintain diplomatic relations depends on the
Governments
concern. But once established the relations
have to be conducted having regard to the provisions of
diplomatic law and the practice of nations. For example,
inviolability
of the diplomatic mission and its agents
remains an important factor in the conduct of international
relations and friendly relations among nations. Thus, article
22 of the Vienna Convention’ states unambiguously that:

26. The representative of Cuba allegesthat a Cuban
merchant ship was attacked by the Chilean forces and
seriously damaged while on the high seas.Freedom of
navigation on the high seasis recognizedin article 2 of the
High SeasConvention of 1958.3Indeed, in the negotiations
2 See official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 10, para.66.
3 United Nations,
Treaty Series, vol. 450, p. 83.

“ 1. The premises of the mission shall be inviolable . . .
3

33. The ,Fourth Conference of Headsof State or Govern
ment of Non-Aligned Countries, meeting in Algien er
9 September 1973-that is, barely a week ago-adopted,
well-conceived and well-thought-out Declaration wl~icl
inter alia focusedon Latin America. It stated:

on the law of the sea, the one principle that has not been
seriously challenged is the freedom of navigation, which is a
vital factor of commerical intercourse and international
trade.
27. The Chilean representative, on the other hand, has
alleged that the Cuban ship was in Chilean waters and that
it was absconding while still carrying 8,000 tons of sugar
belonging to Chile. Again, my delegation, lacking independent sources of information, cannot give a sincere judgement. We do, however, consider that the action of the
Chilean navy and air force was extreme, for it had the
potential of locking the two countries in conflict. The
Cuban ship was, after all, by all accounts we have so far
heard, unarmed and it was a normal merchant vessel.

“The Conference hails the Government and people0
Chile, who in their struggleto consolidate their indepca
dence and build a new society are facing the combincl
aggressionof reaction and imperialism. It expresses
it
solidarity with Chile in its efforts to achievethe econemi,
and social transformations already started, to avoidclvi
war and preserveits national unity.“4
34. The world political spotlight will continue ta b
focused on Latin America. The international commuaitj
will be watching even more closely than ever be&
developments in that part of the world, And if th
interventionist elementsdid indeedintervene, the truth wd
comeout, and, to their surpriseand astonishment,soon41)
truth will be known. It is at that point that this Couac~
should again be seized of the question in the questtl
outlaw interventionism and to vindicate the Council’
mandateto safeguardinternational peaceand security.

28. There has already been wide speculation in the mass
media and also charges in the current debate that the coup
in Chile was foreign-instigated.
No proof is, however,
available to support these charges.
29. It was only three years ago that the General Assembly
adopted the now famous Declaration on the Occasionof
the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations. In
paragraph3 of that Declaration, contained in resolution
2627 (XXV), it is stated:

3.5. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): Beforepro
ceedingto the issuenow before the Council, I should agai
like to statethat the United Statesdeploresand is saddcac,
by the loss of life, in Chile and the death of Presiden
Allende. The situation now seemsto have calmed, andwi
hopethere will not be further violence.

“In pursuance, of the purposes of the Charter, we
reaffirm our determination to respect the principles of
international law concerning friendly relations and COoperation among States. We will exert our utmost efforts
to develop such relations amongall States,irrespectiveof
their political, economic and socialsystems,on the basis
of strict observanceof the principlesof the Charter”.

36. The United States regrets departures from constitu
tional processeswherever they occur. We regret thi
progressivebreakdown of constitutional processesin Cliili
in recent months, which culminated in the tragic eventsal
11 September; and, committed aswe are by 200 years01
constitutional government, we hope that all concernedwil
bendall efforts to their early restoration in Chile.

30. It is therefore outside the purview of international law
for any State, organization or transnational corporation to
have been involved in the Chilean coup. It is strictIy up to
the Chileans themselves to organize or disorganizetheir
affairs.

37. The Cuban representative raised two mattersir
requestingthis meeting of the Security Council: that thi
Cuban Embassyin Santiagohad beenfired upon, andthsii
Cuban merchant vessel had been attacked, allegedly ir
international waters.

31. It is no secret that the Latin American regionhasbeen
and continues to be an areawhere outsidersentertain more
than a wish to have normal relations with the Statesandthe
peoplesof the area. Like Africa and Asia, Latin America is
regarded by some elements as an area in which they can
intrigue and intervene at will without let or hindrance.
Happily, our Latin American friends and colleagueshave
been vigilant, and it wasin recognition of this situation that
two international forums have recently commented on the
Latin American situation,

38. My Government is uncompromisingly opposedti
violent action against diplomatic establishmentsandn:er
chant shipping in international waters. The questionii
whether the assertionsby the Cubandelegation are founded
in fact. In this Council we have heard contrary reportslhit
the firing commencedfrom within the Cuban chanceile~i?
Santiago and that the Cuban merchantman Piaya hw
acted in defiance of local laws while within the port01
Valparaisoand thus within Chilean territorial waters.

32. The Security Council, meeting in PanamaCity on 21
March 1973, adopted resolution 330 (1973) the operative
paragraphsof which read asfollows:
“1. Urges States to adopt appropriate measuresto
impede the activities of those enterpriseswhich deliberately attempt to coerce Latin American countries;

39. During the consultationscalledby the President01th
Security Council on 14 September, the United Sta!::
representative,while interposing no objection to the boll*
ing of a meeting, did expressdoubt as to its propriety.I!g
delegationagreedwith severalother Council members
lhil
the actions referred to in the complaint by Cuba were@

“2. Requests States, with a view to maintaining and
strengthening peace and security in Latin America, to
refrain from using or encouragingthe use of any type of
coercive measuresagainstStates of the region.”

4 A/Y330

4

and Corr. 1, para. 56.

of a violent internal upheaval within the territory of a
Member State. Accordinglv, anv redress would be more
appropriately sought through bilateral channels. We have no
indication that such channels were even tried when this
meeting was requested.
40. It is common knowledge that all the Cuban diplomatic
representatives in Chile had safely left Santiago before the
President of the Council was requested to convene this
meeting, and we can all take satisfaction in their safe
departure. As to the merchant vessel, if, as we have been
told, the ship committed actions in violation of Chilean
law, then it is not, in the absence of special circumstances,
tile business of this Council. It seems to me legitimate to
ask why that Cuban ship sought to leave the port without
the clearance which the maritime authorities of any
nation are entitled to require.
41. As a general principle, my Government believes that
obstacles should not be placed in the way of access to the
Security Council when it is desired by any State. We would
point out, however, that there are other ways, short of a
formal Security Council meeting, of gaining the attention
of the international community which have been used
before, and with greater result, by the parties to a bilateral
dispute. Thus there are the normal diplomatic methods, and
I would note that a third Government is now representing
Cuban interests in Santiago. And Governments have often
brought bilateral or regional matters to the attention of the
Security Council by circulating letters setting forth their
positions.
42. During the consultations last week, my delegation &o
noted that if the United States and other Member States
were to seek to convoke the Security Council on every
occasion when injuries were inflicted on our diplomats and
our overseasmissionswere damaged,the Councilwould be
in almost continuous session.Our own Chancellery in
Santiago was hit by smallarmsfire on 12 September,and, I
regret to say, on 27 other occasionsin the last eight years
oclr diplomatic establishmentsabroad have been bombed,
burned or shot at and our foreign service officers and
official personnelhave been killed, kidnappedor wounded
in literally hundreds of incidents of violence during the
same period.
43. We did not ask the Security Councilto meeton those
instances, despite the seriousness
with which we view such
crimes, becausewe-unlike the Cuban delegation-did not
believe that they constituted a threat to internationalpeace
and security, within the meaningof the relevantportions of
the Charter. We have instead sought redressand remedial
action through two avenues.Almost on every occasion,we
slave energetically sought contact with the authorities
directly concerned, and without regard to questionsof
recognition, We have alsosought on a muchbroaderplane,
and have worked with many other Governments for,
international action that might bring morepermanentrelief
to the very increasingproblem of harassmentand violence
directed at diplomatic representatives.But the stepsthat I
have outlined are thoseany responsibleGovernmentwould
follow. I wonder why the Cuban Governmentdoesnot do
the same.

44. Mr. SEN (India): Mr. President,you andI haveknown
each other for such a Iong time and have affectionately
co-operated in so many fields that there is a hint of
ceremony in my paying a tribute to you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. However, I gladly do so, if only to markthe classic
co-operation that exists between our two countries. I
should also like to record our appreciationof the competent manner in which AmbassadorScali conducted the
businessof this Council last month.
45. We have listened with great care to the statements
made by the Ambassadorof Cubaandthe Charged’affaires
of Chile. Although we much regret the recentdevelopments
in Chile, we in this Council are neither competent nor
obliged to pronounce on them. What has profoundly
disturbed the public and Governmentsall over the world is
the timing and the method of the coup d’6tat in a country
where the armed forces have traditionally beenunder the
control of a civil government.This coupd’Btat,which took
place only a year before the generalelectionsweredue, and
which has already claimed the lives of so man3 people,
must continue to causegraveconcernall overthe world.
46. We must particularly regret and deplorethe death of
that great patriot and distinguishedelectedleaderof Chile,
President Allende. All the developmentsin Chilewill, given
their history and background, be the subject of much
controversy, speculationand suspicionfor many months
and years to come; and while all this mightbe goingon, all
of US who are financially poor or militarily weak will have
to be on our guard. This need to be on our guard was
repeatedly emphasizedin Algiers andwasreferredto again,
three days ago,by the Indian PrimeMinister at a meetingof
the CongressParty.
47. But after I have said all that, the fact remainsthat
what has happenedin Chile-and we have,not unnaturally
and in the conditions now prevailingin that country, most
incomplete information-is essentiallyaninternal matter of
that country. We have heard assertionsbut have not been
given any evidenceof any immediatethreat to international
peaceand security becauseof the happenings
there, andthe
specific complaints before us relate to the treatmentof the
Cuban Embassy and the Cuban diplomatic personnelin
Santiagoand the bombardmentandattack on a Cubanship.
48. Whatever might be the real or imaginedprovocation,
in our view, the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, as also the accepted usageand norm of diplomatic
conduct between nations, doesnot entitle armedforcesof
any r&girne to take violent action againsta diplomatic
mission.The Chileanrepresentativeasserted
that the attack
first came from the Cuban Mission, which, he said,had
been turned into an arsenalor a fortress,Yet the swiftness
of military action on the morning of 11 Septemberand all
the circumstantial evidence availablenow would showthat,
irrespective of who fired the first shot, the CubanMission
was put in a state of siegeand that buildingsbeartnarksof
shooting, and two men were hurt. Besides,there is no
evidence that great stores of arms and armamentswere
found when the Embassybuildingswerevacatedor when
the Mission personnelleft.

cessor, Ambassador John Scali of the United States cl
America, conducted the work of the Council during tbi
month of August.

49. We are gratified in this context that the initiative
taken by the Secretary-General and the diplomatic corps in
Santiago allowed the Cuban officials to leave Chile safely
and speedily. With the departure of the officials, the
immediate problem of the safety of their lives has been
solved. Only two elements remain: the question of compensation and the question of assessment of guilt, if any, of the
army having used force against a foreign mission.

55. My delegation has studied with great care the letters 01
the representative of Cuba of 12 and 13 September
[S/10993 and S/10995], as well as the letter of tht
representative of Chile of 15 September [S/10997].

50. In our view, the problem of compensation should be
subject to negotiations between the two Governments by
whatever means and in whatever forum both consider
appropriate; and the question of assessment of culpability
of the armed forces, if it can be firmly established, will
require consultation and further information, not only
from the parties but from the members of the Council, or
from any other source. We shall therefore need time to
consider these aspects of the problem.

56. We have listened with equal attention to the stale
ments made yesterday by the representatives of Cuba mi
Chile in this Council.
57. The principle of non-interference in matters whichart
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of a State is oet
of the principles upon which our Charter is based and iI
should be respected and complied with. The tragic aad
violent events which shook Chile last week fell thus, bq
definition of the Charter, outside the competence of thi!
Organization and, therefore, of the Security Council,

51. As regards the Cuban ship Playa Larga against which
force was also used, the broad facts are clear, but the details
cannot be known, particularly in the circumstances now
prevailing in Chile, which make travel by independent
authorities difficult. However, the Chilean representative, in
justifying the action the military authorities in Chile took
against that ship, has cited the doctrine of “hot pursuit”.
We do not think that this doctrine applies to a case of this
kind, but are prepared to examine with legal experts the
precise position. This, again, will require time; so, given the
nature of the complaint and the paucity of facts, we
consider that the Council would be best advised to adjourn
for a short time and return again to this problem when we
have had time to sift the facts and consider in detail the
legal implications. That also would be the stage when the
Council might consider some suitable action. We suggest
this course because we feel that there is no immediate
urgency but grave concern for a suitable decision by the
Security Council on this matter.

58. The people and Government of Austria have, however
followed with a sense of deep concern and preoccupatior
the events in Chile and mourn the death of a great Latin
American statesman, President Salvador Allende, whowar
freely elected by his people. The highest Austrian author
ities have given expression to this feeling of shock andgrief,
and the Federal President of Austria, Franz Jonas, hat
expressed the warm and sincere condolences of the
Austrian people to Mrs. Hortencia Busside Allende, widow
of the deceased President. The same feelings have been
expressed by the head of the Austrian Government, Federal
Chancellor Bruno Kreisky.
59. Turning now to the subject of the complaint before
this Council, I should like to state the following. Violent
attacks against diplomatic agents-wherever they ma):
occur-gravely disrupt the mechanism designed to effec.
tuate international co-operation for the safeguarding of
peace and the strengthening of international security. The
existing legal obligations, especially the relevant provisions
of the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relation,
are intended to contribute effectively to the iuviolabllir~
and protection of the persons in question as well asofth:
premises of diplomatic missions.

52. Before I conclude, I should like to invite the attention
of the Security Council to several newspaper reports this
morning which have caused further concern to many of us.
Of course, we cannot and should not act on the uncorrobo
rated newspaper reports, but we should like to be assured
that much of what has appeared in the newspapers this
morning is without foundation. We would hope that the
internal affairs in Chile would be conducted in such a way
as not to conflict with the principles of international peace
and friendly relations among States-principles to which we
attach the greatest importance.

60. The observance of the principle of freedom of
navigation in international waters is essential for t?,e
uninterrupted conduct of relations among sovereign and
independent States.

53. Mr. JANKOWITSCH (Austria): First of all, it is my
pleasant duty to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September, and I wish to assure you of the full and loyal
co-operation of my delegation in the discharge of your
difficult duties. To see the able, talented and experienced
representative of Yugoslavia occupying the highest office in
the Security Council is a source of particular satisfaction
to the representative of a country which is linked by old
and profound bonds of friendship and co-operation with
yours.

61. We have all noticed with great satisfaction that tt.e
Cuban officials and Embassy staff have departed from Chlr
in compliance with the relevant provisions of internationl!
law and that the Cuban merchant vessel PZoyaL&y hu
been able to pursue its way.
62. We have listened to a number of statements in thi%
Council yesterday and today and it is the feeling of my
delegation that we have not yet been provided with all thr
elements to enable us to pronounce safe judgement. YF
delegation hopes, however, that this debate will help ILJ
clarify the particular questions with which the Councilir
seized at present, and will, above all, contribute to a

54. I should also like to express my delegation’s appreciation of the competent manner in which your p&e6

lessening of tension and thus permit the Council to fulfil its
primary functions-the strengthening and maintenance of
international peace and security.

69. Out of concern to safeguard the principles of the
Charter and of international law, my delegation thinks that
the Security Council is in duty bound to condemn the
military junta for violating the premises of the Cuban
Embassy and for the acts of provocation likely to trouble
international peace and security and to jeopardize the
fundamental principle of international peaceful coexistence.

63. Mrs, Jeanne Martin CISSE (Guinea) (interpretation
from I;)sench/: Mr. President, before I addressmyself to the
substance of the item on the agenda may I extend to you
the congratulations of my delegation on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month,
pay a tribute to your qualities as an informed and skilful
diplomat and say how happy we are to see this special
debate being presided over by a son of the great family of
the non-aligned, the scion of a country recognized for its
faith and determination to fight shoulder to shoulder with
the peoples of Africa, Asia and Latin America for the cause
of peace, justice and freedom.

70. Mr. ABDULLA (Sudan): Mr. President, I should like
to begin by expressing to you the extreme pleasure and
satisfaction of my delegation at seeingyou preside over the
Security Council for the month of September. This is not
only an expression of admiration of your outstanding
qualities of skill, experience and wisdom, but also a
manifestation of the cordial and close relations between our
two countries and peoples, which have continued to grow
since our participation in the Bandung Conference in 1955.

64. Scarcely eight days after the glass doors of the
conference halls of the Club des Pins at Algiers closed
behind the last echoes of the mighty fourth summit of the
non-aligned-which
has now gone down in history-the
people of the third world learned with shock, indignation
and with feelings of general censure of the ignoble
assassination of distinguished President Salvador Allende.
The Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned Countries, that conference of unity, hope
aurd solidarity, had unanimously adopted a motion of
support for that worthy son of the people Salvador
Allende, who devoted his life to the economic and social
progress of his country, who died on the field of honour
because, refusing to bow to the hydra-headed monster of
domination
and exploitation of man by man, he was
determined
that the natural resources of Chile should
benefit its nationals and no longer the multinational
corporations alone.

71. ‘At this juncture, I should also like to expressthanks to
Ambassador Scali, the outgoing President of the Security
Council, for the impartial manner in which he conducted
the affairs of the Council during last month.
72. Recent tragic events in Chile have aroused world-wide
concern. My Government, for its part, has followed those
developments with agonizing concern, particularly their
international and humanitarian implications.
73. It was against this background that my delegation
supported the request submitted by Cuba that the Security
Council meet to consider the substance of Cuba’s complaint. It is our view that a complaint by a Member State
which is firmly grounded on the constitutional requirements of the Charter is one to which members of the
Security Council must respond with serious attention. This
is all the more so when the complaining State views the
situation as one which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security.

65. The delegation of the Republic of Guinea, deeply
moved, sympathizes with the gallant militants that have
remained true to the Allende ideal and are continuing to
resist the military junta. My delegation bows before the
memory of the great martyr whose noble ideals will live on
in the spirit of peace-loving peoples and more particularly
those that belong to the great family of the non-aligned.

74. Having listened very attentively to the statements
made yesterday by the representative of Cuba and the
representative of Chile, my delegation would like to make
some observations in regard to the issues that have been
raised.

66. It was with great interest that we listened to the
statement by the representative of Cuba and noted the
reply of the spokesman of Chile. It goes without saying that
my delegation deplores the facts which are the subject of
the complaint of the Revolutionary Government of Cuba
and which are contained in documents S/10993 and
s/10995.

75. In the first place, my delegation is of the view that the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of other
States constitutes one of the basic foundations on which
international relations are built, and is, therefore, enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. Respect of that
principle cannot by itself guarantee international order
unless it is respected correspondingly with other rules of
international law.

67. The attack on the Cuban Embassy in Santiago and on
a vessel of the Cuban Merchant Marine, the PZuyaLarga, by
Chilean armed forces, the arrest and detention of innocent
persons by the Chilean police constitute graveviolations Of
the principles of the Charter and of international law.

76. With respect to the issuesbefore us, the complexity of
international law is such that when one of its rules is
violated it is simple to take shelter behind another. My
delegation has no intention of engaging in such legal
juggling. Our main interest today is to pronounce ourselves
on the issues before us, on the basic understanding that all
of us around this table have greater interest in ensuring that
tomorrow’s world will not be plunged into flames against
which no one’s house is fire-proof.

68. My delegation is also concerned about the fate of the
political refugees in Chile. It expresses the hope that the
numerous messages addressed to the military junta will
n-met with a favourable response, thus saving the lives of
innocent persons who had placed their hopes in the socialist
rQgIrne of President Allende.
7

attitude based first and foremost on an obvious hostility
vis&vis Cuba in no way lessen the reality of the acts
directed against a sovereign State and against its nationals or
diminish the responsibility of the Chilean authorities for
those events.

77. It is for this reason that my delegation deeply regrets
the firing on Cuba’s Embassy and also the attack on Cuba’s
vessel on the high seas by the Chilean armed forces. Those
acts are certainly a violation of both the Vienna Convention
on Diplomatic Relations and the Conventions on the Law
of the Sea. We support Cuba in its complaint before the
Security Council.

84. I shall not spend much time in demonstrating how the
acts of the Chilean authorities constitute an unpardonable
infringement of all the international rules concerning the
treatment of foreign diplomatic missions and the protection
of foreign nationals and property. Preceding speakers llave
already done so, and have emphasized the importance and
gravity of such breaches. But what is still more serious and
what bears out our concern and should retain the Council’s
attention is the dangerous situation which may be seen
behind the brutal acts directed against Cuba and which is
illustrated by the number of arbitrary detentions, the
uncertain fate of the prisoners, the summary executions
and the threats to aliens that characterize the present
behaviour of the Santiago authorities.

78, As a delegation that represents a country that recently
emerged from a civil strife, none can value more than we
the importance of peace and stability on any part of this
globe. We therefore regret the loss of life and property that
has resulted from the violent coup d’Ctat that took place in
Chile last week. We share the concern of many over the
conditions of the thousands of foreign refugees and hope
that their safety will be ensured in accordance with civilized
norms.
79. Finally, my delegation was profoundly grieved upon
learning of the death of President Allende. It was a tragic
loss, for he was a great believer in the ideals of human
liberty and dignity and in his country’s sovereignty over its
natural resources. Those beliefs made him one of the
standarcl bearers of the principles of non-alignment. For
that he will be missed.

85. This unleashing of passions and hatreds in a country
whose courageous efforts to consolidate its independence
and to recover its natural resources we have followed \vjtl~
much sympathy has aroused our concern and places the
region as a whole in considerable uncertainty.

80. The PRESIDENT:
The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of Algeria. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

86. It is one of the constant principles of my country’s
policy to avoid any interference in the domestic affairs of
other countries and to denounce all acts of foreign
interference, whatever their source, in our own affairs. This
principle is also one of the fundamental principles of 111e
Charter of the Organization of African Unity and it inspires
all the attitudes of the non-aligned countries. We shall
therefore refrain from interfering in the internal politics of
Chile, irrespective of the sympathy we have always felt for
the Government of President Allendc and of our concern at
the events that led to his brutal overthrow.

81. Mr. RAHAL (Algeria) (interpretation from French).
Mr. President, it is not necessary for me to tell you how
happy the Algerian delegation is to see you presiding over
this debate and how glad we are that it should be precisely
the representative of Yugoslavia who is assuming at such a
moment the heavy and important responsibility of directing
the proceedings of the Security Council. Your qualities
which are well known to us, since we have had many
opportunities in the past to experience them, offer us the
guarantee that under your presidency the Council will
succeed ‘in facing up to its obligations and in responding to
our concerns. I must also address myself to all members of
the Council and thank them for having been so kind as to
allow me to take part in the Council’s discussions on the
complaint submitted by Cuba.

87. But it is my duty to recall here that it is scarcely two
weeks since the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries meeting h Algiers
sent its greetings to President Allende and to the Government and the people of Chile, expressing its solidarity in
the difficult trials then facing them. Addressing himself to
the President of the Conference, President Allen& cx.
plaincd in a message the difficulties he had to face, He said:

82. Our statement in this debate is motivated by the
solidarity that we wish to express to the Government and
people of Cuba, which have always enjoyed our sympathy
and friendship and with which we share the same concerns
and the same hopes. But our statement is also motivated by
the concern felt in Algeria following the grave events that
have recently taken place in Chile, and particularly the
hostile acts that the new Chilean authorities have directed
against the Cuban Embassy in Santiago and against a vessel
of the Cuban merchant marine.

“NO one knows better than you yourself, Mr. President,
in the light of the experience of your own heroic people,
how difficult it is to transform societies founded on
injustice, exploitation and discrimination into States
which guarantee respect for human dignity and national
liberation from any political or economic yoke and which
can struggle against the connivance of the privileged
sectors in our countries with the major foreign intercstsin a word, how difficult it is to defend oneself against
imperialism, which manifests itself daily in ever-new and
more dangerous forms.”

83. The facts on which the Cuban complaint is based are
sufficiently clear and serious to prompt the Council to take
as a matter of urgency the necessary measures against the
military authorities of Chile. The denjals by the representative of Chile and the confused and laborious explanations
to which he had recourse in the attempt to justify an

88. That clearly explains the development of events which
culminated in the present situation. Those few words arein
themselves the most energetic denunciation of these foreign
interventions which continue to threaten our countries and
8

whose intent is to make our freedom and dignity dependent
ltpon foreign economic or strategic interests, to which our
peoples are henceforward determined not to submit themselves.

94. In accepting the Cuban request for the convening of
the Security Council, my delegation was guided by two
substantive considerations.
95. The first consideration is that every State Member of
the United Nations has the right to demand the convening
of the Security Council whenever it considers that a dispute
or situation is likely to endanger international peace and
security. The Security Council, being the United Nations
political organ with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, not a mere
court for passing judgement on a complaint, is entitled to
examine the causes, the surrounding circumstances, the
possible developments and the pattern of events in a region
relating to any situation brought before it, if it is to
determine, under Article 34 of the Charter, whether the
continuance of that situation is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security.

89. The representative of the United States told us
yesterday that the world has entered upon a new phase of
understanding and co-operation which necessitates a change
of language. Just like everybody else, we have been very
happy, perhaps prematurely, at the changes which seem to
be emerging in the international atmosphere. These changes
certainly entail a change of style but, in our thinking and in
our conviction, this must not be simply a question of a
change in language; it must be a far-deeper change which
goes to the reality underneath the words. I refer to the
behaviour of each and every State vis-a-vis the others; I
refer to respect for the sovereignty and the dignity of every
nation, to the freedom of each people to choose the path of
its development and to secure its prosperity by recovering
first of all its own wealth. What is now going on in Chile
unfortunately
shows that the changes have not yet reached
what are usually called the countries of the third world,
whose security and independence remain unhappily subject
to threats, which have not yet been eliminated by the
improvement
that may be discerned in international relations.

96. Our second consideration is the feeling of my delegation that the Cuban complaint is founded on facts that
actually constitute a grave infringement of the principles of
the Charter and of international law in general and that are
therefore fraught with danger for international peace and
security.
97. At the same time, the context in which those
violations took place, together with their local and international environment and implications, clearly proves the
justified nature of this meeting of the Security Council.

90. My delegation would like to avail itself of this
opportunity
to express to the Chilean people the solidarity
and the friendship of the Algerian people. The trials
through which they are passing are felt and shared by us, as
indeed by all the non-aligned countries.

98. Let me now very briefly refer to the grave acts
committed by the Chilean armed forces to which the Cuban
complaint refers.

91. In his message of condolences addressed to President
AIlende’s widow, President Houari Boumediene said:

99. As we are ail aware, the inviolability of diplomatic
missions and of the persons of diplomats is one of the most
ancient and most widely accepted rules of the international
code of behaviour and written international law. It is a
well-known fact that this norm of international behaviour is
adhered to and respected by the vast majority of countries
of the world, even in cases of outbreak of hostilities
between States and in a state of belligerency. This principle
of international behaviour has recently found concrete
expression in the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations.

“All free men are mourning. The tragic death of
President Allende plunges us in a grief based on our great
friendship with the peoples of Chile, Latin America and
the third world and on the thoughts that only the great
turning-points
in the history of mankind can evoke. An
indomitable fighter for peaceful revolution in a continent
in full change, Allende gave us the sense of what State and
revolutionary
commitment are, throughout all the imperialist machinations hatched by reaction and the multinational corporations.”

100. Consequently, the existing rules of international law
leave no doubt about the fact that the attack against the
Cuban Embassy in Santiago de Chile by armed forces and the
wounding of one of the Embassy’s officers constitute a
grave infringement of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations and of elementary norms of behaviour in
relations among States.

92. The Council is today seized of a complaint by the
Revolutionary
Government of Cuba. That complaint concerns specific facts that must lead to a condemnation of the
military
authorities in Santiago. But we believe that it
would indeed be a mistake to divorce the acts denounced
by Cuba from the whole context of the present situation in
Chile, or to assess them without taking full account of their
implications
for both the immediate and the more distant
future, and of their inherent danger to peace and harmony
in that part of the world.

101. The violations of the norms of international law and
of the Vienna Convention that occurred in the course of 12
and 13 September were not isolated acts and were not
limited to the Cuban Embassy. Other foreign diplomatic
missions as well-but,
significantly, not all of them-were
subjected to unjustified measures of intimidation and
chicanery. Thus, on 13 September, members of the armed
forces cordoned off the Yugoslav Embassy in Santiago de
Chile, preventing the staff of the Embassy from entering or

93. The PRESIDENT: Having for the time being no more
names on my list of speakers, I now take the opportunity
to make a statement in my capacity as the representative of
YUGOSLAVIA.
9

dispute having its roots predominantly in foreign mters
ference against the Government of Chile during the past
three years and more. There is no need to enumerate here
the universally known facts of economic coercion. Presi,
dent Allende himself, for example, gave us an account of
this in his dramatic speech at the twenty-seventh session of
the General Assembly.5

leaving the building. On 14 September, in addition to strict
control of identity, the attache cases of all Embassy
personnel, including that of the Ambassador, were subjected to search.
102, Further, there is no doubt that the attack against the
merchant ship Haya Larga not only amounts to an
infringement of the rules of international law regulating
freedom of navigation-bearing
particularly in mind in this
regard the Geneva Conventions of 1958-but could aho
constitute an act of aggression liable to lead to a further
deterioration of the existing situation.

108. It was precisely in the larger context of peace and
security in Latin America that the Security Council, at its
important series of meetings in Panama, adopted resolution
330
(1973), which, after recognizing that the use or
encouragement of the use, of coercive measures may create
a situation likely to endanger peace and security in Latin
America, urged States to adopt measures to impede the
activities of those enterprises which deliberately attempt to
coerce Latin American countries and requested States to
refrain from using, or encouraging the use of, any type of
coercive measure in the region.

103. My delegation subscribes to the assessment of these
acts of violence as constituting a serious threat to international peace and security within the meaning of Articles
34,35 and 39 of the Charter.
104. On the other hand, my delegation is very much
disturbed by, and seriously concerned over, several negative
aspects of the situation relating to its causes and consequences, its specific colouration and its dangerous international ramifications. Indeed, it should not be expected of
us that we calmly remain blind and deaf, not seeing the real
roots and causes and consequences of the tragic events now
taking place in Chile.

109. It is in the light and context of interaction of
different forms of coercion and interference in internal
affairs, it is in the combined efforts of international
imperialism and internal retrograde forces which caused the
dispute and situation with which we are confronted that we
see a continuous threat to international peace and security
within the meaning of Article 34.

105. Of course, we firmly adhere to the view that
whatever political and social system a country has or wants,
and with whatever country a State or Government wishes
to have or not have diplomatic relations, are matters for its
sovereign decision. However, the new authorities in Chile
have themselves given an international character to all these
violations by basing their first international acts on something that was superseded a long time ago, on something
that reminds us of the Second World War and the most
intense period of the cold war, and they have done so by
attacking relations with other countries on political and
ideological grounds. When they talk about liberating their
country from the “Marxist yoke” and then on that ground
proceed to select countries, on the basis of differing social
systems, with which to sever relations; when they attack or
harass those countries’ diplomatic missions and attack their
ships, and, according to irreproachable sources, subject
large numbers of foreign nationals to arrest, terror and
violence; and when they state that the presence of those
foreign nationals in Chile was the major cause of, and
justification for, what the junta did, then we are faced with
a crisis having an international content endangering international peace and security.

110. As a socialist and non-aligned country engaged,
together with all peace-loving, democratic and progressive
forces, in a persistent effort to base international relations
universally on the principles of the Charter, of a&r
peaceful coexistence, we categorically oppose neo-colonial,
imperialistic policies directed against all current positive
trends in international relations, policies which endanger
the very foundations of international peace, stability and
security in our increasingly interdependent world.
111. We cannot close our eyes to the fact that Lis
combined action of internal and foreign forces against the
legal Government of Chile-whose
contribution to the
positive development of international
relations is well
known, and which was engaged in the carrying out of
significant social and econon-ic transformations
in Chiletook place immediately after the Fourth Conference of
Non-Aligned Countries in Algiers, which marked a turning
point in the active involvement of the largest numbrr of
States in the building of democratic international re!atior&
based on equality, non-interference and the free deselop
ment of all countries. It was the Conference’s asscm\enl
that attempts to prevent necessary changes and perpetuatr
various status quo conditions of injustice, inequalil~.
exploitation, interference and aggression are among tI,e
chief causes of crises, instability and tensions in the ~;a~jd
of today.

106. There is a great outcry in international public
opinion demanding that these repressive measures be
stopped immediately. And all this is actually happening in a
country having deep-rooted and long-standing democratic
traditions and on a continent where the most authoritative
statesmen of all Latin American countries have been
emphasizing during past years the necessity to promote
co-operation and coexistence in that very important region
of the world on the basis of what they call ideological
pluralism.

112. In the part dealing with developments irk Lati?
America, the Declaration of Algiers states, inter ah:
“The Conference hails the Government and pco~;]~
of Chile, who in their struggle to consolidate thti

107. Another important and broader aspect of the situation before us is the fact that we are now considering a

5 See Official
Session, Plenary

0

Records
Meetings,

of the General Assetnhly.
7hw~~sri~~:~
vol. III, 2096th
meeting.

.independence and build a new society are facing the
combined aggression of reaction and imperialism. It
expresses its solidarity with Chile in its efforts to achieve
the economic and social transformations already started,
to avoid civil war and preserve its national unity.“6
113. May I, in keeping with the traditionally good
relations that Yugoslavia and Chile enjoyed for such a long
time, avail myself of this opportunity to refer to the
tremendous loss felt by all of us as a result of the tragic
death of President Salvador Allende of Chile. President
Tito, the Head of State of Yugoslavia, expressed our
feelings best when, in a recent speech, he paid the highest
tribute to the late President Allende and said that his work
and life will be an inspiration in the struggle of the peoples
of Latin America to win the place that rightly belongs to
them.
114. In conclusion, may I underline the readiness of the
YugosIav delegation to support any decision of the Council
that would cope adequately with the specific aspects of the
dispute before us.
115. Speaking again as PRESIDENT, I invite the next
speaker, the representative of Senegal, to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
116. Mr. FALL (Senegal) (interpretation from French): I
should like to thank all members of the Council for being
good enough to permit me to participate without the right
to vote in the debate which the Council is holding today on
Cuba’s complaint against Chile.
117. I should also like to avail myself of this opportunity
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your accession to the
presidency of this important organ of the United Nations. I
am sure that under your presidency the Security Council
will be able to draw the most felicitous conclusions from
these debates.
118. My Government endorses the apprehensions expressed by the Cuban delegation concerning the incidents
which occurred in the Cuban Embassy in Santiago de Chile
in the course of the painful events which took the life of
President Salvador Allende and plunged his country into a
bloodbath which all here deplore,
119. Several delegations who have preceded me in the
discussions have laid stress on the scrupulous desire of their
countries and Governments to abide always by the strictest
respect of the principles of non-intervention in the
domestic affairs of other States. My Government, too, is
guided by that concern, but in this connexion we must
define the limits of what we call non-intervention in the
domestic affairs of a country.
120. I should point out that the demonstrations, whether
they were orchestrated or not, by the public in this
Council’s
meeting yesterday afternoon did not fail to
perturb those who would have hoped that the developments in Chile would remain exclusively an internal Chilean
affair.
6 A/9330 and Corr.1, para.56.

121. In any event, my Government considersthat the
international community could not remainindifferent to
the action undertaken under the orders of the military
junta which has seized power in Chile againstthe local
citizenry and personsof the Cuban Missionin Santiagode
Chile. That action constitutesthe most flagrantviolation of
the most elementary rules of present-dayinternationallaw.
Several speakershave alreadyremindedus of the provisions
of articles 22 and 29 of the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations, of 1961,7 which providesunequip
ocally for the inviolability of diplomatic missionsand
personnel and, in particular, that “all appropriatesteps
[must be taken] to protect [the membersand] the
premisesof the missionagainstany intrusionor damageand
to prevent any disturbanceof the peaceof the missionor
impairment of its dignity.” That is the wordingof article 22
of the Vienna Convention of 1961. The Cubandelegationis
therefore quite right in complaining to the Council about
the attacks to which its diplomatic missionin Santiagode
Chile wassubjected.
122. We would add that it is clearly a questionof an
action which might endangerpeace and security,at leastin
that part of the American continent for, indeed,history has
taught us that acts of a lessviolent andlessunlawfulnature
have been at the origin of death-dealingdisputesbetween
States.
123. I shall not go back over the facts whichhavebeenset
forth here by the representativeof Cuba, At the present
stage of affairs it is not possible to expressa value
judgement on the accusationslevelled againstChile. My
delegation considers that this state of affairs WI by no
meansbe attributed to the Cuban Governmentand that it is
for the Chilean Government to provide specific evidence
rejecting the accusationsagainstits country.
124. Unfortunately, not only have the new mastersin
Chile failed to provide any convincing proof of their good
faith but, on the contrary, they have prohibited those
whose profession it is to keep world public opinion
informed from entering the country. Indeed, in a press
releaseof Agence France Presseof yesterday I find the
following statement:
“Argentina and foreign journalists blocked at the
frontier between Argentina and Chilesince11 September
have issuedan energeticpressstatementin protestagainst
the military authorities of Chile, who do not allow them
to cross the frontier in order to inform the world about
the events that are occurring in that country. What is
happening then, in Chile, that cannot be disclosed
to the
world? , ask the signatoriesto this protest.”
125. We therefore consider that if the presentmastersin
Chile have nothing to hide there is no reasonwhy they
should refuse to admit any impartial personswho could
validly keep world public opinion informed.
126. It is in consideration of all these factors that my
delegation is of the view that your Councilshouldcondemn
the act which is a flagrant violation of the rights,
7 United Nations, Treaty

Series,vol.

500,

p.95.

followed the Chilean experience under the courageous
leadership of Mr. Allende will now be forewarned of the
dangers inherent in the aftermath of a backward imperialism and of what can happen to the wishes of a people
determined to take charge of their own future, no matter
how disagreeable to some may be the revolutionary process
initiated by such peoples in full awareness of what they are
doing. We pay a tribute to Mr. Allende and we hope that his
sacrifice of his life will not be in vain.

immunities and privileges of diplomatic missions, and
clearly and unequivocally condemn the attack on the
Cuban Embassy in Santiago de Chile as a violation of the
rules of the Vienna Convention.
127. Before concluding my brief statement, allow me on
behalf of my Government to pay a solemn tribute to the
memory of President Allende. Salvador Allende died, as he
had lived, fighting for freedom in honour and dignity. He
died a hero’s death, and I am convinced that his sacrifice will
not prove to be in vain and that his example will be an
inspiration to the millions of men and women who are
fighting to deliver the world from oppression, poverty and
exploitation. The socialist experiment for which Salvador
Allende sacrificed his life had aroused the greatest hopes in
the hearts of all democrats throughout the world. Salvador
Allende was already a man in history, and now he has
become a legendary hero; and I would not be in the least
surprised if in the very near future those who were
responsible for this tragic event did not come to feel the
greatest pride in the fact that they are citizens of a country
which saw the birth and death of this noble man. We
extend our thoughts and condolences to his widow and
family, friends and companions in the struggle of Salvador
Allende. On behalf of my delegation and on behalf of the
Government and people of Senegal I also convey to them
our sympathy and sorrow in their suffering.

132. The revolutionary Government of Cuba has seen fit
to bring to the Security Council the matter which is now
before it because it has confidence in the triumph of law
over blind force or pressures which are no less intolerable
for being concealed. It has been said repeatedly that there
could be misgivings as to the desirability of bringing this
matter before the Security Council. My delegation believes
that in bringing the complaint before the Security Council
it was the intention of Cuba to have examined and settled,
if possible, its dispute with the Chilean authorities in the
context of strict respect for international law which, to us,
is a proof of its good faith.
133. Without wishing to teach anyone a lesson-least of all
this august assembly-my delegation thinks that the Secu‘rity Council should not simply be a recording chamber, but
,should see to it that a grave situation does not degenerate
beyond remedy to the detriment of the safeguard of
international peace and security.

128. The PRESIDENT:
The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of Madagascar. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

134. Moreover, we do not believe that the Security
;Council should confine itself to merely noting that there is
a situation threatening international peace and security; it is
the Council’s duty, before all else, to prevent any develop
ments which may jeopardize peace and normal and even
friendly relations between nations and peoples.

129. Mr. RABETAFIKA:
(Madagascar) (interpretation
from French): First of all, Mr. President, I should like,
through you, to address my delegation’s thanks to the
members of the Security Council for allowing me to take
part in the Council’s debate on the Cuban complaint in
document S/ 10995.

135. The incidents related by the Charge cl’affaires ad
interim of Cuba in his letter of 13 September 1973 to the
President of the Security Council, and further developed
before the Council yesterday by the representative of Cuba,
represent very serious breaches of those standards of
conduct imposed by international law. The Vienna Convention of 1961, which has been repeatedly quoted here, is
quite clear on the inviolability of the person and property
of diplomats. That inviolability has quite obviously been
ignored by the military authorities in Santiago and we
cannot but be deeply concerned and shocked at that state
of affairs.

130. It is my intention to emphasize that the Government
and people of Madagascar intend at all times to remain true
to a principle in the Charter of the United Nations and
which is also one of the cornerstones of the policy of
non-alignment which we follow, namely, non-interference
in the domestic affairs of States. The fact remains, however,
that in the face of a series of events which have deeply
shaken the conscience of the countries and peoples of the
third world-and
particularly those that have committed
themselves to a struggle to free themselves completely both
economically and socially in their national life-my Government can remain neither silent nor indifferent, the more so
as the most elementary democratic rules have been violated
in the overthrow of a Government which grew out of the
popular will, a Government of national unity, a Government devoted to freedom, progress and justice.

136. Let us suppose for a moment that the state of
insurrection prevailing in Chile on 11 and 12 September
last, did justify taking exceptional measures. My delegation
nevertheless thinks that the attack-and perhaps the word
“attack” is not strong enough-perpetrated by the so-called
regular armed forces, or militia, against diplomatic premises
and members of a mission cannot conceivably be regarded
as part of any such exceptional measures. Furthermore, the
Vienna Convention provides that in case of insurrection,
the host State has the duty to protect the property and
person of diplomats. We find it hard to see how harassment
such as that practised on the Cuban Embassy in Santiago
can be justified except in terms of the most cynical black
humour. We can only denounce such humour since this is

131. We very deeply regret the tragic death of
Mr. Salvador Allende, a statesman who was able to break
the hard shell of dependency in which his people had lived,
despite plots hatched from outside either by foreign Powers
or by transnational interests in the service of an alleged
ideology which is archaic and tinged with the basest sort of
imperialism. We are. however, sure that all peoples who
12

indicative of an irresponsible
norms of international law.

attitude

which flouts the

not for the respect we feel for the membersof the Council,
which compelsusto make a few pointsclear.

137. No matter what justifications may be adduced by the
Chilean authorities-justifications
which seem to us excessively punctilious in detail-cannot prevent us from ignoring
the fact that the Cuban Ambassador in Santiago and
members of the diplomatic staff in the Embassy were quite
simply the victims of an intolerable attack. It is only just
that Cuba, which does not have the means of a great Power,
should have recourse to the Security Council to be advised
of its rights and to determine the responsibility that should
rest squarely with the Chilean authorities.

144. If we were to acceptthe imaginativeinterpretation of
the representativeof the military junta, this Councilwould
not only not condemn this military regime but rather
congratulate it and thank it for its exemplary compliance
with the rules of international law. The CubanEmbassy,as
he said, was besiegedby Chilean troops in order to protect
it. The shots fired were not fired from the streets where
these troops were to be found but rather fram the
Embassy.According to him, there wasno protestmadenor
were any steps taken about this brutal attack by Chilean
armed forces.

138. As regards the bombardment of the merchant vessel
Larga by the Chilean Air Force, we see no conceivable justification for it. That bombardmenttook place
on the high seas,and the Geneva Convention on the High
Seasa provides that such vesselsshould be free from all
impediment. Even if this merchant vesselwas still carrying
its cargo of sugar,would not the Chileanauthoritieshave
done better to have recourseto a trade tribunal or to some
other adequate procedure, rather than bombarding the
vessel without prior warning, a merchant vesselwhich had
no other missionbut a peacefulone?
Playa

139. Even the right of pursuit, which hasbeenmentioned
here, is subject to certain conditions under the Geneva
Convention, and we for our part do not think that the
Cuban vesselP@a Lavgu was engagingin any kind of
piracy. This is why we condemn this unjustified attack,
which seemsindeed to have been premeditated, and the
victim of which wasthe CubanmerchantvesselPZuya Large.
140. In conclsuion, we hope that the membersof the
Security Council, who now have before them the information they require, will shouldertheir responsibilities
and
will accede to the requestof the representativeof Cuba in
the Council, namely, that the safety and security of
diplomatic missionsall over the world may be ensuredand
that shipping on the high seasmay be protected and that
unjustified attacks may be castigated by the judgement
which the Council will pass.

142. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof
Cuba, who wishesto speakin exerciseof the right of reply.
143. Mr. ALARCON (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spnrzish): Out of respect for the membersof the Security
Council, my delegationwould like to offer somepoints of
clarification on the allegations, which are completely
fraudulent, that were madeyesterday by the representative
of the military junta of Chile. Strictly speaking, his
statement, which was a mockery of the capacity for
rationalization and evaluation that membersof the Council
possess,would not call for any further comments,were it
Nations,

146. The facts are that a person who was seriously
wounded, called Luis Farias, a Cubandiplomat who was
within the premisesof the CubanMission,exists,and there
is another person who was wounded also,though not so
seriously, Mr. Inchaustegui,who wasformer Ambassadorof
Cuba to this Organization and is known to many of the
members of the Council and who was servingas Cuban
Ambassadorto Chile at the time theseeventsoccurred.
147. The facts are that the building which wasattacked
showssignsof the impact of the Chileanartillery fire, and
of course it would be interesting to know why the
inclination for photography of the representativeof the
Fascist leaders of Chile which prompted him to bring a
seriesof photographshere yesterday which could convince
no one, did not prompt him to bring a simplephotograph
showing how the facade of our building in Santiagohas
beenleft.
148. The facts are, what is more, that distinguished
membersof the diplomatic corps accreditedto Santiagode
Chile had the opportunity to participatein all theseevents.
Adopting a conduct to which my Government and delegation would like to pay a tribute, a numberof the foreign
ambassadorsand other diplomatic missionpersonnelaccredited to Chile had to interposethemselves
betweenthese
forces and the Cuban diplomats, and they had to accompany our staff from the building of our Embassythat
was besieged and under attack to the aircraft which
returned them to safety outsideChile.They areexceptional
witnessesasto how the events occurredandwhat the facts
actually were.

141. Finally, although it is not the custom, I shouldlike
on behalf of my delegation and on my personalbehalf,
Mr. President, to extend to you our warmest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for September.

8 United

145. This line of argument would have somemerit if it
were perhaps offered in an elementary school and there
were not impartial, direct eye-witnesses
to thesefacts.

Treaty Series, vol. 450, p. 83.

13

149. The facts stand for themselves.The representativeof
the military junta did not mention a singlecasualtyamong
the Chilean troops nor any damagesuffered by the
attackers. Yet he would convince the Council members,
who are adults, persons experienced in dealing with
international disputes, that it was the wounded persons
who fired the shots, that it wasthe besieged
who attacked,
and it was the victims of aggression
who did not protest. I
really do not think this deservesany further commenton
my part to demonstratethat the ChiIeanallegationmerely
deservesto be describedasa lack of respecttowardsaI the
membersof the Council.

150. Let us turn now to the question of the vessel. The
same thing happened. The fact is that there is a vessel that
has been subjected to cannon and machine gun fire and
bombardment, and I do not think that they would go so far
as to claim that it was attacked by its own crew. Moreover,
there exists proof that the cannon shots came from outside
the vessel. But the vessel exists and is now in the port of El
Callao where it is being repaired by engineers and technicians who are not Cubans, but Peruvians. It finally reached a
site where the brutality that obtains in Valparaiso and
Santiago does not exist but where there is respect for
international law.

of vessels in the Port of Callao. It is assumed that on
Monday or Tuesday of next week it will be brought into
the dry dock of the State enterprise, which is the
Industrial Naval Enterprise Service (SIMA), in order to be
repaired.”
154. With respect to the other lie offered by the representative of the military junta, namely that the craft was
carrying sugar, let us see what the three last Iines of this
message from the Yankee journalist, transmitted by the
Yankee news agency, says:
“The vessel apparently has no cargo aboard because it
was well known that the water-line, which is green, is
fairly high.”

151. Some representatives have mentioned the difficulties
of fading objective and impartial accounts about these
incidents. I have already mentioned the sources that can
provide a factual version of what happened in Santiago,

Now, if a vesselwith a capacity of 10,000 tons was carrying
8,000 tons-that is, 80 per cent of capacity-and in addition
the Chilean equipment, which in his imagination the
representative here assumed it had aboard, it is very
difficult to believe that this Yankee correspondent, of this
Yankee agency, would not have noticed that this line was
below the water and would have reported that it was above
the water,

152. I wonder whether the representative of the United
States or his Chilean spokesmen consider that a Yankee
journalist and a Yankee press agency, present at the place
where the Cuban vessel arrived, would be sufficiently
objective to satisfy them. According to the statement made
yesterday by the representative of the military junta, the
vessel was not attacked. Now I shall read what he said:

155. It appears clear that the Cuban ship carried no cargo.
The Cuban sailors had unloaded the whole of the cargo of
sugar in the port of Valparaiso. In fact, they had left the
port of Valparaiso at a certain speed, as the representative
of the military junta has said, but they did not leave from
the port in normal conditions. They left the port where, of
course, there are a number of Yankee war units present,
which did not cause any concern to the representatives of
the military junta of Chile. It would appear that these
Yankee war units were there engaged in activities completely consonant with their plans, that is, to participate in
the planning and carrying out of the coup d’etat.

“But since it would have had to be shelled in order to
make it obey, the commander of the destroyer that was
following it consulted the naval authorities, who decided
to give up the chase.” [I 741st meeting, para. 51.1
153. The correspondent of the United Press International
made the following report from Lima on 15 September last,
and I shall read out what this Yankee journalist has written
and sent to the United States press agencies:
“The merchant vessel from Cuba, Playa Larga, entered
this afternoon the bay of the neighbouring port of Callao
with visible holes and marks of the attack to which it was
subjected last Tuesday by aircraft and a destroyer of the
Chilean navy outside of Valparaiso. The Cuban craft was
about three miles from land and, as it waspossible to see
from a launch, it shows three distinct holes at the water
line and the prow. One of these holes, approximately 40
centimetres in diameter, shows entry and exit from port
to starboard.”

156. They Ieft the port where our seamen had been
subjected to attacks, threats by the authorities, and
confronted with a state of brutal violence and a campaign
of hate against Cuba. But I ask myself whether the absence
of a prior permit from the authorities who were threatening
the security and the life of a number of seamen would
justify an attack on a vessel on the high seasand leave it in
a state which, according to the naval engineers of Peru,
would make it dangerous for that vessel to remain in the
entrance of the Callao port because it might sink at any
moment.

Then the Yankee correspondent’s cable, issued by a Yankee
news agency, continues:
‘Shortly thereafter a group of naval engineers went
aboard in order to carry out a detailed inspection of the
craft, which has a displacement of about 11,000 tons.
One of the engineers said, on returning to land, that the
merchant vessel, in addition to the visible signs in the
bow, had four other points of damage, apparently
inflicted by the impact of cannon balls. Three of these
marks are on the bow and the others are in the stern.”

157. In addition, it is just as well to note how, with
absolute impudence, the military junta said that since they
would have had to bombard the vessel and did not want to
do it, they gave orders not to pursue it. The fact is,
actually, that upon arriving in Callao it was subject to
bombardment, and most intensive bombardment. What is
more, we think there can be nothing more cynical than the
allegation made to the effect that the authorities of the
coup d’&.at were so interested in some tons of sugar in
Valparaiso that were allegedly on the boat, but which tile
vessel did not take with it, some of the sugar which our
country had given and handed over to the Popular
Government of Chile for the benefit and use of its people
completely free: 40,000 tons of sugar.

Then the UPI goes on:
“The craft did not go into the maritime port, as had
been supposed, as a measure of security, because it might
possibly sink and cause problems’for the entry and exit
14

158. It is the height of cynicism to come now and accuse
us of an alleged failure to comply with a promise to hand
over some sugar which, in fact, not only was handed over
but in addition was handed over in a quantity much greater
than that cited, and was given free to the Chilean people by
our Government. Of course, those who participated in the
coup will have to sweeten their tea with salt because they
will not be able to expect any solidarity from our people or
the sugar producers. But for the Chilean people, our people
already gave an example of solidarity, handing over a higher
amount of sugar than had been mentioned, and charging
nothing for it.

our deep concern, since they are at the mercy of a regime
which has exhausted all the possibilities imaginable in
exerting repression, in committing all kinds of crimes and
outrageous acts, and even today is shamelessly lying to the
Security Council.
163. I should also lie to indicate that-as you,
Mr. President clearly stated in your capacity as representative of Yugoslavia-not only was the Cuban Mission the
subject of attacks in Santiago de Chile; other embassies
were besieged by armed elements of the military junta and
according to our information some are still in the same
position. A few minutes before I came to this chamber, for
example, we were reading in a Mexican newspaper published yesterday that the Mexican Embassy continued to be
surrounded by members of the military group.

159. It is interesting to note how, after all this elementary
analysis, the representative of the military junta-frightened
because he is well aware that he is not going to convince
anybody, and the debate has proved this-is very careful to
state for the record that both the Embassy incident and the
incident of the vessel, in his opinion, are not competent
subject matters for this body. In other words, he is telling
the Council that he is offering it a primitive explanation,
which is a mockery for the Council, and then he is telling
the Council that it should not discuss this, or even listen to
him-if
we are going to be consistent with what he
has said-that it lies outside the Council’s purview. This all
reflects the absolute impossibility for the military junta of
Chile to convince anyone or to justify its gross violation of
the norms and practices of international law.
160.

164. I should now like to make a few brief comments on
the statement made yesterday and repeated today by the
representative of the United States. First, I should like to
ernphasize the fact that only one representative-only
one-has come to this Council to support and validate the
versions of the military junta of Chile. It could be none
other than Ambassador Scali. It is important that the
Council note that fact, because it constitutes the best and
closest support for the claims we have advanced here as to
who was the father of the coup initiated in Chile on 11
September.

In another part of his statement the representative of

165. The representative of the United States, adopting
paternalistic language, referred to styles used in other
climates. He pointed out what should be the rules of
behaviour of sovereign States Members of this Organisation,
and his arguments ranged from football to the Bible.

the military junta referred in his fanciful statement to the
alleged presence of almost a thousand Cubans in Chile. I
said in my statement that there were still some Cubans in
Chile. I stated, and I repeat now, the concern of the
Revolutionary Government of Cuba about the security of
these persons, all of whom went to Chile on the basis of
agreements and conventions subscribed to by the legitimate
authorities
of that country, or to participate in the
activities of international organizations.

166. With respect to the lesson he tried to give the Council
as to what should be the attitude of Member States when
their embassies or diplomatic personnel are the victims of
terrorist attacks of an official type-that is, attacks having
behind them the support and responsibility of Govern
ments, which have international responsibilities in this
connexion-he said that if the United States were to call for
the convening of the Security Council every time its
interests or property or embassies abroad were attacked,
this Council would be meeting continuously. Then he
explained to us what should be the rules of behaviour of
States in such cases. I would answer him as follows. If other
States did not come to the Council to denounce acts of
aggression or hostile actions against their diplomatic personnel or their interests abroad but instead followed the
centuries-old practices of the United States, then of course
the Council would not be in permanent session nor would it
exist. There would be marines promenading through the
Caribbean and Indo-China defending the interests and lives
of North Americans. That has always been the argumentusually a fallacious one, of course-given by North American imperialism for not convening the Security Council but
rather using their troops and their marines, bombing
defenceless peoples to provoke international crises and to
lead the world to the brink of war, as has happened many
times.

16 I. I shall now read out the names of those Cubans still
in Chile. If the representative of the military junta can find
the names of the 990-odd others needed to complete the
list, I invite him to give us those also. In Chile at the present
time are the following Cuban citizens: Felino Quesada,
economist; Miguel Avalos, engineer; Hector Ayala, economist. Those three are there in pursuance of-an agreement on
cultural collaboration between the University of Havana
and the University of Northern Chile. Also in Chile are
Hector Argtielles and Orlando Torrado, sports coaches who
were giving technical assistance under agreements established between sports organizations of both countries. Also
to be found in Chile are Dr. Celestino Alvarez Lajoncherie,
a specialist in gynecology and obstetrics fulfiiling a programme of the World Health Organization and the Pan
American Bureau for Family Planning as a short-term
adviser. He has a laissez-passer of the United Nations,
Finally, also to be found in Chile is Comrade Miguel
Enriquez GonzBlez, a staff member on an official mission
bearing a diplomatic passport.
162. For obvious reasons our Government is not fully
informed about the present status of those persons, and we
have more than sufficient reason to express and reiterate

167. Member States, of course, have not learned the North
American lesson. On the contrary, they make every effort
1.5

to ensure that the world uses a different concept-the
Charter concept, which justifies the existence of this organ.
It is better for the Security Council to meet in permanent
session rather than to disappear and then have prevail the
criteria and policies of the aggressors of the imperialists and
aggressive regimes in Viet-Nam and throughout the world
who shave demonstrated their concept of how to defend
their interests abroad.
168. One final word-about
the Bible. Yesterday, in his
arguments criticizing our analysis of the situation I have
denounced, the representative of the United States accused
us of seeing the CIA /Central Intelligence Agency/ and
imperialism everywhere and accusing the CIA and imperialism of this, that and the other thing. He said that one day
we would come to the point where we would accuse the
CIA of provoking
disturbances in football games, of
creating the traffic problem in New York or of having
secretly written the Bible.
169. In the first place, without being religious believers,
we have the deepest respect for all those who are more
concerned with the Bible than they are with a football
match or a Manhattan traffic jam. But our Government
never will accuse the CIA of having drafted the Bible,
because that historical document, from Genesis to the
Apocalypse, is a profound, clear and violent diatribe against
hypocrisy, against evil, against Pharisaism, against those
who commit evil deeds outside this chamber but come here
to strike sanctimonious poses about support and respect of
language, form, tone -and types of oral expression
while belying in practice day by day-shedding blood,
burning and committing crimes-the ostensible honesty in
which they approach this Council.

173. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Chile, who also wishes to exercise his right of reply.
174. Mr. BAZAN (Chile) (interpretation from Spauish]:
The debate which we have heard here has not been limited
to two basic issues which were raised in order to convene
the Council, but, in addition, various comments have been
made about the situation in Chile, which compels me in this
statement to offer a few words of clarification.
175. The representative of red fascism which prevails in
Cuba prophesied yesterday the transitional nature of our
new Government in Chile. It will indeed be transitory, but
not becauseof the return to Chile of a regimewhich would
again tolerate Cuban intervention and only pretend to
govern for a fraction of the Chileanpeople. That is whathe
would wish. The new Chilean Government is going to be
transitory, asthat Government itself has declared from the
very first moment, becauseits only aspiration is to hand
over the mandate once we have restored normality to the
country and rectified the Constitution so that only the
majority of the country can govern. The Government will
then be handedover to the legitimately elected authorities.
As the President of the Junta, General August0 Pinochet,
said yesterday with respectto future elections, the sooner
they areheld, the better. Unfortunately, we cannot say that
the tyrannical and bloody regimeof Fidel Castro wilI also
be transitory, becauseits intentions are to perpetuate itself
in power.
176. There is a serious mistake in the assertion that a
representative made here about the presence of foreign
journalists in Chile. I do not know who could have made
the false denunciation sent from Mendoza which was read
out in this room. The truth is that recently many German,
English and French journalists have entered Chile. In
addition, I should add that foreign journalists and press
attaches of foreign embassieshave had free accessto all
sourcesof information. Those journalists have of course
been able to verify personally the stores of arms found
throughout the country, and have been able to circulate
freely, having been transported in aircraft of the Air Force
when they wanted to visit places far removed from the
capital.

170. In other words, from Genesis itself, which begins by
saying that in the beginning there was chaos and the first
thing God did was to separate the light from the dark, until
the Apocalypse which shows what will be the ultimate fate
of liars, the Bible is a document which, though very old,
was written against the CIA, it continues to be in effect
against the CIA and never could the CIA have subscribed to
a single one of its proverbs or precepts, I am a reader of the
Bible. I usually have it with me whenever I have the honour
of appearing in a room side by side with the United States
representative. His statement of last night Ied me to reread
some of its chapters.

177. The ChileanInterior Minister gavean important press
conference on I4 September attended by more than 50
Chilean and foreign journalists. Moreover, whoever reads
the daily presswill have no doubt not onIy as to the fact
that there are foreign journalists in Chile, but alsothat they
have full freedom to sendout their reports abroad.

171. In hearing him deplore the fate of our comrade
Salvador Allende, claiming that his Government is not in
any way involved in what has happened and is continuing
to happen in Chile, we are reminded of Ecclesiastes,
chapter 1, verse 8, which reads: “. , . the eye is not satisfied
with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing”.

178. Fears have been expressedhere for the safety of
foreigners in Chile. In order to dispel those fears I should
like to read out the relevant portions of an officia1
statement of the Government of Chile which I have just
receivedby Telex. It readsasfollows:

172. When .we hear him trying to justify the behaviour of
his Government, attempting to present it as not being
involved in the Fascist military coup in Chile or in the
brutal repression unleashed against that country, we recall
the words of Revelation, Chapter 21, Verse 8, which
describes the final destiny of liars as follows: “. . . and all
Bars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with
fire and brimstone: which is the second death”. So the
Bible has meted out to liars not only the common death of
all mortals, but also death in a lake of fire and brimstone.

“The contribution of foreignersto Chile ever since the
days of our national independence has been most
valuable. They have made a mighty contribution to the
forging of our national identity, to the development of
science, technology, industry, education, and even the
armed forces of the country. In addition, there are many
16

182. I have explicit instructions to denounce the infamous
campaign which the red Fascists of Cuba have undertaken
against the Government of Chile alleging violations of
human rights which they themselves commit day after day.
In Chile, there have been victims during the struggle
between military forces and terrorists and sharpshooters.
But there have been no executions or arbitrary detentions
or arrests; no one has been nor wilI be tortured, and aU
fundamental human rights have been and will continue to
be respected.

foreigners who have studied in Chile and who have
contributed, on return to their homelands, to the prestige
in which our country is held abroad. Besides recognizing
this important contribution, the Government would like
to assure foreign residents in Chile that Chile expresses its
gratitude to them and reaffirms its intention to give them
the broadest possible protection and support. The enforcement action of the Government is directed only
against those foreign nationals who have intervened in
internal politics, who have illegally entered the countryparticularly the extremists who in recent years have been
the main cause of the growing violence in the country.”

183. The representative of red fascism in Cuba, using the
most insolent epithets of his pestilent oratory, yesterday
had the audacity to describe the members of the armed
forces in Chile in terms which, out of respect for the
Security Council, I am not going to repeat. The anned
forces of Chile are beyond the reach of that sort of filthy
diatribe. They are identified by the Chileans with the best
days of our history; they are the living incarnation of the
virtues of our people and they represent the most solid
bulwark of our nationality.

179. Many speakers, particularly those from the nonaligned countries, have expressed regret at the recent
deveIopments in Chile, imagining that they are losing an
ally in the defence of the right of all countries to ownership
and control of their basic natural resources; but I must tell
them that they are mistaken. The policy of recovering basic
natural resources is not new in Chile, nor is it the
patrimony of any political group. That policy was initiated
during the Government of President Frei. President Allende
took a great step forward in helping Chile regain control
over its copper, but he would not have been able to carry
out that action without the unanimous support which all
members of the Congress lent him. When it comes to the
question of developing countries regaining their natural
resources, we in Chile have but one viewpoint: whatever
government may exist in Chile, we in our country will
always be in the forefront of the defence among those who
support the idea that basic natural resources must be the
exclusive property of the countries in which those resources
are found.

184. The armed forces of Chile are not members of a
coup. They always gave their loyal support to President
AIlende, who never missed any opportunity to give them
his most enthusiastic praise and support. The amred forces
of Chile made sacrifices to defend the Government of
President Allende and they went along with him in the
most difficult times. They even mobilized and came out
against their own comrades in arms when, two months
ago, an armoured unit rose in revolt, If they finally set their
arms against President Allende it was because the extremist
elements that had dominated him had placed the Government outside the law and were leading the country to a
tragic downfall. Under the pressure of those extremist
elements, with which the Cuban Embassy was closely
collaborating in Santiago de Chile, the Government broke
legality, overthrew the Congress, disregarded the judicial
powers, began to administer the country by simple decrees,
wiped out all rights, headed us into economic chaos,
organized armed guerilla confrontations and, finally, began
to develop a campaign to incite the troops to rebel against
their officers, which would inevitably have led to a cruel
and prolonged civil war.

180. The representative of the red fascism which prevails
in Cuba, where for so many years human rights have been
trampled under foot, vociferously protested the alleged
violation of those rights in Chile. The representative of the
regime which set up the pared&~-that is, the execution
wall, which deprived millions of his brothers of a homeland-appeared horrified when speaking of imaginary executions and persecutions in Chile. I think I have more moral
authority
than the representative of Cuba to talk about
human rights. I belong to a country which in all international forums and in domestic policy has invariably made
it a cult to respect human rights. Nor is this the patrimony
of any group in Chile either, but is shared by all Chileans.
Here in the United Nations, Ambassador Diaz Casanueva,
until yesterday representative of Chile, had distinguished
himself for his constant defence of human rights; and I
would modestly mention that in the Third Committee in
1964 I fought tenaciously for the adoption of an international
convention on human rights that would be
operable-something
I could not achieve because some
countries managed to insert an article in it which would
never allow that convention to come into force.

185. The pronouncement of the Chilean armed forces
bears no political sign. It constitutes a supreme effort to
restore legality, which had been trampled underfoot to
unite Chileans once again and to ensure that the country
returns, through the efforts of all, to its traditional line of
work and progress. This movement of the Chilean armed
forces was not plotted by any little coterie or influenced by
any kind of intervention from abroad. It is the outcome of
a desperate effort to survive which began among the
working classes in Chile, and which grew irrepressibly with
the support of the two great Parties of the Congress. At the
present time, therefore, the armed forces of Chile are more
than ever identified with the will of the great majorities of
our country.

181. Moreover, Chile, through me at the Inter-American
Conference held in Rio De Janeiro in 1965, introduced the
draft of an inter-American convention on human rights
which, duly amended at a specialized conference, led to the
approval of the one adopted within the inter-American
system.

186. It is a source of patriotic satisfaction for me to pay a
tribute at this time to the armed forces of my country. I am
proud to be representing the military junta of Chile. Today
is Chile’s independence day. The armed forces have saved
17

our independence;
pendence.

they have given us our second inde-

187. Some delegations have expressed fear that the new
Government of .Chile might deprive Chileans of social
progress and the advances they have already made. I can
assure the Council that that is not going to occur. The first
manifesto of the military junta contains this guarantee-and
yesterday the President of the junta, General August0
Pinochet, reaffirmed it by saying that:
“The new Government means not a step backwards but
only a step towards legality and order.”
188. The two meetings that have been held by the
Security Council on this question and the intemperate
action by the representative of Cuba in them reaffirm my
.conviction which I anticipated in my statement of yester.
day: that in convening the Council on the pretext of facts
that could not be investigated-nor indeed is there any need
to investigate them-he was only pursuing political propaganda ends. It is an act of insolence to utilize the Security
Council for such an ignominious objective; but the representative of red fascism in Cuba did not hesitate to do this.
Indeed, he has set up here the greatest show on earth.
189. Apart from his foul diatribes he has not said anything
about the substanc,e of the questions that he has raised. He
has tangentially referred to these points, adding at whim
new imaginary facts, mahciously cutting out quotes from
his own documents without providing any proof testifying
to the truthfulness of his statements. Today he referred to
the damages inflicted on the PZaya Larga. That vesselmight
have arrived at El Callao with damages and, naturally, those
damages could have been caused by its own crew. Because,
if the Chilean Navy had actually fired on that vessel, it
would never have reached El Callao in a normal amount of
‘he; it would have had to go back to Vslparaiso. The Navy
would have overcome it and forced it to return and there
would not have been any reason for firing on it effectively
and then allowing.- it to escape.
190. What is important in this case-and I should like to
emphasize it-is that now the representative of Cuba
recognizes what he craftily concealed in his original
statement: that the vessel came from Valparaiso and,
therefore, that it was under Chilean jurisdiction, This is a
proven fact about which there need be no discussion. If the
vessel violated Chilean law there, the Government of Chile
legitimately has the right to exercise its right of pursuitwhich it actually did.

Convention on Diplomatic Relations because Chilean
soldiers fired back when they were fired upon from tire
Embassy. He said that he thought it impossible that the
shots could have come from an embassy. But that defence
is based upon a complete ignorance of facts. The Cuban
Embassy in Santiago was not a normal diplomatic mission.
It was a place that wasused in a manner incompatible with
diplomatic functions, violating article 41, paragraph 3, of
the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. That
Embassy was a fortress, an arsenal, a repository and centre
for the distribution of weapons, a general headquarters for
operations. Its occupants, including Cubans and Chileans,
normally amounted to about 100 people. And while those
of Cuban nationality were supported by diplomatic pro&c.
tion and privilege, they were for the most part experts in
guerilla tactics, subversion, terrorism and sabotage. They
were entrenched in the Cuban Embassy on 11 September.
They had taken a position and they had been involved in
the events of that day. They were not impartial observers,
They were active militants against the action that had been
taken by the armed forces of Chile, and for that reason it is
perfectly understandable that from the very first moment
they wanted to make a contribution in order to overthrow
the military authorities. The fact that they were the first to
fire in attacking Chilean soldiers is, for that matter,
sufficiently demonstrated by the telephone conversation
between Admiral Carvajal and the Cuban ambassador,
which I analysed in depth yesterday before the members of
the Security Council. In order to ascertain the truth, the
Council does not need any other elements of proof than
that.
193. Therefore, there could not have been any violation of
the Convention on Diplomatic Relations by the Government of Chile, whose forces were attacked from the Cuban
Embassy and had to fire back in the exercise of the right of
self-defence, which is recognized to all Member States
under Article 51 of the Charter. The one that violated that
Convention is the Cuban Embassy, with its inadmissible and
insolent acts of intervention in our domestic affairs.
194. The facts already mentioned, which are conclusive
and which will very shortly be exhibited to the whole world
in documentary form, constitute the most monstrous
violation of article 41 of the aforementioned Convention.
This type of violation, which disguises an imperialistic
intention since it pursues the idea of the control of one
country by another, could indeed constitute a threat to
international peace and security.
195. I think that the Security Council should consider the
matter and take measures so that no apprentice in
imperialism would try tomorrow to intervene unduly in the
domestic affairs of other States.

191. It is interesting to observe that the representative of
red fascism in Cuba has not denied the facts I put forward
yesterday to the Security Council from which it could be
concluded that Cuban diplomats did intervene in the
domestic affairs of Chile in such an unusual and barefaced
manner that it is possible to accuse them-because of the
smuggling and distribution of arms in which they engaged
and the organization of guerrilla bands to which they were
committed-of having been the prime fomenters of civil war
which, inevitably, would have broken out in Chile.

196. What still stands from all that we have heard? A
complaint, which is based on two claims: the incident of
Playa Larga and the incident of the Cuban Embassy. To
support those claims, the accusers have resorted to much
verbiage without even having attempted to prove that they
have spoken the truth. For our part, on behalf of Chile, we
have rebutted those charges seriously. We have presented in
support of our contentions, elements of proof, some of
which were inadvertently provided in the accusations of

192. The representative of another Member State has said
here that the Government of Chile violated the Vienna
18

Cuba. We have described those two incidents as legally
showing that the PZaya LQ’U matter was a matter of the
internal jurisdiction of Chile and as one that could not be
heard by the Security Council, and that the matter of the
Cuban Embassy in Santiago was a matter of the past which
could be handed over for study to an academy for historical
research, but which is completely outside the competence
of the Security Council.

status of this vesseland of what happened,sinceall of this
can be decidedby personswho are experts in the field.

197. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
United States; who wishes to speak in exercise of his right
of reply.

205” Moreover, reflecting the concern expressedat this
samemeeting by a number of membersof the Council and
by Ambassadorsof countries which, without being menbers, have askedto intervene in the debateon the question
of the situation existing in respectof political exiles who
are now or were in Chile, I shouldlike once againto refer
to North American sources and quote a cable from a
Yankee newspaper,by a correspondentof the Associated
Press,a Yankee agency, which stated:

198. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): “For every
kind of beasts, and of birds, and of serpents, and of things
in the sea, is tamed, and hath been tamed of mankind: But
the tongue can no man tame; it is an unruly evil, full of
deadly poison.” (James, iii. 7 and 8.)

“According to official sourcesof the Chileanmilitary
junta, 315 Bolivians who were living in Santiago and
other cities of the country have been taken into custody
and placed in a frontier post to be sent back to the
Bolivian r8gime.”
Moreover, that agencycontinued:

199. With his newest outpouring of bile, the Cuban
representative has given fresh meaning to these words from
the Bible, that great book from which he now, along with
his Foreign Minister, has suddenly discovereda sourceof
quotations they considersoinspiring.

“Four thousand one hundred and seventy-eight
Bolivians”-I repeat, 4,178 Bolivians-“are to be found in
Chile, but we do not know the status of their whereabouts or under what policies they will be sent back to
the regimes from which they fled, and which is being
applied in respect of Brazilian, Uruguayan and Paraguayan exiles.”

200. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof
Cuba, who wishesto speakin exerciseof his right of reply.
201. Mr.
ALARCON (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): I shall certainly not tax the patience of the
Council, which has already spent much time in listeningto
this incredible exercise of the Government of the military
junta of Chile trying to demonstratesomethingwhich no
one in this room, except its sponsors,would venture to
justify.

I repeat that this information comes from a Yankee
newspaperreporter, transmitted through the Yankee news
agencyAssociatedPress.

202. To be quite specific, I referred to the vessel,I spoke
about the cannon fire, I talked about the attack on that
vessel as it was described by a Yankee correspondent
tllrough a Yankee newsagency.As I said,the vesselisto be
found in the port of a third country-m this case,Peru.It is
being seenand examinedby Peruviantechnicians.
203. My delegation formally asksof this Council that it
investigate the facts. There are meansto do that. It is not
impossible. The vesselis not under our control at this time.
The vesselhas the holesin it describedby UPI; it hasthe
damage described by the press agency and it is being
examined by technicianswhom everyone should consider
to be impartial. If the representative of the Chilean
military really believesthat he is going to convinceanyone
of his far-fetched theory that the vesselPlaya Larga, a
merchant vesselthat wascarrying sugar,wasthe first case
of self-bombardment of a vesselon the high seas,then let
him accede to and endorse my formal request of this
Council that it should proceed to hold an objective
investigation into the condition of the vessel-whetherthe
cannon shots came from inside or outside the vessel,who
attacked the vesseland, in fact, what actually happened.
204. Some membersof the Council expresseddoubtsand
misgivings about the feasibility of acquiring objective
information. My delegationspecifically invites this Council
to proceed to an objective and impartial investigationof the
19

206. I shall not refer to the last statement of the
representativeof the Chileanregime.I shouldmerely like to
say that my deregationpays a tribute today to the people
of Chile and the glorious fighters who are resistingfascism
in that country on the National IndependenceDay of Chile.
I should mention that it is really a matter of sorrow and
grief that on a transitory basisthis date, which commemorates the independenceof that sister country, it
should be directed, guided, controlled and placed in
subjugation by a Fascistregimewhich hasbrought it down
to the level of a State associatedwith the United States,as
this debatehasindeed proved.
207. The PRESIDENT: I call againon the representative
of Chile, who wishesto speakin exercise of his right of
reply. I would simply ask him pleaseto take into account
the late hour.
208. Mr. BAZAN (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
Since the representative of Cuba is asking the Security
Council to carry out an investigationand hasaskedwhether
I would agree,I must say that I cannot consent.
209. The existence and nature of the damagesustainedby
the vesselPlaya Larga may be proven by Cubaanyway she
wishes;however, I do not think it is within the purview of
the Security Council to carry out such an investigation,If
the vesselis or is not damaged,or what the damageis,has
no bearing on resolving the casethat has beenraised.The
only point that is of interest in the matter is that the
representative of Cuba has now recognizedthat the vessel

Playa Larga was coming from the port of Valparaiso, where

over it, and that if it could be verified that the facts stated
are true they would also disapprove of the course of action
followed by the Chilean forces.

it was under Chilean jurisdiction. Therefore, it violated
Chilean legislation by leaving without the permit required
by Chilean law and by leaving with Chilean goods aboard.
He has also recognized the fact, at least, that it left
Valparaiso without the required permit. It violated our lavs
and hence the right to pursue was exercised by Chile.

213. That is why our proposal is the logical conclusion cf
the concern expressed by all the members of the Council.
Our proposal is that the Council should investigate what
happened with the vessel Playa Larga. The pirates do noi
want any investigation, but that is only logical. The Council
must investigate.

210. The PRESIDENT: I call again on the representative
of Cuba in exercise of the right of reply, and I would ask
him to take into account the lateness of the hour.

214. The PRESIDENT: As there are no further nameson
the list of speakers and no further requests for the exercise
of the right of reply, I intend to adjourn this meeting.

211. Mr.

ALARCON
(Cuba) (interpretation
from
Spanish): I merely want to ensure that the record is clear
that I have not asked permission, nor would I ever ask
permission, of the Chilean pirates. Now he has had the good
taste to anticipate a point of what might become a decision
of the Council-and to which my delegation had addressed
itself before the Council-namely, that it should proceed to
make an impartial and objective investigation of what
happened in the case of the vessel Playa Lurga.

215. Since I have no indication at this stage as to when
members of the Council would wish to speak again or to
present any specific proposals on the item on the agenda,it
would seem to me premature to fix a time for another
meeting of the Council on this issue, Accordingly, I shall
remain in contact with the members of the Council sotllat
consultations may be held on when another meeting on this
issue should be scheduled.

212. It is worth noting that all the members of the
Council without exception-or, I should say with the one
exception we already know-either condemned what happened with the Playa Larga or expressed concern and regret

The meeting rose at 2.15 p.m.

20

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

Unite 1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
or write ta: United

DES NATIONS

and distributors
Nations,
Sales

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
on adresses-vous
& : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes. New York on Geneve.
ICAIG

ITOJIYPMTh

COMO

CONSEGUIR

IEl~AHHJL

OPl-AHNBA4IiN

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

OG%EflNHEHNhIX

NACIONES

HAJJHH

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
est&n en venta en libretias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librera
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seccirjn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

2.06 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

73~82001~June

1979-2,206
