so

~encral Allembly-Twenty-third Seuion

9. Invites the Secretary-General and the United
Nations organs and specialized agencies concerned to
take action, as appropriate, on the resolutions and
recommendations of the Conference ;
10. Further invites the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth sess-ion on
the measures .taken and the progress achieved in the
implementation of the recommendations of the Conference by Member States, the United N ations organs,
specialized agencies and other intergovernmental
organizations concerned;
11. Decides to keep under review to the extent possible the resolutions of the Conference in connexion with
related agenda items.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

2443 (XXID). Reepect for and implementation of
human rights in occupled territories
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principies of the Charter
of the United Nations and by the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War of 12 August 1949,30
Mi11dful of the principie embodied in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights regarding the right of
everyone to return to his own country, and recalling
Security Council resolution 237 (1967) of 14 June
1967, General Assembly resolutions 2252 (ES-V) of
4 July 1967 and 2341 B (XXII) of 19 December 1967,
Commission on Human Rights resolution 6 (XXIV)
of 27 February 196831 and Economic and Social Council
resolution 1336 (XLIV) of 31 May 1968, in which
those United Nations orians called upon the Government of Israel, inter alia, to facilitate the return of
those inhabitants who have fled the area of military
operations since the outbreak of hostilities,
Recalling the telegram dispatched by the Commission
on Human Rights on 8 March 1968, calling upon the
Government of Israel to desist forthwith from acts of
aestroying homes of the Arab civilian population in
areas occupied by Israel,82
Recalling also Security Council resolution 259 ( 1968)
of 27 September 1968, in which the Council expressed
its concern for the safety, welfare and security of the
inhabitants of the Arab territories under military
occupation by Israel, and deplored the delay in the
implementation of Council resolution 237 ( 1967),
N oting resolution I on respect for and implementation of human rights in occupied territories, adopted
by the International Conference on Human Rights on
7 May 1968,33 in which the Conference, inter alia:
(a) Expressed its grave concern at the violation of
human rights in Arab territories occupied by Israel,
( b) Drew the attention of the Government of Israel
to the grave consequences resulting from the disregard
of fundamental freedoms and human rights in occupied
territories,
ao United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), No. 973.
81 See Official ReconJ.s of the Economic and Social Council,
Fort31-fourth Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/4475), chapter

XVIII.

82 ]bid., para. 400.

aa See Final Act of the foten1ationat Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 5.

(e) Called u pon the Government of Israel to desist
forthwith from acts of destroying homes of the Arab
civilian population inhabiting areas occupied by Israel
and to respect and implement the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 19493 4 in occupied territories,
( d) Affirmed the inalienable rights of all inhabitants
who have leí~ their homes as a result of the outbreak
of hostilities in the Middle East to retum home, resume
their normal life, recover their property and homes, and
rejoin their families according to the provisions of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
l. Decides to establish a Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights
of the Population of the Occupied Territories, composed of three Member States;
2. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to appoint the members of the Special Committee ;
3. Requests the Government of Israel to receive
the Special Committee, co-operate with it and facilitate
its work;
4. Requests the Special Committee to report to the
Secretary-General as soon as possible and whenever
the need arises thereafter;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with all the necessary facilities for
the performance of its task.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

2444 (XXIll). Reepect for human right• In armed
conftlcts
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the necessity of applying basic humanitarian principies in all armed conflicts,
Taking note of resolution XXIII on human rights
in armed conflicts, adopted on 12 May 1968 by the
International Conference on Human Rights,85
Afferming that the provisions of that resolution need
to be implemented effectively as soon as possible,
l. Affirms resolution XXVIII of the XX.th International Conference of the Red Cross held at Vienna
in 1965, whit:h laid down, ínter alia, the following principies for observance by ali governmental and other
authorities responsible for action in armed conflicts :
(a) That the right of the parties to a conflict to
adopt means of injuring the enemy is not unlimited;
( b) That it is prohibited to launch a.ttacks against the
civilian populations as such ;
( c) That distinction must be made at ali times between persons taking part in the hostilities and members of the civilian population to the effect that the
Jatter be spared as much as possible ;
2. Invites the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the International Committee of the Red Cross
and other appropriate international organizations, to
study:
(a) Steps which could be taken to secure the better
application of existing humanitarian international conventions and rules in ali armed conflicts;
H United Nations, Treat31 Series, vol. 75 (1950), Nos. 970-973.

°"

8G See Final Act of the lnternational Confermce
H..,.
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 18.
