established during the present session, which organs
General to place the question of the organization of
will continue their work between sessions of the
an international press conference upon the agenda
Assembly.
of the second part of the first session of the General
If other problems arise with which the General
Assembly.
Assembly should urgently concern itself, a special
Twenty-sixth plenary meeting, 9 February 1946.
session could be convened under rules 3 and 4 of
the provisional rules of procedure.
The prac!ical probl~ms rai~ed by tbe present 32(1).RELATIONS 0F MEMBERS 0F THE UNITED
schedule of 1mportant mtemat10nal confercnces of
N
S
concern to the Members of the United Nations,
ATI0NS WITH PAIN
and those concemed in completing arrangements
l. The General Assembly recalls that the San
at the temporary headquarters render difficult the
Francisco Conference adopted a resolution accordfulfilment of the proposals of the Preparatory
ing to which paragraph 2 of Article 4 of chapter II
Commission.
of the United Nations Charter "cannot apply to
Therefore the General Assembly resolves that:
States whose regimes ha.ve been installed with the
1. The present session of the General Assembly
help of armed forces of countries which have
shall be adjoumed in February on a date to be
fought against the United Nations so long as these
subsequently detennined and shall be known as the
regimes are in power."
first part of the first regular session.
2. The General Assembly rccalls that at the
2. The second part of the first regular session of
Potsdam Conference the Governments of the
the General Assembly shall be convened on the
United Kingdom, the United States of America
first Tuesday after 2 September 1946 in accordance
and the Soviet Union stated that they would not
with rule 1 ánd supplementary rule B of the provisupport a request for admission to the United Nasional rules of procedure.
tions of the present Spanish Government "which,
3. Supplementary rules e, F and G of the prohaving been founded with the support of the Axis
visiona! rules of procedure shall apply for the secpowers, in view of its origins, its nature, its record
ond part of the first regular session of the General
and its close association with the aggressor States,
Assembly rather than rules 7, 11 and 13. Referdoes not possess the necessary qualifications to jusences elsewhere in the supplementary rules or in
tify its admission."
resolutiqns of the Assembly and its Committees to
3. The General Assembly, in endorsing these
the "second part of the first session" shall be contwo statements, recorrmends that the Members of
strued to refer to the second part of the first reguthe United Nations should act in accordance with
lar session.
the letter and the spirit of these statements in the
Twenty-sixth plenary meeting, 9 February 1946.
conduct of their future relations with Spain.
Twenty-sixth plenary meeting, 9 February 1946.

30( 1l. APPLICATIONS FR0M NATIONALs oF NoNMEMBER STATES F0R PERMANENT EMPL0YMENT WITH THE lNTERNATI0NAL
SECRETARI.11,T

33 (1 l. TERMS 0F OFFICE 0F MEMBERS 0F
COUNCILS1

Resolved that it is the sense of this Assembly that
members of Councils elected in January 1946
under the provisional rules of procedure shall hold
office for twelve months and that elections of their
successors shall be held at the second part of the
first regular session of the General Assembly.
The Secretary-General is requested to report at
the opening of the second part of the first regular
session what, if any, changes in the rules he deems
necessary to give effect to the foregoing.
Thirty-second plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.

The General Assembly instructs the SecretaryGeneral:
1. To receive and file su.ch applications for employment with the Secretariat as may be received
from nationals of non-member States.
2. To infonn the governments of non-member
States making enquiry with regard to application
for employment that such applications will be received and filed, but that employment can only
take place in accordance with the regulations of
the Secretariat.
Twenty-sixth plenary meeting, 9 February 1946.

1

Thi• que•tion, originally discu•sed by the General Assembly at its twenty-cighth meeting on 10 February 1946
on the ba,is of a report of the Sixth Committee ( document A/38), was rcferred to the General Committcc for
further consideration. The General Committee, in rcporting its findings to the General Auembly ( document
A/51) •ubmitted thi• new ,ewlution. In paragraph 1 the
pcriod of "twenty months" proposed by the General Committee, was altered by a vote of the General Auembly to

31 (1) .ORGANIZATION 0F AN lNTERNATIONAL
PRESS CONFERENCE

The General Assembly instnlcts the Secretary-

"twelvc months.,,

39
