S/PRST/2000/28

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 September 2000
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4194th meeting of the Security Council, held at the level of Heads of
State and Government on 7 September 2000, in connection with the Council’s
consideration of the item entitled “Ensuring an effective role for the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and security, particularly in
Africa”, the Heads of State and Government agreed that the following statement on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which had been discussed and agreed upon
by the Permanent Representatives of the States members of the Security Council in
the Council’s prior consultations, should be issued as a Presidential statement by the
Summit:
“The Security Council is deeply concerned at the continuation of the
hostilities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, at the dire consequences
of the conflict for the humanitarian situation and at reports of abuses of human
rights and of illegal exploitation of that country’s natural resources.
“The Security Council reaffirms the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of all
States in the region.
“The Security Council calls on all parties to the conflict to cease the
hostilities and to fulfil their obligations under the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
(S/1999/815) and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
“The Security Council takes note in this context of the statements issued
by Uganda and Rwanda relating to measures towards disengagement and
withdrawal of their forces which are present in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It calls for the accelerated withdrawal of Ugandan and Rwandan forces
and of all other foreign forces from the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in full compliance with its resolution 1304 (2000) of 16 June 2000.
“The Security Council calls on all parties to respect human rights and
international humanitarian law, and provide access for humanitarian relief
personnel.
“The Security Council calls on all the Congolese Parties, and in
particular on the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
engage fully in the national dialogue process as provided for in the Ceasefire
Agreement and to support in this regard the efforts of the facilitation.
“The Security Council calls on the Parties to the Ceasefire Agreement to
engage in a sincere dialogue to implement this Agreement and to agree on

00-63478 (E) 070900
`````````

S/PRST/2000/28

ways to give a new momentum to the peace process. It expresses its support
for the efforts of His Excellency Dr. Frederick J. T. Chiluba, President of
Zambia, and other leaders of the region to this end.
“The Security Council is ready to assist in the peace process, in particular
through the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUC), in accordance with its resolution 1291 (2000) of 24
February 2000. It deplores that the continuation of the hostilities and the lack
of cooperation by the parties have prevented the full deployment of MONUC.
It takes note of the commitments by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to support the deployment of MONUC and urges it to
honour its particular responsibilities as the host Government of the Mission. It
calls on the parties to demonstrate their will to move the peace process forward
and to cooperate effectively with MONUC in order to allow its deployment.”

2
