S/PV.7702

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7702nd meeting

Tuesday, 31 May 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Meek
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-15242 (E)
*1615242*

S/PV.7702

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/493, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2290 (2016).
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements after the vote.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia supported the adoption of resolution
2290 (2016). In voting for it, we based our decision on
the significant progress recently achieved towards the
settlement of the conflict in South Sudan, including
the establishment of the Transitional Government
of National Unity. We also take into account the
sensitivity of the current situation and the need for
effective international support for the peace process in
that country.
We have repeatedly expressed concern that
excessive pressure, particularly that exerted by
sanctions, can undermine those achievements and
2/5

31/05/2016

entrench the positions of the South Sudanese parties.
Russia cannot in principle accept a situation where
anyone — especially a member of the Security
Council — should seek to use sanctions instead of
undertaking serious political and diplomatic work.
We therefore strongly opposed the inclusion in today’s
resolution a provision warning of the broadening of
the Security Council sanctions regime against South
Sudan in the coming months, including the imposition
of an arms embargo. Let us not forget the needs of the
Government of South Sudan in ensuring security, law
and order in the country.
We are glad that common sense prevailed in the
Council in the end. However, our support for resolution
2290 (2016)as a whole does not mean that we agree
with all its provisions. Unfortunately, as in the case of
other Council resolutions on South Sudan, the authors
did not take into account the serious and reasonable
concerns of a number of delegations. We believe that
it is inappropriate — especially in a Security Council
sanctions resolution — to include a provision on the
review of the Non-Governmental Organizations
(NGOs) Bill. This provision not only serves to create
advantages for foreign NGOs, but also distorts the
South Sudan Peace Agreement.
Nor can we justify inclusion in the text of a
reference to the reports of the High United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. The Security Council
did not request these reports; they were discussed in the
Human Rights Council. The contents of the document
have nothing to do with the primacy of Security
Council leadership. We are also disappointed by the
refusal of some delegations to include in the resolution
reference to the importance of international assistance
in normalizing the situation and overcoming the
economic and humanitarian problems in South Sudan.
In our view, the international partners should apply not
only sanctions, but also positive incentives to South
Sudan. No one is interested in its economic collapse.
We hope that in the course of the work on a new
draft resolution on South Sudan in July, these legitimate
concerns will be taken into account. Otherwise, the
unity of the Council and its effective performance in
South Sudan may again be threatened.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): The
Security Council has watched the situation in South
Sudan particularly closely over these past three months.
In early March, as the targeted sanctions established
16-15242

31/05/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

by resolution 2206 (2015) were due to be renewed,
the Council extended them for 45 days. We proposed
that somewhat unconventional approach because
we wanted to keep the fluid situation on the ground
under continuous review. In early April, seeing some
tentative signs of progress but still no national unity
Government, the Council extended the sanctions for
another short period and simultaneously adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/3, reinforcing the
steps the Security Council expected the parties to take.
We expressed our intention to review progress on those
benchmarks before the Security Council considered
next steps on the sanctions regime. Finally, just over
a month ago, the Transitional Government of National
Unity was formed, fulfilling a key provision of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan. Obviously, however, much more remains to
be done.
While we have now adopted resolution 2290 (2016),
extending the sanctions framework for a year, we will
be no less vigilant or focused on South Sudan as we
have been for the past 90 days, and we will be no less
prepared to augment or modify the sanctions regime as
the situation on the ground demands and the conduct of
the parties necessitates. We have all watched too much
bloodshed in South Sudan. We have watched leaders
prioritize power over peace, and we have watched the
very real human consequences of their craven policies.
As the Secretary-General has stated, the people of
South Sudan have “been betrayed by those who put
power and profit over people”. He went on to refer to
“epic corruption”.
There is no time to delay tackling these challenges.
Now is the time to fully implement the Peace Agreement,
which, as the Security Council has emphasized
today, includes establishing the hybrid court and the
mechanisms outlined in Chapter V of the Agreement
in order to hold accountable those whose actions have
cost so many — too many — lives needlessly. Today’s
resolution should remind South Sudan’s leaders that
there is no other path and no other choice but full and
expeditious implementation of the Peace Agreement.
The return of Riek Machar, his appointment as
First Vice President, and the subsequent formation of
the Transitional Government of National Unity are
indeed significant steps forward, but they are only the
beginning of a long path towards peace and healing, and
a long path towards justice. So long as there continues to
be no meaningful progress on the other core elements of

S/PV.7702

the Peace Agreement — which includes upholding the
ceasefire, improving humanitarian access and ending
attacks on humanitarians — the severe suffering of the
millions of South Sudanese impacted by this conflict
will continue.
To convey a sense of the scale of the suffering,
a report of the United Nations Deputy Humanitarian
Coordinator in South Sudan states that in just five
counties in South Sudan’s Unity state, there were over
7,000 violent deaths in a single year. In just five counties
of just one state of South Sudan in just one year, there
were as many violent deaths as there have been in all
of Yemen since March 2015. A survey by the United
Nations Development Programme also found that the
levels of post-traumatic stress disorder are on a par with
some of the worse conflict zones in modern history.
The leaders of South Sudan must redouble their
efforts to build a better future for their people by
fully implementing the Peace Agreement, including
the four reform pillars, drafting and adopting a
permanent consitution, restructuring the security
sector, establishing transparent management of public
finances, and advancing transitional justice, including
meaningful reconciliation and accountability.
At the same time, we, as members of the Security
Council, must renew our commitment to carefully
monitoring the situation in South Sudan, including
information we have received from the Panel of
Experts about the arms flow that poses such a serious
threat to the success of the Peace Agreement and the
stability of South Sudan and the region. In light of
the Panel of Experts’ reporting that the parties were
continuing to acquire arms even after they signed
the Peace Agreement, in resolution 2290 (2016) the
Security Council has, significantly, asked for a special
report from the Panel of Experts on arms procurement
since the formation of the Transitional Government of
National Unity. We must continue to watch this closely,
and we must continue to uphold our responsibility to
use the full range of tools available to us when such
action is necessary for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
I thank the delegation of the United States of
America for its efforts in the negotiations on resolution
2290 (2016), renewing the South Sudan sanctions
regime. I also thank the delegations that made positive

16-152423/5

S/PV.7702

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

contributions to the negotiations and those whose
amendments improved the text of the resolution,
leading to its unanimous adoption. The negotiations
on resolution 2290 (2016) reflected the Council’s
support for the Transitional Government of National
Unity, established in April; for the important efforts
of the African Union High Representative for South
Sudan, President Alpha Oumar Konaré; and for their
hopes for the full implementation of the South Sudan
Peace Agreement.
I reiterate my delegation’s position on the
importance of the international community’s support
in general, and the Security Council’s support in
particular, for the efforts of the Transitional Government
of National Unity to overcome the political, economic
and humanitarian challenges facing the country, and for
the full implementation the Peace Agreement. In that
context, I reiterate the importance of the meticulous
targeting and moderation of sanctions regime, given
that renewing and expanding sanctions is not the ideal
way at the moment to address the conflict, in which we
are seeing a rapprochement among the parties.
The Council must send positive messages to
encourage the initiatives in South Sudan in order to
maintain the positive momentum towards a resolution
of the conflict.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malok (South Sudan): I thank you, Sir, for
giving me the floor to speak on this vital issue related to
my country. Since this is the first time for me to address
the Security Council under your leadership, permit
me to congratulate you and your delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May, and although it is rather late in
the month, with only a few hours of your presidency
left, I should like to assure you of the full support and
cooperation of my delegation.
Let me also thank you and the members of the
Security Council for giving me the opportunity to
address you on this topic of great importance to
my country.
Today, as the Security Council renews the mandate
of the South Sudan sanctions regime for another year
through the adoption moments ago of resolution 2290
(2016), the parties in the Transitional Government of
4/5

31/05/2016

National Unity, after the signing and the implementation
of the Peace Agreement, have chosen to fully implement
the Peace Agreement and usher in a new era of peace
and stability in the country.
The Transitional Government of National Unity,
since its formation last month, has committed itself
to fully implementing the Peace Agreement in its
entirety. The Council of Ministers of the Transitional
Government of National Unity have formed a technical
ministerial committee to look into the matter of 28
States. The Council of Ministers has also approved
the establishment of cantonments for the former rebels
in the Greater Equatoria and Greater Bhar El-Gazal
regions, where there was no rebellion.
The cantonments of the former rebels will help in the
implementation of the permanent ceasefire, improve the
security situation in the country and advance the work
of security sector reform. The Transitional Government
of National Unity is investigating violations that
are recurring in Greater Equatoria and other parts
of the country, in order to verify whether or not the
elements provoking those incidents and disrupting
traffic flow on the inter-state after the formation of the
Transitional Government of National Unity. These are
new developments that will be addressed. These steps
demonstrate the commitment of the parties to fully
implementing the Agreement.
Since the signing of the Peace Agreement last year,
followed by the formation of the Government a month
ago, His Excellency President Salva Kiir Mayardit has
consistently spoken of the need for reconciliation and
forgiveness among the South Sudanese. Transitional
justice, reconciliation, accountability and healing are
part of the Peace Agreement, which as a Government we
are committed to implementing as per the Agreement.
Over five decades, the South Sudanese were pitted
against each another for one reason or another, but
despite all that they emerged victorious with a country
to call a home. Today, with the bitter past behind
us, we are called on to initiate transitional justice,
reconciliation, accountability and healing from the
events that began in December 2013. The Transitional
Government of National Unity and all stakeholders in
South Sudan should be allowed to look at this process
holistically, with the assistance and partnership of
the international community as deemed fit by South
Sudanese stakeholders. As such, we will lay a strong
and sustainable foundation for transitional justice,
16-15242

31/05/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

reconciliation, accountability and healing, which
will continue for 30 months from the signing of the
Peace Agreement.
We note with great disappointment that the
resolution adopted today fails to recognize the sovereign
right of the Government of South Sudan to exercise
its national constitutional right to govern and manage
its own affairs without interference from the Security
Council. Despite the Agreement, the resolution refers
to the review of the Non-Governmental Organizations
(NGO) Bill. The Bill has not been disputed by the
South Sudanese stakeholders; they cherish the Bill
in its entirety because the Government introduced it
through a consultations and legislative process. The bill
is therefore inclusive and stands to address problems
within the humanitarian governance of the country. We
call on the Security Council to support the efforts of
Member States in addressing issues of humanitarian
delivery. The NGO Bill will make humanitarian
activity in South Sudan an inclusive process; it stands
to outlive the current crisis and is in line and consistent
with international best practices.
The Government is in compliance with the
provisions of the Agreement and is neither placing
any restrictions on the freedom of movement and
operation of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), nor attacking the personnel and facilities of
the United Nations or the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development. Recently, the Government ordered
the removal of all roadblocks, wherever they are in the
country, in order to allow the easy flow of humanitarian
assistance to affected areas. The Government has been
calling on UNMISS and humanitarian personnel to
cooperate and coordinate their movements with the
Government so as to ensure their safety and security.
UNMISS should provide concrete and hard evidence to
the contrary, if there is any.
Resolution 2206 (2015) imposed targeted sanctions
on individuals alleged to have impeded the peaceful
settlement of the conflict in South Sudan. However,
today’s resolution questions the armament of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army (SPLA). As South Sudan is

S/PV.7702

not under an arms embargo or sanctions, questioning
its right to arms calls us to question the motive behind
such language. The stability of South Sudan in the Horn
of Africa relies on its readiness to protect itself against
any aggression from within or without. The region is
awash with small arms and light weapons.
Civil society in South Sudan is synonymous with the
liberation struggle of the people of South Sudan, who
today are partners in the development of South Sudan.
Therefore, any disagreement between the Government
and civil society is not and should not be viewed as oil
and water. However, we differ on how we look at issues
of governance, with the NGOs being driven more by a
foreign agenda. As a country, we need to develop our
own agenda tailored to and for our needs.
The Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare
launched its national actions plan on resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, with the help
and support of the UN-Women country team. Within the
Office of the President of the Republic of South Sudan,
on 11 October 2014 His Excellency President Salva
Kiir Mayardit and Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict signed a joint communiqué with
sets of commitments. Early this month, Ms. Bangura
was in Juba to follow up at the invitation of the Office
of the President, and agreed to work closely with the
SPLA and the South Sudan National Police Service in
the development of national action plans, in accordance
with resolutions 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013). These are
steps to address issues relating directly to women, with
the support of the United Nations. Therefore, we believe
that such steps needs to be encourage with the support
of all United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.
Permit me to conclude by saying that the Transitional
Government of National Unity has an obligation to
fully implement the Peace Agreement. However, we
call for the cooperation of the Council to positively
engage the Government in its implementation of the
Peace Agreement.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

16-152425/5
