S/PV.8372

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8372nd meeting

Tuesday, 16 October 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Edjo Memba
Mr. Amde
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Root causes of conflict — the role of natural resources
Letter dated 9 October 2018 from the Permanent Representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/901)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-32236 (E)
*1832236*

S/PV.8372

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Root causes of conflict — the role of natural
resources
Letter dated 9 October 2018 from the
Permanent Representative of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2018/901)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/901, which contains a letter dated
9 October 2018 from the Permanent Representative
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and to give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Bolivian
presidency for convening this debate.
The exploitation of natural resources, or
competition over them, can and does lead to violent
conflict. Preventing, managing and resolving such
conflicts is one of the major and growing challenges of
our time. United Nations studies show that more than
40 per cent of internal armed conflicts over the past
60 years have been linked to natural resources. With
the increasing impacts of climate change evident in all
regions, the risks are only going to grow.
Other global trends, such as a growing population,
increasing
consumption
and
environmental
degradation, are also placing significant and potentially
unsustainable pressures on the availability of many
natural resources. These include oil, gas, minerals,
water and land. The unfair distribution of natural
resources, and corruption and mismanagement, can and
do lead to conflict, especially in countries with weaker
institutions. These pressures can also exacerbate
existing ethnic or religious divides within societies and
across borders.
2/20

16/10/2018

Since 1990, 75 per cent of civil wars in Africa
have been partially funded by revenues from natural
resources. The illegal extraction of minerals, timber,
charcoal and wildlife has fuelled violence in a number
of regions. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
it has generated almost a billion dollars in revenue for
rebels and criminal groups. Likewise, in the Central
African Republic the illicit exploitation of minerals by
numerous armed groups and militias has contributed to
sustaining and prolonging the conflict.
More needs to be done to regulate the provenance,
sale and trade of minerals through cooperative
arrangements involving civil society, Governments
and regional and international organizations. A
positive example is the Kimberley Process, which
succeeded in reducing the trade in conflict diamonds.
Through certified extraction, production and fair trade
practices, and with a focus on aiding local communities,
lawlessness can be countered and tangible benefits
brought to conflict-affected populations.
It is also worth emphasizing that shared natural
resources have traditionally also been a catalyst for
cooperation among States, communities and people.
Mutual benefits generally act as an incentive for
sustained peaceful dialogue, which in turn can generate
cooperation and understanding in other areas. For
example, benefit-sharing on water resources has a
long history among the riparian States of the Senegal
River basin. In South America, Lake Titicaca, the
largest freshwater lake on the continent, has long been
a source of cooperation between Bolivia and Peru. And,
from my own experience, the Albufeira Convention,
agreed during my time as Prime Minister of Portugal,
continues to promote good relations and cooperation on
water management between Portugal and Spain.
In Central Asia, progress is being achieved in the
area of transboundary water management through
ongoing consultations among Central Asian States,
supported by the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy. In Iraq, the United Nations
Assistance Mission is working to reinforce peace and
stability through the development of a land-disputes
project to promote confidence-building among
communities and increase inclusivity. In the Lake
Chad basin, cooperation on water has also played a
critical role in bringing countries together to address
the broader challenges to the region.
18-32236

16/10/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

In short, the United Nations recognizes the potential
for the shared management of natural resources as a
means for preventing conflict and enhancing regional
cooperation for peace and sustainable development. To
that end, we have taken note of Member States’ call
for a greater focus on these issues, including recently
through the adoption of Security Council resolutions
on Lake Chad, Somalia and Darfur, as well as a
presidential statement on West Africa and the Sahel
(S/PRST/2018/16). In response, we are taking a number
of actions.
First, the Organization is seeking to strengthen
our capacity to address the growing threat of
climate-related security risks. This includes a new joint
initiative involving the Department of Political Affairs,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Environment Programme.
Secondly, we intend to maximize opportunities
to use mediation over natural resources as a tool for
conflict prevention, in cooperation with Member
States, regional partners and international financial
institutions. For example, the High-level Panel on
Water, which I convened together with the President
of the World Bank Group, has helped galvanize action
around hydro-diplomacy.
Thirdly, we will further strengthen our partnership
with regional and subregional organizations to work
on ways to increase attention to building the capacities
of national and local actors to prevent and respond to
conflicts with natural resource dimensions. As part of
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
I welcome the ongoing collaboration between our
respective organizations to support the Panel of the
Wise in its efforts to improve the prevention, mediation
and resolution of conflicts over natural resources
in Africa.
Fourthly, we are seeking to strengthen the
capacity of women’s networks and organizations to
effectively engage in dialogue and mediation processes
around natural resources and the environment,
including in the context of climate change. That
initiative — co-led by the UN-Women, the United
Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations
Development Programme and the Peacebuilding
Support Office — has already supported indigenous
and Afro-Colombian women in Colombia in processes

S/PV. 8372

related to natural-resource use, ownership, governance
and benefit-sharing.
Fifthly, we also recognize that issues relating
to land remain a critical factor. Following an initial
scoping study in 2016 conducted by UN-Habitat, I have
recently finalized a guidance note to ensure greater
strategic convergence across the United Nations system
to help address issues of land and conflict.
Once again, let me thank the Bolivian presidency for
today’s timely debate. There is a lot of work to be done
on this critical issue, and if we address it effectively,
we will go a long way towards creating a safe and
sustainable world for everyone, now and in future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Secretary-General for his interesting and
extensive briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his
briefing today, and we take this opportunity once again
to reiterate our support for his important work.
The twentieth century is characterized by the
strengthening of multilateralism as a fundamental
component of relations among States and respect for the
basic norms of international law, built on the basis of
treaties that establish rights and duties that we mutually
accept within the framework of the exercise of our
sovereignty, with the objective, among other things,
of protecting the most vulnerable from encroachment,
misappropriation and depredation by the most powerful.
The current conflicts arising in different parts of
the world show us that behind many international or
local geopolitical disputes is also almost always an
interest in access to and the control and exploitation
of economically attractive natural resources, which is
reflected in the fact that according to the SecretaryGeneral’s report published by the United Nations
Environment Programme, over the past 60 years at
least 40 per cent of conflicts have been motivated by
this reason. In many cases, when control, exploitation
or access to oil, gas, water, minerals or other natural
resources becomes a strategic objective of the parties
to the conflict or of armed groups and criminal
organizations, it is because behind them there are often
also multinational corporations or foreign interests
willing to use them to gain access to these resources.

18-322363/20

S/PV.8372

Maintenance of international peace and security

Some examples very close to the concerns of the
Security Council, just to mention a few from throughout
the history of the twentieth and twenty-first centuries,
are the coup d’état against Iran in 1953, undertaken
against a democratically elected Government that, in
the exercise of its sovereignty, had nationalized oil
from the hands of an Anglo-American company; the
invasion of Kuwait in 1990 by Iraq, whose intention
was to control 20 per cent of world oil production; the
conflict in Libya, where parties are constantly clashing
over control of the country’s hydrocarbon industry
and which is also affecting the entire Sahel region; the
illegal invasion of Iraq in 2003, whose objective was,
in the end, to control oil production and the oil market;
and the involvement of various armed groups in the
Democratic Republic of Congo as a result of the illegal
trade in tin, tantalum, tungsten and gold.
In other cases, when sovereign policies of the
States over their natural resources affect the interests of
corporations or of some other countries that form part
of the chain of industrialization or commercialization of
the resources, these corporations have no qualms about
financing separatist movements, arming opposition
groups or provoking policies of change of regime to
establish Governments in line with their interests. The
history of the twentieth century in many countries in
my own region is a clear example of this.
We believe that it is not enough to monitor and
punish armed groups, their heads as individuals, or
the parties to the conflict; it is also necessary to make
sanctions regime more dynamic and effective. To do
this, we must apply sanctions to the networks that make
up the entire chain of those involved in the conflict.
In the case of conflicts related to natural resources,
sanctions should also be applied to what we may term
commercial enablers, which in large part are composed
of large transnational companies that enable the
commercialization of natural resources that have been
obtained illegally or in conflict situations as well as for
their insertion into global markets. Sanctions should
also apply to what we may term financial facilitators,
composed of financial corporations and tax havens,
which allow for the insertion and legitimatization of
profits derived from the commercialization of these
resources into the global financial system. Accordingly,
the Security Council must reformulate the mandates of
the subsidiary bodies dealing with sanctions, so that
the panels of experts have a mandate to investigate and
identify these corporations, affecting or definitively
4/20

16/10/2018

shutting down these criminal networks. With the results
of these investigations, the Council should be able to
impose sanctions on such networks.
It is important to fight not only the illegal exploitation
and misappropriation of natural resources, but also the
unequal distribution of the benefits resulting from their
commercialization, which can make them catalysts
that exacerbate conflicts. The Bolivian State has faced
these scenarios throughout its history. A clear example
of this goes back to the nineteenth century, when the
exploitation of natural resources by foreign corporate
interests drove an asymmetrical and expansionist war
in the region that deeply affected my country. These
foreign interests were replicated during much of the
twentieth century and translated into the privatization
and exploitation of our natural wealth — water, silver,
tin, oil and gas — for the benefit of transnational
corporations, leaving only tiny royalties for the
development and well-being of our people.
I would simply like to try to show what has been done
in Bolivia with respect to this issue. In 2006, the State
decided to nationalize the country’s natural resources,
which were recognized through the Constitution
adopted in 2009 as the direct, indivisible and irrevocable
property and dominion of the Bolivian people, under
the administration of the State in accordance with the
collective interest. This mandate allowed the recovery
of the natural resources of strategic companies from the
hands of the companies that had exploited them to the
detriment of the interests of our people.
An example of how sovereign control of our
resources changed the course and development of
Bolivia can be seen in the social and economic changes
that my country has been experiencing for the past 12
years. It is no lie to say that before that time, my country’s
presidents would go to the International Monetary Fund
or the Paris Club almost as beggars to ask for economic
assistance just to be able to pay the salaries of our
teachers or doctors. Twelve years ago, the dynamics of
the distribution of profits for hydrocarbon exploitation
sent 82 per cent of them to transnational companies and
only 18 per cent to the benefit of the country. Since our
resources were nationalized, 82 percent now remains in
the hands of the Bolivian people and 18 per cent goes
to the service contracts of the transnational companies
that remain in the country because they still make
healthy profits.
18-32236

16/10/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8372

Hydrocarbon revenues in Bolivia increased from
$2.9 billion for the period between 1994 and 2005 to
$35.2 billion for the period between 2006 and 2017.
Bolivia’s gross domestic product also grew steadily.
In 2017, it was 4.82 per cent, well above the regional
average of 1.87 per cent, and our gross domestic product
rose from $9 billion in 2005 to $36 billion in 2017. Our
international reserves increased from $1.7 billion to
$10 billion between 2005 and 2018.

members of the Security Council — Côte d’Ivoire,
Equatorial Guinea and Ethiopia — I would like to thank
the Bolivian presidency for convening today’s briefing
on the role of natural resources in armed conflicts. On
their behalf, I would also like to express our sincere
gratitude to Secretary-General António Guterres for
his briefing and relevant analysis of the correlation
between natural resources and the conflicts that impact
the African continent with particular virulence.

In the past 12 years, this new flow of income and
its redistribution has enabled us to reduce extreme
poverty from 37 per cent in 2005 to 17 per cent today,
and to shrink inequality. In 2005, the richest 10 per
cent owned 128 times more than the poorest 10 per
cent, whereas in 2017, and today, that figure has been
reduced to only 47 times more. Public investment
increased from $620 million in 2005 to $5.5 billion in
2017. Some 3 million people in a country of 11 million
joined the middle class, which grew from 35 per
cent of the population in 2005 to 58 per cent in 2017.
The infant mortality rate dropped by more than half
between 2008 and 2017. The number of medical and
health facilities doubled. Life expectancy increased
from 63 years in 2005 to 72 years in 2018. The school
dropout rate fell from 4.5 per cent in 2005 to 2 per cent
in 2017. I understand that this subject is not one that is
inextricably linked to peace and security-related issues,
but the sovereign control of natural resources enables
fairer and more human societies to be built.

Although the importance of natural resources for
economic growth and development in Africa is wellknown, their control is a considerable challenge for
countries that appear to be vulnerable or affected by
instability and armed conflict. Over the past decades,
regrettably the African continent has been a theatre
for many armed conflicts, which have resulted in
unprecedented mass atrocities and humanitarian
crises. Originally begun for sociopolitical reasons,
several crises in Africa have subsequently morphed
into armed clashes for the control and exploitation of
vast territories rich in natural resources, such as gold,
diamonds, oil and timber. Because such resources also
fuel the majority of the conflicts on our continent,
they clearly have an adverse impact on peace, stability
and economic and social development. Indeed, the
lack of governance and an inequitable distribution
of natural-resource dividends are key factors in the
outbreak, funding and continuation of armed conflicts.
The issue of access, control and distribution of natural
resources therefore appears to be a major underlying
cause of the conflicts that persist in Africa.

In conclusion, and using the words of President
Evo Morales when he spoke at the General Assembly
in 2015 (see A/70/PV.15), we believe that the Council
must reflect in the future on the following before
taking decisions based on various contexts. President
Morales said that we are living in times of peace, not
times of invasion or domination. We must therefore ask
ourselves, who benefits from wars? After interventions,
who retains control over natural resources? Who
governs — our citizens, or foreign interests that
promote wars for their own benefit? Those questions
can help to a certain extent as we begin today’s debate.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to members of the Council who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): As I
begin my statement, which I am making on behalf of
the three African countries that are non-permanent

The current challenges in finding a peaceful
solution to crises in the Central African Republic and
Libya, as well as to those that resulted in bloodshed
in Liberia and Sierra Leone, clearly demonstrate the
unavoidable nature of armed conflicts that are fuelled
by the pillaging of natural resources by armed groups.
In its concern about conflict prevention and resolution
in Africa, the African Union (AU) has placed its focus
squarely on the issue of the link between conflicts and
natural resources, which has been at the centre of many
Peace and Security Council meetings focused on the
close correlation between violent conflicts and the
illegal exploitation of natural resources in Africa and
the ways and means to address it.
The responses to the challenges raised by natural
resources in conflict prevention and resolution must be
based on strategies that enable better management of
access to natural resources, and on the strengthening

18-322365/20

S/PV.8372

Maintenance of international peace and security

of national and international control mechanisms in
order to prevent them from being used as a means of
financing conflicts. Discussions within the Peace and
Security Council have therefore highlighted the need
to put in place effective national strategies for the
management of natural resources, in order to ensure
that income is used not to fuel conflicts but rather to
benefit local communities. In that way, they become
an important asset for the sustainable economic and
social development of our States rather than a factor
of instability.
Furthermore, while it is undeniable that many
conflicts in Africa are fuelled by poor governance and
trafficking in natural resources, it is also important
to highlight and strongly denounce the involvement
of actors from outside the continent who benefit from
the exploitation and illegal trade of resources. Those
actors at the margins of armed conflicts jeopardizing
the development of our continent, as is rightly pointed
out by the Bolivian presidency in today’s concept
paper (S/2018/901, annex), are generally armed groups
or multinational companies, international financial
networks or foreign interests whose actions promote
the outbreak of violent conflicts and ongoing instability
in regions rich in natural resources.
We believe that it is the Council’s responsibility
to take appropriate measures, in accordance with the
principles and objectives of the Charter of the United
Nations, to ensure the preservation of the sovereignty of
States in the management of their natural resources. In
our opinion, every State must have the sovereign right to
control and use its natural resources in accordance with
the principles of international law and good governance.
The Security Council must also strengthen its role in
combating the illegal exploitation and trafficking of
natural resources in areas where they contribute to the
outbreak and continuation of armed conflicts.
Today’s meeting also gives us the opportunity
to highlight another major challenge facing our
continent — illicit financial flows related to the illegal
exploitation of and trade in natural resources. Such
illicit flows, due to their scale, have a negative impact
on the continent’s ongoing development and governance
programmes. According to some estimates, they could
reach $50 billion per year, about twice the amount of
official development assistance to Africa. In reality, such
estimates cannot help but reflect a larger phenomenon,
given the lack of accurate data on all illicit transactions
on the African continent. It is therefore imperative to
6/20

16/10/2018

ensure the effective and transparent management and
equitable distribution of natural resources in order to
safeguard the interests of the country concerned and
the well-being of its people. Equity, transparency and
accountability in the management of natural resources
are therefore essential to conflict prevention and the
promotion of sustainable development in Africa.
We recognize and welcome the efforts of the
international community to improve the international
legal framework for the use of and trade in natural
resources. They have resulted in the establishment
of relevant standards through instruments such as
the Kimberley Process and the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative. For its part, the African Union
adopted the African Mining Vision in February 2009,
which calls on the AU Commission to integrate the
peace and security dimension of natural resources into
conflict-prevention and early-warning mechanisms,
conflict management and peacebuilding policies and
programmes. It is also important to highlight the work
of the African Union High-Level Panel, chaired by
Mr. Thabo Mbeki, former President of South Africa,
whose report contained useful recommendations on
addressing the complex issue of illicit capital flows
from Africa.
Despite the efforts being made, the expected results
will be effective only if there is close cooperation with
external actors, including multinationals involved
in the exploitation of natural resources. We believe
that ensuring greater control of supply and marketing
chains and accountability for individuals, groups
or multinationals involved in the illegal trade in
natural resources is also essential. In addition, it is
more important than ever that international partners,
transnational corporations, the private sector, civilsociety organizations and all stakeholders support the
promotion of transparency, equity and developmentoriented natural resource governance. That is key to
conflict prevention and resolution on the continent.
Our Council has used various tools to address the
links between natural resources and conflict, including
natural-resources sanctions, ranging from a diamond
and timber embargo to a ban on charcoal exports and
maritime measures prohibiting illegal oil exports.
The report produced by Security Council Report is an
excellent research tool that provides a useful analysis of
the conception and implementation of these sanctions
regimes. It is urgent that we take stock of the lessons
learned from the implementation of these measures in
18-32236

16/10/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

order to strengthen the Council’s role in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts linked to natural resources.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this meeting and Bolivia’s
initiative to raise the critical issue of natural resources
and their link to the root causes of conflict, as well
as the important briefing given by Secretary-General
António Guterres.
As a country that is rich in natural resources, Peru
appreciates the fact that they play a crucial role in its
growth and development. However, we are also aware
that the exploitation of these resources and access to
their respective markets have historically been decisive
factors in the outbreak of conflicts in various parts of
the world. The potential of these resources to either
generate prosperity or have an undesirable impact leads
us to reiterate the importance of being able to rely on
inclusive and accountable institutions, as well as the rule
of law, in order to prevent conflicts by addressing their
root causes and promoting sustainable development in
line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
This also requires a rules-based order that guarantees
the predictability of international trade and the stability
of financial markets in order to avoid the boom-andbust cycles to which countries that export primary
materials are particularly vulnerable and that often
degenerate into conflict situations.
It is clear that such matters go beyond the Council’s
remit. Nevertheless, we believe it important for this
organ to acknowledge and demonstrate its relevance in
the maintenance of international peace and security so
that these issues can be addressed from a preventive,
multidimensional approach that focuses on the root
causes, as predicated by the concept of sustainable peace.
For example, in assessing the impacts that mining
industries may generate, it is important to maintain an
inclusive dialogue among the State, the private sector
and the communities potentially affected by such
projects. We also consider it important that mining
industries contribute to local development by creating
and strengthening capacities, transferring technology,
offering decent employment opportunities for the
population living in the areas in which they operate,
increasing the local content of the goods and services
produced, and ensuring economic inclusion while
respecting traditional ways of life.
All these aspects, which are linked to the sustainable
management of natural resources, are critical to

S/PV. 8372

effectively combating poverty and human vulnerability,
and to preventing perceptions of corruption and
injustice that are then exploited by interested actors
to radicalize disgruntled sectors of the population.
In many contemporary conflicts, we have seen how
such perceptions have facilitated the development of
militias, which exercise illegal control over natural
resources. This often leads to situations of anarchy in
which serious violations of human rights and major
deterioration of the environment are usually observed.
We must especially bear in mind that such
dynamics are facilitated and even encouraged by the
links that illegal extractors of natural resources often
establish with criminal organizations in order to access
international markets, launder illicitly acquired wealth
and obtain weapons. In the light of such vicious circles,
we believe that the sanctions committees of the Council
should pay special attention to illicit trafficking
networks dealing in natural resources emanating from
countries affected by conflict and the corresponding
illegal flows. This is in line with the presidential
statement S/PRST/2007/22 of June 2007.
We also believe that the missions deployed under
Security Council mandates to countries rich in natural
resources can help the respective national authorities
to prevent and combat the illegal exploitation of
their resources. In the same vein, we believe that in
countries in transition to post-conflict situations, the
Peacebuilding Commission and United Nations country
teams should be able to support national authorities in
strengthening the institutions required to manage their
resources sustainably. These measures are relevant
in countries such as the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which was recently visited by the Council and
is especially rich in natural resources that, far from
promoting development, have led since colonial times
to cycles of violence and conflict that must come to
an end.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank you,
Sir, for calling this meeting on today’s important topic.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and participation in today’s meeting.
The link between natural resources and conflict
is complex, and the United States shares the concern
that in many instances, as noted by the SecretaryGeneral, the poor management of natural resources
by Governments can contribute to corruption, conflict
and violence. It is unfortunate that today’s Council

18-322367/20

S/PV.8372

Maintenance of international peace and security

briefing has been deliberately framed to ignore internal
State mismanagement of natural resources. Despite
the potential for natural resource endowments to bring
prosperity and social development when properly
managed, we unfortunately see far too many examples
of countries where natural resource wealth does not
translate into improved livelihoods for citizens.
Nowhere are the dangers — indeed, threats to
peace and security — posed by the mismanagement
of natural resources more apparent than in Venezuela,
where millions of citizens of that once wealthy country
have been driven into poverty by the rapacious
corruption of a kleptocratic regime. Instead of serving
as a source of wealth to improve the livelihoods of
Venezuela’s citizens, the State-owned oil company
Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. exists today primarily as
a vehicle for embezzlement and looting by Maduro and
his inner circle. This has created a situation of scarcity
and economic instability that has generated massive
refugee migration flows. With its oil sector in decline,
Maduro’s regime has turned to another valuable
resource to plunder, Venezuela’s gold deposits.
In Venezuela’s mining regions, illegal and
unregulated mining is now resulting in rapid
deforestation and pollution, without regard for the
environment or the indigenous populations. We have
no doubt that the proceeds from this illicit mining
are lining the pockets primarily of Maduro and those
closest to him. The effects of the crisis in Venezuela
extend far beyond its national borders and the resulting
humanitarian crisis has placed the burden on the
entire region.
Similarly, in Iran we see the country’s rich
endowment of natural resources siphoned away from
activities that could benefit the Iranian people and
used both to enrich Iran’s elite and to fund Iran’s
destabilizing activities abroad. Iran has used the
proceeds of its oil and gas trade to build missiles
capable of delivering weapons of mass destruction,
increase internal repression, finance terrorism and fund
destabilizing activities in Lebanon, Syria, Yemen and
Iraq. For these reasons, we are working with countries
that import Iranian crude oil to cut their purchases
substantially, and we are pleased that so many countries
and companies are moving to stop such imports.
In South Sudan, the Government has been
collateralizing future oil sales to secure foreign loans
in violation of the Agreement on the Resolution of the
8/20

16/10/2018

Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, signed in 2015,
and the revitalized peace agreement signed last month.
The money has been used not to feed the people but
rather, again, to enrich elites and extend the conflict,
including attacks on innocent civilians.
In the cases of Venezuela, Iran and South Sudan,
the destabilizing effects of natural resources are not
the result of the activity of external armed groups,
multinational companies or foreign interests; rather,
they are the direct result of decisions taken by the
leaders of those countries to engage in corruption and/
or use the proceeds from their natural resource wealth to
fund destabilizing activities that threaten international
peace and security.
There are steps we can take as a Council to
improve our chances of ensuring that natural resource
wealth translates into greater prosperity. For example,
the United States supports the Kimberley Process
as a constructive international initiative that fosters
transparency in the diamond trade and has contributed
to a marked reduction in — in fact, almost the complete
elimination of — the trade of conflict diamonds since
its establishment. We support meaningful reform of the
Kimberley Process to ensure its long-term health and
relevance. Specifically, at this year’s plenary session we
will seek an expanded definition of a conflict diamond
to include diamonds linked to conflict or violence,
regardless of the perpetrator.
Finally, United Nations sanctions regimes remain
a critical tool for addressing the destabilizing impact
of the trade in illicit resources. As members of the
international community, States must do more to
strengthen the implementation of United Nations
sanctions regimes that seek to eliminate trade in
natural resources that contribute to conflict. If we work
together to cut off those flows and support cooperative
efforts to improve the oversight of natural resources,
together we can help prevent natural resource-related
issues from contributing to conflict.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to express
its sincere thanks to Secretary-General Guterres for
his briefing. We thank the Bolivian presidency for
convening this briefing on a critical topic, which the
Security Council has discussed only once since 2013
(see S/PV.6982).
Over the decades, we have seen that the control
and exploitation of and access to natural resources have
18-32236

16/10/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

contributed to fuelling armed conflict. There are many
steps that the Council and the United Nations can take
to tackle the issue and to promote the use of natural
resources for sustainable peace. Allow me to focus
on the role of natural resources in three phases of the
conflict cycle: in preventing conflicts through adequate
risk assessment; during a conflict through transparency
and accountability; and in building sustainable peace.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands consistently
calls for adequate risk assessments and analyses of all
root causes and threat multipliers. That is as relevant
for natural resources as it is for climate change and
water stress. Activists and affected communities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have called attention
to the links between that country’s mineral wealth and
its protracted armed conflicts. It is important that such
calls find their way to the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission and that our future actions
be based on adequate risk assessments and analyses.
We commend the Secretary-General for his efforts in
that area and look forward to hearing more from the
Secretariat during the Arria Formula meeting on water,
peace and security to be held later this month. We must
ensure that conflict-, gender- and climate-sensitive
mandates take the availability, extraction and
governance of natural resources into account.
With regard to my second point, concerning
accountability and transparency, natural resources are
a broad concept, and it would be a mistake to solely
focus on extractive industries. There are several lessons
learned with regard to accountability and transparency.
Like the Secretary-General, I would like to mention
the Kimberley Process. The multi-stakeholder
approach of the Kimberly Process was successful in
reducing the trade in blood diamonds. It facilitates
cooperation among Governments, the private sector,
producers of rough diamonds, traders, watchdogs and
non-governmental organizations.
The Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible
Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and
High-Risk Areas of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development and the United Nations
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights
form a basis for collaborating with the private sector
to ensure that human rights violations and bribery,
for example, are adequately addressed in conflict and
high-risk areas. We expect all companies to undertake
due diligence to contribute to responsible sourcing
and production. The illegal exploitation of and trade

S/PV. 8372

in natural resources remain root causes of violence in
ongoing conflicts such as in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Central African Republic, South Sudan,
Somalia and Libya. In line with that, there is also an
imperative role for Governments to play. Governments
must choose to dismantle war economies and economies
of predation in which the trade of natural resources is
used to finance the interests of a few rather than the
interests of many. The gains of ending the conflict and
dismantling networks should be seen as more important
than utilizing the networks of ivory traffickers, gold
and diamond smugglers and mineral dealers to earn a
profit. We must change the cost-benefit equation. In that
context, what can the Council do? It can act with regard
to dismantling those networks. Tools such as adequate
reporting and political pressure must be utilized.
The illegal trade in natural resources should
be grounds for sanctions, as revenues from illegal
exploitation and trade are used to destabilize countries.
Political will, however, is absolutely necessary to do
that. The Council must also continue to evaluate and
build on experiences from peacekeeping operations,
such as the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
both of which play roles in combating the illegal
exploitation of resources.
Natural resources are key to building sustainable
peace. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the sustaining peace agenda underline the
importance of adopting an integrated approach and of
creating more inclusive societies. Governments need
to take responsibility, be equipped to combat the illicit
trade in and trafficking of natural resources and be
able to manage their related industries. If Governments
do not shoulder their responsibility, the Council has a
responsibility to act. We know that the development
of the responsible sourcing of and trading in natural
resources contributes to creating decent jobs and,
ultimately, to social and economic growth.
In conclusion, when looking at the role of natural
resources in conflicts, it is imperative to do so
throughout the conflict cycle. We call on the Council
to call for appropriate risk assessments and analyses;
to urge Member States to work with all the relevant
stakeholders to address the issue; to take up the
responsibility to act when required in combating the

18-322369/20

S/PV.8372

Maintenance of international peace and security

16/10/2018

threat; and to make use of the tools at its disposal to
continue to build sustainable peace.

remains the best means to prevent conflicts, including
those linked to claims pertaining to natural resources.

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting. I also thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his participation and valuable briefing. We
very much hope that today’s discussion will raise our
awareness of the link between natural resources and
conflict. The concept note (S/2018/901, annex) sheds
light on the close link between them, which the Security
Council has discussed on two previous occasions (see
S/PV.5705 and S/PV.6982). Nevertheless, we have
seldom met to discuss that issue and to reach the
necessary understanding and solutions, which shows
that the Council does not see how dangerous it is and
the threat that it poses to those experiencing its impact.

My country has been blessed with natural resources,
and we know well that they can be linked to conflict. We
experienced first-hand the catastrophic consequences
of the disastrous occupation in 1990 on Kuwait and
the countries of the world. Natural resources are not
by themselves the only reason for conflicts and civil
wars. The appropriate exploitation of natural resources
could be the most important means for societies and
countries to recover in the post-conflict period, leading
to reconstruction and development.

Conflicts caused by disputes over natural resources
are no longer only among sovereign States, as was the
case before and during the Cold War. Over the past three
decades, we have witnessed many civil wars, primarily
in developing countries. Such conflicts seem to be
political in nature but the root causes are economic and
social. The consequences have been catastrophic, and
the Security Council has worked to settle such conflicts
for many years, although some of them persist.
Since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) and
presidential statement S/PRST/2007/22 on this topic,
the Security Council has been able to shed light on
several basic factors that supposedly help to limit
and address that phenomenon. I will mention the
most prominent of them: first, strengthening the role
of peacekeeping troops by implementing adequate
mandates to enable peacekeeping operations to help
the Governments concerned prevent natural resources
from being exploited illicitly; secondly, supporting
regional initiatives to limit the dangers related to the
exploitation of natural resources, such as the Protocol
against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources
in the Great Lakes region, the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative and the 2000 Kimberley
Process, relating to blood diamonds, which has been
a paradigm of cooperation; and thirdly, strengthening
sanctions regimes by the Council, which must adopt
explicit mandates with specific terms of reference
for its panels of experts and monitoring teams so as
to prevent the trafficking and illegal exploitation of
natural resources. Nevertheless, preventive diplomacy
based on dialogue and mediation, as well as arbitration,
10/20

History is full of examples of armed conflicts
and civil wars resulting from the legal and illegal
exploitation of natural resources, which fuelled them
and were a reason for prolonging them. It is often the
case that the exploitation of natural resources is the
main reason for such conflicts and wars breaking out
again. Natural resources are a divine blessing to be
preserved but they can be used as weapons of war with
serious consequences for the environment, the economy
and public health at both local and regional level.
We have learned lessons from the environmental
catastrophe that resulted from the Iraqi occupying
forces setting fire to more than 1,000 Kuwaiti oil wells.
That is an example of the misuse of natural resources
and the environment during armed conflict. The
State of Kuwait believes that such resources and the
environment must not be used during armed conflict.
For that reason, we proposed a draft resolution, which
was subsequently adopted by the General Assembly
(resolution 56/4), for the annual observance of
6 November as the International Day for Preventing
the Exploitation of the Environment in War and Armed
Conflict. Kuwait will also call for an Arria Formula
meeting on 7 November in order to address preventing
the use of the environment in armed conflict, as well
as strengthening the international legal framework in
that regard.
Poverty, hunger, inequality and the absence of
good governance are among the most important reasons
for the outbreak of conflicts, as mentioned by United
Nations reports. We must look into the common factors
that lead to tensions and cause the outbreak of conflicts.
There are three economic indicators that we should
consider: first, per capita income levels; secondly, the
rate of economic growth; and thirdly, the structure of
the economy.
18-32236

16/10/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

There are fundamentals for building a stable State. It
is important to implement the Sustainable Development
Goals in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We must strengthen our national
capacities and manage our economies effectively, using
comprehensive strategies to fight corruption, build
institutions, strengthen the rule of law and diversify
the economy. The United Nations can assist States and
establish partnerships with them in that regard.
Finally, we want to emphasize that every State has
the sovereign and genuine right to control and to exploit
its own natural resources according to the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. Clearly, natural
resources, if used well, can be a basic factor for longterm economic growth and sustainable development.
The State of Kuwait believes that natural resources are
a divine blessing for many States. They must be the
driver of sustainable development, the prosperity of
countries and the well-being of their people. Managing
natural resources in a legal, transparent and sustainable
way at the national level is a priority for Kuwait. We
preserve our natural resources and exploit them in
the right way, while maintaining the security of our
State and its national economy in accordance with
the Constitution.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the Secretary-General
for his insightful briefing, good analysis and, as always,
action-oriented approach. We thank the Bolivian
presidency for providing another important opportunity
for us to discuss the root causes that lead to or may
lead to conflict. For the Council to be effective in its
preventive role and in sustaining peace, it is crucial that
we better understand and address the underlying drivers
of conflicts. The root causes are different depending
on the context. They can include violations and abuses
of human rights, gender inequality, poverty and weak
governance and very often they are a combination of
several or all of those factors.
In July, Sweden hosted a debate in the Council on
climate-related security risks, focusing on climate as a
driver of conflict (see S/PV.8307). It is closely related
to the issue that we are discussing today and one of
the conclusions drawn at that debate was on the need
for the United Nations to better understand and analyse
those risks. The same can be said of today’s issue. We
also welcome the upcoming Arria Formula meeting on
water and security. All such steps aim to improve our
track record in preventing conflicts.

S/PV. 8372

Natural resources are clearly a driver of conflict in
many contexts. While resources such as oil, natural gas
and minerals have the potential to confer significant
benefits on populations and to improve development
outcomes, they can also fuel instability and violence.
The research presented in the joint United Nations-World
Bank report Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches
to Preventing Violent Conflict suggests that 40 to
60 per cent of intra-State armed conflicts over the past
60 years have been triggered, funded or sustained by
natural resources. During the recent Council trip to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as has been referred
to by my Peruvian colleague, we saw first-hand how the
rich natural resources there have largely yet to translate
into greater prosperity and stability for the broader
population in the areas where most of those riches
are found. In Liberia, disputes related to land tenure
have long been a key cause of conflict. The Liberia
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, which
I chair, is therefore beginning to focus its work on the
management of natural resources.
The United Nations system has a hugely important
role in ensuring that natural resources are turned from
the scourge of potential conflict into a common good
for development, stability and prosperity. We truly
appreciate the various actions set in motion by the
Secretary-General, as outlined this morning, such as
improved analysis and cooperation within the system,
supporting regional cooperation and initiatives,
strengthened mediation, including in hydro-diplomacy,
offering capacity-building to countries, looking into the
connection between land rights and conflicts and, of
course, the general empowerment of women, including
at the local level. Today I would like to point to three
areas that can help to tap the opportunities and positive
benefits of natural resources while mitigating the risks
of them being a driver of conflict.
The first area is strengthening governance and
national institutions. Natural resources are more likely
to be a cause for conflict when there is a governance
and public security vacuum. Functioning institutions to
protect national interests, to uphold legal frameworks
and to hold those operating outside the law accountable
are therefore critical. Democratic and transparent
national strategies for how natural resources are
extracted and used are an equally important part of the
equation. The implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, as the Ambassador of Kuwait
has just said, should be the logical starting point in that

18-3223611/20

S/PV.8372

Maintenance of international peace and security

regard. In line with Sustainable Development Goal
16, effective, accountable and inclusive institutions
should be built at all levels. That includes tax and audit
authorities that can develop fiscal policies and solid,
trusted systems for public financial management.
The second area is fighting organized crime.
Organized crime involving natural resources, for
example through fuel smuggling and illicit mining,
have become the largest source of income for non-State
armed groups and international terrorist organizations.
Those activities also contribute and are often connected
to corruption and erode institutions and trust in the
authorities, which in turn further spurs violence
and violent extremism. Organized crime networks
must therefore be forcefully addressed, including
by enhancing the investigation and analysis of their
linkages to the extractive industry. International
cooperation and making full use of the United Nations
tools on offer is recommended.
The third area is the important role of responsible
business. The private sector has an important
responsibility to make sure that business activities
are sustainable and do not have a negative impact on
conflict dynamics and basic human rights. To that
end, businesses need to integrate corporate social
responsibility models into their core operations. That
requires dialogue with host Governments and, of
course, civil society, including local communities.
African countries are now taking the lead in
improving ownership models for extractive industries
to better benefit their communities and citizens.
We have just heard our colleague from Côte d’Ivoire
talk about some of the African Union initiatives.
Transparency is key to those efforts. There needs
to be a better understanding of financial flows and
banks have a particular responsibility, including at
the international level. In that regard, the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative and the United
Nations Framework Classification for Resources should
be supported. Governments should also be encouraged
to develop national action plans for business and human
rights. The United Nations Guiding Principles on
Business and Human Rights and the Global Compact
should serve as a basis for those efforts.
As is the case with many of the root causes of
conflict, challenges linked to natural resources do not
recognize borders. They therefore require a national,
regional and international response. The United Nations
12/20

16/10/2018

system, as well as other international organizations
and bilateral partners, can help countries to reap the
positive benefits of natural resources and to move
away from a conflict-driven, informal and unprotected
economy towards a transparent formal economy that
can generate decent jobs and provide for social services
such as education and health.
The Security Council, for its part, needs to do a
better job of assessing root causes and taking a more
holistic approach to addressing the conflicts on its
agenda. That includes assessing and addressing the
issue of natural resources, as well as other root causes,
in a more structured and proactive way. In order to do
that, what the Council needs first and foremost is for the
regular reporting from the Secretariat to include more
integrated analysis of the drivers of conflict. Gender
analysis is a key aspect, as women are important actors
in addressing the drivers and root causes of conflict.
But the Council must also follow up such information
with action. When it is relevant, peacekeeping missions
should be mandated and given appropriate resources
to that effect so that they can manage such drivers of
conflict better, in close partnership with the broader
United Nations country teams and other relevant actors.
Targeted measures, including sanctions on individuals
and entities — or indeed certain goods — involved
in fuelling conflicts through illicit trade should also
be considered.
The Peacebuilding Commission, with its broad
agenda and a wider range of stakeholders, is well placed
to complement and contribute to Council efforts to
address the underlying causes of conflict, including the
issue of natural resources. The Commission can also
take a regional approach, which is often needed when
it comes to these borderless challenges. Actors such as
the World Bank, civil society and of course the private
sector can and should be invited to discussions that
provide advice on action to the Security Council.
In conclusion, we fully support the SecretaryGeneral’s vision of putting conflict prevention and
sustaining peace at the centre of what we do. Addressing
the root causes of conflict effectively, including by
improving the transparent management of natural
resources in order to benefit people, is a crucial part of
that vision.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the Secretary-General for
18-32236

16/10/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

participating personally in our meeting today and for
his informative briefing on the subject.
The aspects that the Bolivian presidency touched
on today relating to the issue of States’ sovereignty over
their natural resources are extremely important and are
apparent in many of today’s regional conflicts, as was
rightly noted. Strictly speaking, however, these issues
are beyond the scope of the Security Council’s remit
and belong in the mandates of the High-level Political
Forum on Sustainable Development and the Second
Committee of the General Assembly. In that regard,
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
States Members of the United Nations reaffirmed that
each one of them
“has, and shall freely exercise, full permanent
sovereignty over all its wealth, natural resources
and economic activity”.
Based on that principle, combating illegal activities
in the extractive industries is also first of all both the
prerogative and the responsibility of the Governments of
the countries that own the resources. In that regard, the
priority is assisting vulnerable States in strengthening
their State institutions and applying sustainable
environmental management models in the interests of
socioeconomic development and trade.
Resolution 1625 (2005) and presidential statement
S/PRST/2007/22 define the parameters for further work
aimed at preventing the illegal exploitation of natural
resources from fuelling armed conflicts. In our view,
however, the Council’s task in that regard lies not in
conducting generic discussions but in ensuring strict
compliance with the principles of sovereignty and
non-interference in the internal affairs of particular
countries and regions. We consider it unacceptable
to politicize these issues by artificially assigning
them conflict-generator status and thereby creating a
basis for potential crises or worsening existing ones.
We see many examples of how natural resources can
become the object of competition, including in the
form of armed confrontations both within and between
States. As a rule, we see this kind of issue in countries
with weak Government control over national mineral
resources. However, armed conflict, whether domestic
or international, can exacerbate the problems associated
with their illegal exploitation, but we want to emphasize
that such clashes are caused not by natural resources
per se, but as a result of acts of aggression by various
forces, and often external actors.

S/PV. 8372

In such cases, what we could term “delayed-action
mines” laid down in colonial times play a significant
negative role. Former imperial powers also made use
during the Cold War of schemes devised in those faroff times for plundering territories under their control.
And in our own era, behind the opposing parties to
conflicts we find players from outside the region or
global corporations, while loud slogans about the
struggle for democratic values are a mere fig leaf for
commercially driven efforts to take over one or another
country’s natural wealth.
We believe that the right way to discuss this topic
is in relation to situations in specific countries and
regions. For example, the region of the Middle East and
North Africa, rich in oil and gas reserves, has always
been an area that big States have competed over. The
energy issue was a significant contributing factor at
the start of the period of shocks prematurely termed
the Arab spring. The current crises in Syria and Libya
are a clear illustration of the growing link between
security and global competition for resources. The socalled international coalition, operating on Syrian land
uninvited by the national Government and unsanctioned
by the Security Council, has occupied the territory east
of the Euphrates where oil and gas fields are located
and together with its client structures has established
what is essentially shadow hydrocarbon extraction.
A policy aimed at reinforcing this state of affairs,
violating Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, is
being carried out before our very eyes.
After the acts of aggression against Libya in
2011, the country became a springboard for external
players’ struggle for its rich natural resources, and it
is still in a fragmented state to this day, despite all of
the efforts of the United Nations to implement a model
for a political settlement based on unifying the country
and its State institutions. We would really like to see
Libya’s national wealth serve the interests of ordinary
Libyans, not foreign corporations. And we do not have
to look very far to find other examples in the Middle
East, where we have the destabilization of Iraq due to a
foreign invasion in 2003, as well as the war in Yemen.
In both those cases, however, it was terrorist forces
that at various points in time got access to their natural
resources and used hydrocarbons primarily in order to
fuel their destructive activities.
One of the reasons for the continuing turbulence
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo is
the illegal exploitation and export of natural resources

18-3223613/20

S/PV.8372

Maintenance of international peace and security

16/10/2018

in the interests of large transnational companies
conducted by illegal armed groups to finance their
activities. Suppressing this kind of activity would help
to create the conditions for stabilizing the situation in
the country and help it to develop.

based on unquestioning respect for the sovereignty of
the host State. Those who claim the role of peacemaker
and friend should have no hidden agendas or desire
to take advantage of others’ problems for their own
mercenary, self-serving interests.

The question of revenue-sharing from oil and
other mineral resources is a serious factor in Somalia’s
centrifugal tendencies and has been an obstacle to the
completion of federalization in Somalia. The agreement
signed in June 2018 between Mogadishu and the federal
states on the rights to the ownership, management and
the sharing of income from the extraction of mineral
resources was an important achievement. However,
doubts remain about the parties’ willingness to comply
with those agreements.

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing. I would also like to thank the Bolivian
presidency for presiding over and convening today’s
important meeting.

The problems involved in controlling natural
resources where the demarcation of maritime and land
borders is concerned have the potential to become a
source of inter-State conflicts, and there are many
examples of that in Africa. Take, for instance, the
situation concerning the ownership of major oil and gas
fields in the coastal areas of the Gulf of Guinea, or the
non-recognition of existing borders by the many tribes
in the Sahara-Sahel region that have taken up arms to
defend their rights to natural resources. The situation
in South Sudan is another clear example in which both
internal and external players are shamelessly trying to
use the country’s natural resources to enrich themselves.
The activities of various States and transnational
corporations interested in getting access to the
resource base of countries of the region is a significant
destabilizing factor in a number of Latin American
nations. Unfortunately, little has changed there in the
twenty-first century, and the situations in Venezuela
and Nicaragua are clear proof of that.
We believe it is both dangerous and short-sighted
to blame all the problems in countries that are rich
in natural resources and that are openly subjected to
outside interference and pressure, including through
sanctions, on the poor management of those resources.
Framing the question that way is one short step from
direct military intervention. History can teach us
ruthless lessons about that, but there are many who do
not want to take those lessons to heart.
The Russian Federation has consistently advocated
for the importance of strict respect for States’ sovereign
right to manage their natural resources. Partnerships
for their development should be mutually beneficial and
14/20

Natural resources are the material basis for human
survival and development and an important factor in
peace and development for all countries. The illicit
exploitation and trafficking of natural resources,
as well as their misuse and unfair distribution, can
potentially play a key role in triggering and fuelling
conflicts and undermining peace. Security threats such
as war, conflicts and terrorism all have roots in poverty
and underdevelopment, and solutions to them must be
found through development.
In order to address the issue of conflicts caused
by the misuse of resources, we must help the countries
concerned take full advantage of their natural resources
and facilitate their efforts to industrialize and diversify
their economies, enabling them to follow their own
paths of sustainable development in line with their
particular conditions. I would like to emphasize the
following points.
First, the international community should respect
States’ irrevocable sovereignty over their natural
resources in their territories, which is indisputable.
The proper protection, exploitation and management of
natural resources are a sovereign right and obligation.
The exploration, development and utilization of
natural resources should be decided independently
by the Governments and peoples of individual States.
Countries in conflict should pay greater attention to
the proper use and management of resources, prevent
their illicit exploitation and misuse in causing and
fuelling armed conflicts, translate their rich resources
into development advantages and enable all citizens
to benefit from their dividends. In exploiting natural
resources, multinational corporations and the private
sector should respect the host countries’ ownership
and work sincerely to meet their corporate social
responsibilities and give back to local communities.
Secondly, the Security Council should continue to
play a constructive role in that regard, in accordance
18-32236

16/10/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

with its own responsibilities and strengths. Considering
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
should place stronger emphasis on means such as
good offices and mediation, focus on preventing and
resolving conflicts and work effectively to meet its
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. Sanctions imposed by the Council are not an
end in themselves and should be carefully targeted for
a precise impact on organizations engaged in illicit
extraction, while minimizing the effects on the normal
exploitation conducted by the countries concerned.
Thirdly, the relevant United Nations entities should
improve their coordination and work together to help
conflict-affected countries to improve their management
of resources. When formulating a comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy, the Peacebuilding Commission
should give greater priority to the management of
natural resources in post-conflict reconstruction. United
Nations field missions and development agencies should
pool their resources and create synergies in order to
support countries in conflict in improving their ability
to exploit their own natural resources. The United
Nations can provide assistance in the proper extraction,
transportation and management of natural resources
at the request of the countries concerned, and should
promote the use of natural resources for sustainable
development and social stability in all countries.
Fourthly, regional organizations and relevant
mechanisms should play an active role in this area. In
recent years, the African Union and other regional and
subregional organizations have played an important
role in encouraging cooperation among African
States in building up their capacity for comprehensive
natural-resources management. Mechanisms such as
the Kimberley Process have been crucial in curbing
the illicit trade in natural resources and should be
encouraged to complement the efforts of the United
Nations and its Member States and continue to
contribute to the consideration and proper use of
natural resources.
China is committed to defending and building
world peace, based on the principles of equality, mutual
benefit and win-win cooperation. China actively
supports and helps other countries to properly develop,
utilize and manage their natural resources. We consider
coordinated economic, social and environmental
development very important, as it helps the countries
concerned to achieve sustainable development and

S/PV. 8372

ensures that local communities benefit. We will work
with nations around the world to build a community with
a shared future for humankind and leverage the positive
role of natural resources in maintaining international
peace and promoting common development, so that
countries affected by conflict can overcome the curse
on their resources as soon as possible, invest their
natural resources in their peoples’ pursuit of happiness
and contribute to world peace and development.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me start by expressing
Poland’s appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his briefing today. We also thank the presidency for
recognizing the issue of natural resources in Council
discussions of the root causes of conflicts.
While natural resources do not themselves cause
wars, the competition for their access, control and
illegal exploitation and trafficking can be a driver
of armed conflict and play a role in post-conflict
situations. On the other hand, we should not forget
that natural resources can also create incentives for
peacebuilding processes. To begin with, I would like to
make few general remarks.
In many parts of the world, we are very concerned
to see that access to natural resources and control
over them can become a root cause of conflict, and it
particularly affects countries that have rich deposits of
oil, gas, gold, diamonds or other minerals. Despite their
potential for social and economic development, they
struggle with poverty, unemployment, epidemics and
violence. Weak border controls and poor infrastructure
are among the other factors that can aggravate such
situations. Moreover, these countries often seem to
fail to take into account the negative environmental
consequences of their actions. The massive exploitation
of natural resources can have a truly negative impact.
The international community should not be silent when
the environment is devastated, human rights are violated
and a country’s economic growth and sustainable
development are hampered. We should never accept
situations in which authoritarian regimes are supported
merely to safeguard the interests of armed groups or
companies that benefit from lucrative industries.
When considering the role of natural resources in
the peace and security agenda, we must consider the
issue’s complex character and its relation to many other
aspects. We believe that our debate must be carefully
focused. Respect for international law should be a
source of inspiration and a starting point for further

18-3223615/20

S/PV.8372

Maintenance of international peace and security

deliberations on the Council’s role. That said, I would
like to underline the key importance of international
law, particularly the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and of the sovereignty of States, with
regard to the ability to effectively address issues
related to the control and illegal exploitation of natural
resources and of access to them. We have a variety of
international instruments at our disposal within the
United Nations system and in the Council in particular.
We must consider the full range of development, trade,
security and diplomatic tools available.
I want to stress the key importance of transparency,
good governance, the rule of law and cooperation in
our shared responsibility among a wide range of actors,
including regional organizations. While Governments
are primarily responsible for controlling the use of
natural resources, the engagement of the private sector
is also essential. In that regard, I would like to point
to the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative and the
United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights as examples of global standards and
good practices for preventing abuses.
For the Security Council, I want to stress the need
for a comprehensive and innovative approach, as the
issue of natural resources and conflict concerns the
actions of private companies and armed groups as well
as Governments. We need an inclusive approach so that
civil society and local communities can also be engaged
in addressing the issue. The missions and peacekeeping
operations of the United Nations and Security Council
expert groups and sanctions regimes offer a variety of
mechanisms and, as stated in presidential statement
S/PRST/2007/22,
“could play a role in helping the Governments
concerned, with full respect for their sovereignty
over their natural resources, to prevent the illegal
exploitation of those resources from further
fuelling the conflict.”
In conclusion, while climate change, environment
and water scarcity may not be the focus of today’s
debate, I want to emphasize the important role they
play in our peace and security agenda. Today more
than ever, the Council should take those issues into
consideration, as we see that in many parts of the world
climate change and environmental issues can become
threat multipliers for conflicts and escalate tensions at
16/20

16/10/2018

the local and regional levels. We are ready to engage in
further Council discussions on that issue.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the Bolivian presidency for organizing
today’s debate on what we consider an essential topic,
as well as the Secretary-General for his briefing,
which has given us a very informative framework for
our discussions.
When we talk about natural resources, we are
talking about extractive resources, including fossil
fuels and minerals. But it also means soil quality,
biodiversity and drinking water, all vital resources
that are affected by climate change. Sustainable
management of natural resources can and must be a
factor in economic development. However, all too often
the struggle to control them still helps to trigger, amplify
or perpetuate deadly conflicts. In such situations, the
challenge is to combine short-term action, which is
critical for responding to urgent crises, with long-term
efforts to address their root causes, which often include
tackling the issue of natural resources. My message
today is simple. We must work together to more
effectively address this factor in conflict prevention,
crisis management and support for political transition
processes and sustainable development.
My first point is about prevention. The conditions
that lead to conflict over natural resources are well
known. When the revenues they generate are poorly
distributed, when predators enter the picture, when
the management of the companies involved is opaque
or the stakeholders are not included enough in the
decision-making process or the distribution of resources,
the risk of conflict increases. That is true for internal
conflicts or those sparked by actors from neighbouring
countries. To better identify such precarious situations,
we must encourage the sharing of analyses and
diagnoses and develop early-warning mechanisms.
We therefore call on the Secretariat to integrate the
natural-resources dimension into its reports and to find
the expertise required for that through the support of
the specialized agencies of the United Nations.
Civil society and private actors can also make
valuable contributions alongside Governments to
improving governance in the exploitation of resources.
Voluntary measures to improve revenue transparency
are a step in the right direction for that, and here I
particularly have in mind the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative. Encouraging the contribution
18-32236

16/10/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8372

of civil society also means ensuring that advocates
for environmental law and sustainable resource
management everywhere are free to express themselves
and protected against possible attacks. Lastly, we
must support the tools of preventive diplomacy in
the management of natural resources, such as the
Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary
Watercourses and International Lakes.

follow-up and transparency capacities. I would also like
to laud the valuable contribution made by mechanisms
for the certification and follow-up of commodities,
such as the one for diamonds created by the Kimberley
process, whose chairmanship is held this year by the
European Union. We would like to see the gold sector
also be subject to a certification framework, in the same
spirit of cooperation between public and private actors.

My second point is about crisis management. When
a conflict breaks out, the revenues generated by the
illegal exploitation of resources can help it to spread
or persist. The Libyan crisis is a good example of
that. The predations of the country’s natural resources
have encouraged many actors to maintain the status
quo rather than back the political transition process
proposed by Special Representative Ghassan Salamé
and supported by the Council. That is also very clear in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic, in the predatory activities of armed
groups. In all those crises, the war economy is also a
lopsided economy that adversely affects the people in
two ways — they are deprived of the resources they need
for development and they are the primary victims of the
continuing conflict. Difficulties in accessing energy
and natural resources during conflicts are also a factor
in increases in sexual and gender-based violence. For
example, women sometimes have to expose themselves
to intolerable violence in order to bring home water and
essential supplies. South Sudan is a particularly serious
example in this respect.

My third and final point relates to post-conflict
situations, which also require determined action on
our part. Here security-sector reform poses a crucial
challenge. In order to prevent and combat the illicit
exploitation of natural resources in the long term,
we must enhance both the operational effectiveness
of the security forces and their transparency and
accountability, focusing on this issue in the mandates
adopted or renewed by the Council. In addition, when
private service providers are charged by the extractive
sector with providing site security, regulations must be
in place that will ensure their professionalism and their
coordination with the public authorities.

In addition, women’s inequitable access to
resources hampers not only their empowerment but
also the development of the countries concerned. It is
therefore our duty to address this issue, as it is a factor
in the perpetuation of crises. This we do when we adopt
sanctions, in particular when we establish designation
criteria linked to the exploitation of natural resources,
such as the mechanisms established in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the Central African
Republic. We can and must do more in this area, in
particular by ensuring that we recruit specialized
experts and by encouraging them to update the local
and international intermediary networks that make
such traffic possible.
Beyond Council action, the recommendation tools
set up by the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development to encourage multinational companies
to adopt a responsible attitude are also very useful. Of
course, this responsibility is generally based on central

Peacekeeping operations can help host countries to
strengthen the rule of law and, in so doing, contribute
to creating a climate that is conducive to a rational and
legal exploitation of natural resources that also takes
into account the interest of the population. They will
help the host country to exercise its sovereignty in this
area as well. In that respect, we must also ensure that
the conduct of United Nations staff is beyond reproach.
In post-conflict situations, land and land ownership
issues are also very important, as we can see in Darfur.
They are key factors in enabling the return of displaced
persons and preventing the resurgence of conflict.
Conflict prevention also involves recognizing and
securing existing and determined property and usage
rights, regardless of their origin or nature. We must pay
particular attention to ensuring that the land rights of
women are upheld, including in post-conflict situations.
Finally, I wish to underline the important role
played by the Peacebuilding Commission with respect to
countries in post-conflict situations that are dependent
on natural resources. It provides an indispensable
framework for bringing together all the components of
the United Nations system and international financial
institutions and for promoting best practices.
In the face of such a complex challenge, mobilization
is vital across the board so that natural resources can
become a driver of sustainable development rather than

18-3223617/20

S/PV.8372

Maintenance of international peace and security

fuel for current and future crises. Mr. President, you
can rest assured of France’s resolute commitment in
this respect.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Like other colleagues,
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having brought
this subject back to the Security Council’s attention. I
think that we have heard a lot of common themes today.
While natural resources often bring great benefits to
a country, they can also contribute to the outbreak of
conflict and feed the conflict cycle. We have already
heard from other speakers that at least 40 per cent of all
intra-State conflicts in the past 60 years have had a link
to natural resources, according to the United Nations.
Natural assets that ought to drive domestic economic
growth all too often can be subverted and diverted. In
Iraq, we have seen how Da’esh used oil resources to
fund its campaign of terror. In Libya, competition for
control of oil resources remains one of the key drivers
of conflict. The trade in diamonds has driven conflicts
in countries such as Angola, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Liberia and Sierra Leone. I was very
interested in what our colleague from Côte d’Ivoire
said about the total cost of this being something like
$50 billion per year, exceeding aid budgets. That is a
very telling figure.
Conversely, resolving disputes over control of
natural resources can be a central pillar of peace
processes. For example, oil was a crucial element of
the peace agreement between Sudan and South Sudan.
Beyond oil and diamonds, conflict over land and
water resources is a growing risk. Population growth
and climate change — and I wish once again to thank
the Swedes for their excellent presidency debate on
this issue (see S/PV.8307) — threaten to increase
competition for natural resources and hence the risk
of conflict. Sustainable Development Goal 12 calls
for responsible consumption and production, which is
integral to reducing the risk of conflict and achieving a
sustainable peace.

16/10/2018

has imposed sanctions on the trade in diamonds in
Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Sierra Leone, and timber, for example, in Liberia.
Calibrated sanctions on trading charcoal from Somalia,
oil from Libya and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and the absolute prohibition of the oil trade
with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham all have
helped curtail the ability of spoilers to destabilize
already fragile situations. But the success of these
sanctions regimes, and hence our ability to mitigate or
prevent conflict, relies on implementation by not only
all Council members but also all of the other States
Members of the United Nations.
In United Nations peace operations, our responses
should be tailored to the context. We need to pay attention
to the underlying causes of conflict, including, where
relevant, to support countries in overcoming issues
pertaining to the nexus between natural resources
and conflict. That said, I just wanted to respond
briefly to what the Russian representative said. Not all
interventions are driven by negative motivations. It is
important that the Council and countries be ready to
address crimes against humanity. It is important that
they be ready to address grave human rights abuses and
important that we be ready to address the imminence
of overwhelming humanitarian catastrophes. So I just
want to place on record that we reject his descriptions
of why Western interventions have been made over the
past years.

National responses have, unfortunately, proved
insufficient in tackling such complex challenges. We
believe that a multilateral approach is critical and needs
to be based on international cooperation and respect
for the rules-based international system, including the
relevant parts of international law.

A number of speakers also mentioned the Council’s
recent visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We heard how the illegal exploitation of mineral
resources by armed militias in the eastern part of the
country is fuelling conflict and imposing suffering on
the civilian population. The value of goods smuggled
across the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
border exceeds that of formal trade, with gold the most
valuable component. So I was very interested in the
ideas that the French representative put forward about
including gold in an enhanced regime. If we are to end
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we need to see an end to the smuggling of mineral
resources. We support the role of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in helping the Government to
address that.

A number of speakers mentioned sanction regimes,
which can provide a useful tool for tackling the role of
natural resources in perpetuating conflict. The Council

We believe that we can also do more to identify and
address risks related to natural resources in conflict
through early warning systems and efforts to support

18/20

18-32236

16/10/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

countries to alleviate potential triggers. We very much
appreciate the work of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development in this respect. I share
the French approbation of the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative. There are also some other
ideas that we believe are well worth exploring. Sweden
had ideas around tax and audit and tackling organized
crime, and China had an interesting idea around using
the Peacebuilding Commission. We would be very
willing to work with colleagues on the Council to try
and advance such instruments.
The Kimberley Process was also raised. The
United Kingdom is proud to be a founding member
of the Kimberley Process, and we support the current
reform process, designed to make the framework
even more effective. In addition to the Process, the
United Kingdom is committed to strengthening the
international framework for regulation of the trade in
minerals linked to conflict. I would like to highlight
the mining and trading of tin, tantalum, tungsten and,
as I have already mentioned, gold. These minerals are
key components for modern technology. Under the
right conditions, the mining of such minerals can build
both prosperity and security for local communities. But
otherwise, we end up with deplorable practices — from
human rights abuses to the illicit financing of conflict.
We want to help to address such issues. We
believe that we should be encouraging compliance
with the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible
Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected
and High-Risk Areas. Implementation of this guidance
becomes mandatory for the largest importers in the
European Union in January 2021, and I can assure the
Council that, even after Brexit, the United Kingdom
will remain committed to this regulation. We also
support the European Partnership for Responsible
Minerals, which is a multi-stakeholder initiative
comprised of Governments, civil society and the private
sector. The Partnership is recognized by the European
Union (EU) as an official accompanying measure to the
EU regulation.
In conclusion, the role of the Council in tackling
the problem of natural resources as a cause of conflict
continues to be a very important instrument, which we
should ensure that we use to the full.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank the Bolivian
presidency of the Security Council and Secretary-

S/PV. 8372

General Guterres as briefer for drawing our attention
to how natural resources have led to intense conflicts,
political unrest and even the overthrow of Governments
and to the urgent need to take action to maintain not
only regional but also international peace and security.
As a Central Asian State, we express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for including
in his briefing the comment that our part of the world
stands as a good example of progress being achieved
through consultations among neighbouring States
with the support of the United Nations. As a member
observer of the African Union (AU), we fully support
and associate ourselves with the statement made by
the representative of Côte d’Ivoire on behalf of the
African troika. In that regard, we underline the crucial
importance of the Arria formula meeting on silencing
the guns in Africa and on how the AU partnership can
contribute to a continent free of conflict, to be convened
on 19 October under the sponsorship of nine Council
members, including Kazakhstan. We also emphasize
the significance of our President’s initiative on building
a world free of violent conflicts by the United Nations
centenary in 2045, as mentioned in the presidential
statement adopted in January (S/PRST/2018/1).
In modern international relations, the lack or
abundance of natural resources — food, water, energy,
oil and minerals — has taken a high human toll and
prolonged tensions through the illegal exploitation
of and trafficking in natural resources as well as
their illicit trade, which are exacerbated not only
by Governments but also by extractive industries of
foreign or multinational origin, wealthy exploiters and
even armed groups and militias to the detriment of
local populations, as well as causing dire humanitarian
consequences. Natural resources often lie at the heart
of wars and civil unrest. The growing scarcity of
resources can become an increasingly serious problem
in the coming decades. In addition, the potential
consequences of climate change for water availability,
food security, the prevalence of disease, coastal
boundaries and population distribution may aggravate
existing tensions and generate new conflicts. The high
demand for energy carriers to serve an expanding global
population of more than 9 billion people by 2050 may
raise the issue of accessibility to global energy supplies.
Such a situation may provoke tensions between States,
which will inevitably keep our world from becoming
a better and safer place for succeeding generations, as
evoked by the Charter of the United Nations.

18-3223619/20

S/PV.8372

Maintenance of international peace and security

The exploitation of natural resources must be
accompanied by increased capacity-building of
populations and contribute to the development of
the economy in general. Otherwise, it will lead to
the impoverishment of populations and the struggle
for control over resources as a means of profit. This
perspective applies to both local and foreign companies.
In this context, Kazakhstan is a good example of a
responsible State. Because we have sovereignty over
our natural resources, we attract foreign investors on
mutually beneficial terms and diversify the economy
to fully meet the needs of the population. Changing
this equitable paradigm would lead to instability
and conflict.
As mentioned today by the Secretary-General,
and according to the United Nations Environment
Programme, more than 40 per cent of internal
conflicts over the past 60 years have been linked to
the exploitation of natural resources. In this vein,
Kazakhstan views energy security as an instrumental
factor in international stability. In our opinion, there
are numerous and complex factors, including political,
social and economic aspects, that remain key drivers
of conflict. Natural resources alone are not the only
determinant in the sorrowful equation of war and
conflicts on the one hand and people’s lives on the other.
The dispute over the control of natural resources has
always been on the international agenda. The advantage
we have today, in comparison to past millenniums, is
the United Nations.
My country strongly advocates respect for the
sovereignty of States over their natural resources, which
is of crucial importance for the African continent,
above all, as we witnessed during our recent visit to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, since
the international community is also concerned by
environmental degradation and the illegal exploitation
of natural resources, a coordinated global approach is
also required. Member States, together with the United
Nations, must be at the forefront of the preservation of
peace and the fair use of natural resources under the
pillars of the United Nations — peace and security,
sustainable development, humanitarian action —and
in accordance with international law. We need to

20/20

16/10/2018

catalyse new thinking, reform and processes in each of
the pillars, which, together with technical analysis and
capacity-building, could become self-sustaining, and
which partners and beneficiaries could scale up.
As with sustainable development generally,
addressing issues of natural resources also requires
a collective management system. This point was
stressed in the high-level independent reports on
peace operations and the peacebuilding architecture.
Nowadays, contributing to the conservation of natural
resources is an important part of the mandates of
peacekeeping operations. We therefore support the
wise vision that win-win solutions to today’s conflicts
should be found through development.
It is also highly necessary today to strengthen
coordination among United Nations specialized
agencies and programmes so as to render their work
more efficient and practical and help them improve
State mechanisms for managing natural resources
in countries affected by conflict. The capacity of the
United Nations to provide technical information on
the status of natural resources and the environment, as
well as to make recommendations on their sustainable
use during mediation processes, should be further
strengthened.
Since we have only one planet, we think that, as an
integral part of its peacekeeping mandate, the Security
Council needs to address the issue of natural resources
and environmental impacts in the light of their great
potential for fuelling conflicts. Environmental
issues can therefore serve as an effective platform or
catalyst for enhancing dialogue, building confidence,
taking advantage of shared interests and broadening
cooperation between divided groups, as well as
among States.
Finally, we must always remember that it is people
who are vulnerable and who suffer disproportionately
in conflicts of any size or of any cause. International
impunity nurtures this problem. Kazakhstan believes
that a more equitable and balanced global partnership
will provide a solid foundation for overall sustainable
peace and development.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

18-32236
