II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

12. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
the records of the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly relating to the Agency's activities.
52nd plenary meeting
I I November 1981

36/26.

Admission of Antigua and Barbuda to membership in the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 10 November 1981 that Antigua and Barbuda
should be admitted to membership in the United Nations, 21
Having considered the application for membership of
Antigua and Barbuda, 22
Decides to admit Antigua and Barbuda to membership
in the United Nations.
53rd plenary meeting
I I November 1981

36/27.

Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave consequences
for the established international system concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace and security

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled ·'Armed Israeli
aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its
grave consequences for the established international system
concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace and
security" ,
Expressing its deep alarm over the unprecedented Israeli
act of aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations on
7 June 1981, which created a grave threat to international
peace and security,
Recalling its resolutions 33/71 A of 14 December I 978
concerning military and nuclear collaboration with Israel
and 34/89 of 11 December 1979 on Israeli nuclear armament,
Further recalling Security Council resolution 487 ( 1981)
of 19 June 1981 and noting with concern Israel's refusal to
comply with that resolution,
Taking note of the resolution adopted on 12 June 1981
by the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency 23 and of resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381 adopted
on 26 September 1981 by the General Conference of the
Agency, in which the Conference, inter alia, considered
that the Israeli act of aggression constituted an attack against
the Agency and its safeguards regime and decided to suspend
the provision of any assistance to Israel,
Fully aware of the fact that Iraq, being a party to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 24 has
subscribed to the International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards regime, and that the Agency has testified that these
safeguards have been satisfactorily applied.
Noting with concern that Israel has refused to adhere to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
21
Official Records of the General Assembh. Thirtv-sixth Session. Annexes, agenda item 20, document A/36/666. ·
·
22
Ibid., document A/36/642-S/14742.
23
See GC (XXV)/643.
24
Resolution 2373 (XXII I, annex.

17

and, in spite of repeated calls, including that of the Security
Council. to place its nuclear facilities under International
Atomic Energy Agency safeguards,
Alarmed by the increasing information and evidence regarding Israel's activities aiming at the acquisition and development of nuclear weapons,
Gravely concerned over the misuse by Israel, in committing its acts of aggression against Arab countries, of
aircraft and weapons supplied by the United States of
America.
Condemning the Israeli threats to repeat such attacks on
nuclear installations if and when it deems it necessary,
Affirming the inalienable sovereign right of all States to
develop technological and nuclear programmes for peaceful
purposes, in accordance with the internationally accepted
objectives of preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons,
I. Strongly condemns Israel for its premeditated and
unprecedented act of aggression in violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and the norms of international conduct, which constitutes a new and dangerous escalation in
the threat to international peace and security;
2. Issues a solemn warning to Israel to cease its threats
and the commission of such armed attacks against nuclear
facilities;
3. Reiterates its call to all States to cease forthwith any
provision to Israel of arms and related material of all types
which enable it to commit acts of aggression against other
States;
4. Requests the Security Council to investigate Israel's
nuclear activities and the collaboration of other States and
parties in those activities;
5. Reiterates its request to the Security Council to institute effective enforcement action to prevent Israel from
further endangering international peace and security through
its acts of aggression and continued policies of expansion,
occupation and annexation;
6. Demands that Israel, in view of its international responsibility for its act of aggression, pay prompt and adequate compensation for the material damage and loss of life
suffered as a result of that act;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member
States and the Security Council informed of progress towards the implementation of the present resolution and to
submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Armed Israeli
aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its
grave consequences for the established international system
concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace and
security'·.
56th plenary meeting
13 November 1981

36/34.

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications
for international peace and security

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and
security'·.
Recalling its resolutions ES-6/2 of 14 January 1980 and
35/37 of 20 November 1980, adopted at the sixth emergency
special session and the thirty-fifth session respectively,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the obligation of all States to refrain
