THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

10 NOVEMBER

1978

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. . .. . . . . ,. . . . . .. , . . .. . .. .

1

. . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . . . .. . . . .. . . ..

1

The situation in Namibia:
(a) Report
of the Secretary-General
submitted
pursuant to paragraph 7 of
Security Council resolution 435 (1978) (S/12903);
fbl Letter dated 24 October 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Burundi
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12906)
. . . . .._.....................,..,._....,.....

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2097/Rev.

Adoption

of the agenda

1)

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Officiul Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2097th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 10 November
&-&dent:

Mr. Leon N’DONG (Gabon).

1978, at 3 p.m.

Mr, KOttWtina
(Yugoslavia) and Miss Konie (Zambia) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2092nd meeting,
I invite the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia and the delegation of the Council to be seated at
the Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2097/Rev.l)

At the invitation of the President, Miss Konie (President
the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.

of

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution
435 (1978) (S/12903);
(b) Letter dated 24 October 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Burundi to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2906)

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2092nd meeting,
I invite Mr. Curirab to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gurirab (Permanent Observer of the South West Africa People’s
Grganization) took a place at the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): Members of the Council have before them the following
documents: S/12922, containing the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Gabon, India, Kuwait and Nigeria,
and S/12916, containing the text of a letter dated
7 November from the representative of Mongolia to the
Secretary-General,

The meeting was called to order at 5 p. m
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
(a) Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to
paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution 435 (1978)
(S/12963);
(6) Letter dated 24 October 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Burundi to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12906)

5. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Permit me first of
all to congratulate you, Mr. President, upon your assump
tion of the important and responsible post of President of
the Security Council for this month, when the Council is
considering the important and timely problem of ensuring
the right to self-determination and independence of one
more African people fighting for its liberation. I should also
like to express my gratitude to your predecessor in the post
of President, the representative of France, Mr. Leprette,
who so skilfully and with such consistency conducted the
proceedings of the Council in October.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings of
the Council, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Bangladesh, Benin, Burundi, Cuba, Egypt, Ghana, Guyana,
Mozambique, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Yugoslavia and
Zambia to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

6. The question of the situation in Namibia has been
discussed a number of times in the Security Council.
However, it would be no exaggeration to say that at the
present time consideration of this question has now entered
a decisive phase.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bouayad-Agha
(Algeria), Mr. Huq (Bangladesh), Mr. Houngavou (Benin),
Mr. Simbananiye (Burundi),
Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba),
Mr. Abdd
Meguid
(Egypt),
Mr. Boaten
(Ghana),
(Mozambique),
Mr. Lobo
Mr. Sinclair
(Guyana),
Mr. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia)
Mr. Hussen (Somalia),

7. The people of Namibia have experienced some very
gruelling
ordeals. A mighty wave of the national kberation
movement has rolled across the African continent and
1

readiness to take part in talks and renounce continuation of
the national liberation struggle against colonial and neocolonial oppression.

swept away the former large colonial empires, and only in
southern Africa do we find continuing preservation of the
bulwark of racism and colonialism in their most cruel and
repugnant forms. So far, the racist regime of Pretoria,
disregarding the numerous decisions of the United Nations,
has been keeping under its colonialist heel the indigenous
population of Namibia, has been attempting to suppress by
armed force that country’s struggle for national liberation
and has been imposing harsh repression upon its patriotic
organizations. In the Security Council and other organs of
the United Nations much evidence has been repeatedly
adduced to show that behind the racist rCgime of Pretoria,
h its effort to perpetuate the illegal occupation of Namibia,
stand influential international monopolistic circles that
have a vital interest in the continuing unhindered exploitation of the whole of that part of Africa.

Il. The Soviet delegation has repeatedly pointed out the
futility and danger of the policy of giving in to the
colonialists and racists, stressing the need to apply the
sanctions provided for under the Charter of the United
Nations in order to compel the Pretoria regime to grant
independence to the people of Namibia. Nevertheless, the
Soviet Union has found it possible not to object to the
adoption by the Council of proposals designed to bring
about agreement with South Africa regarding the holding of
elections in Namibia under the supervision of the United
Nations, although in this regard the Soviet delegation did
express considerable misgivings about the outcome if this
plan was adopted. Events have confirmed the worst
forebodings of all those who shared these misgivings.

8. In recent years the national liberation struggle of the
people of Namibia has achieved considerable success. That
sturggle has been headed by the true patriots of Namibia,
who are members of the South West Africa People’s
Organization (SWAPO), which enjoys considerable authority both inside the country and well beyond its confines,
and has earned the well-deserved recognition from the
Organization of African Unity and the United Nations as
the sole and genuine representative of the people of
Namibia. SWAP0 consistently defends the interests of the
Namibian people in their valorous struggle against the
South African occupiers and represents them in the
international arena. The success of the national liberation
struggle of the Nambian people under the leadership of
SWAP0 has compelled the authorities of South Africa and
their protectors in the West to look for new ways of
preserving colonial domination in Namibia for the purpose
of continuing their inhumane explbitation of the indigenous population and of the natural resources of that
country.

12. Apparently the Pretoria authorities in their talks with
the Western Powers have never considered seriously the
question of granting independence to Namibia. Clearly they
have been counting on the understanding and sympathy of
their partners in the “dialogue”. Typically, the Prime
Minister of South Africa, Mr. Botha, in his statement to the
Foreign Ministers of the five Western Powers stated:
“The ideals for which the West stands-and I refer
especially to those democratic principles of individual and
political freedom-are as dear to us in South Africa as
they are to YOU.” [S/12900, annex I.]
It would appear, therefore, no accident that the South
African racist wanted to stress what the racist system of
apartheid
had in common with the Western world. One and
one-half years of talks and manoeuvring around the Western
plan for a Namibian settlement have allowed the South
African authorities to gain the time necessary for them to
prepare and to put into effect their neo-colonialist solution
to the Namibian problem-the holding of rigged elections
for the purpose of establishing a puppet Government.

9. About three years ago the Security Council adopted
unanimously resolution 385 (1976), which provides for
enabling the people of Namibia freely to determine their
own future by means of free elections throughout Namibia
under the supervision and control of the United Nations. It
would appear that the Council enjoys under the Charter the
necessary powers to put into effect that decision which it
adopted. However, the Western Powers ,members of the
Council, although they supported the decision to hold
elections in Namibia under the control of the United
Nations, in fact have not evinced any serious intention of
using the means at their disposal to oblige the Pretoria
authorities to put into practice that decision. On various
pretexts they have for a considerable period of time been
holding up the implementation of resolution 385 (197(j),
and have not permitted the Council to take effective
measures against the Pretoria r6gime.

13. Now, when the time has come for taking stock of the
policy of the new approach to African problems, clearly
this policy has led to the most unfavourable consequences
for the people of Namibia. In essence, it has served as
camouflage for the preparation by the South African
authorities of an “internal settlement” in Namibia, the true
purpose of which is the preservation of the old system of
colonial and racist domination by South Africa under the
renewed neo-colonialist label.
14. It is true that the authors of this highly publicized
plan of the five Western Powers have asserted that they
wanted to avert the holding of these sham elections but
were unable to do so. However, who is now hindering or
has been hindering them from making use of the existing
possibitities of applying sanctions against South Africa
under Chapter VII of the Charter to impede this dangerous
development of events?

10. Various kinds of plans have appeared designed, we are
told, to prevail upon the Pretoria rdgime to agree to the
voluntary transfer of power to the people of Namibia. At
the same time, in the Security Council and outside it, we
have heard various statements about the beginning of a
“new policy” toward African problems, about the intention
to take into account the interests and aspirations of the
African peoples if they for their part demonstrate a

15. No one should be misled by statements to the effect
that it would be possible to carry out free elections in
Namibia under United Nations control even after the
2

,

,I”

.

.

establishment there of a puppet Government. If the
Pretoria rigime now refuses to hand over power in Namibia
to the true representatives of the Namibian people, the
South African racists will simply be in a much better
position, after the carrying into effect of the “internal
settlement” plan, to disregard the decisions of the United
Nations.

the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ahtisaari,--with the greatest respect for his diplomatic
skills-would lead to results which proved unattainable for
the Foreign Ministers of five Western Powers?
20. We are logically compelled to the conclusion that all
the talk about new efforts are designed solely to delay
matters and to present the United Nations with a fait
accompli. Surely there is an already prepared scenario
whereby the South African authorities, after holding their
sham elections in Namibia and setting up a puppet
government there, will then be able to state that henceforth
the Security Council will have to deal, not with South
Africa, but with a so-called independent Namibia and its
so-called sovereign government. And would not the head of
that puppet government receive an invitation to visit
Washington, just as quite recently Smith was invited there?

16. The prospect of the further development of events in
Namibia has been clearly shown in the telegram of 23
October from the President of SWAPO, Sam Nujoma, to
the SecretalyGeneral, which States:
“It is clear in the mind of every Namibian patriot that
the Pretoria rCgime intends to create a puppet regime in
Namibia through bogus elections in December; such a
regime will certainly be manipulated and controlled from
Pretoria. There is no doubt that such a puppet regime
would ask South Africa to maintain in Namibia its
repressive armed forces to continue to suppress the
Namibian people’s resistance against oppression, foreign
domination and exploitation. . . . The United Nations
should not allow itself to be used by the Pretoria racist
rigime to legitimize its evil intentions and illegal acts to
impose a neo-colonial solution against the interests of the
Namibian people.“/S/12913, annex.]

21. It is clear to all that the time for persuasion has passed
and that the moment has now come for decisive and
effective action. The overwhelming majority of speakers in
the Security Council have expressed themselves in favour of
the immediate application of sanctions against South Africa
under Chapter VII of the Charter because of its refusal to
comply with the binding decisions of the Council on the
granting of independence to Namibia. The Soviet delegation
supports that proposal and is in favour of immediately
taking a decision on this. Statements to the effect that that
proposal should not be put to the vote since it will present
difficulties for certain States are, in our view, all just part of
the manoeuvring designed to delay the work of the Council
and win time for the holding of rigged elections in Namibia.

17. We all know what the “internal settlement” in
Rhodesia led to. Initially the Western Powers assured us
that they would have nothing to do with the illegal regime
at Salisbury. But six months went by and the doors of
Washington were thrown open to the rebel Ian Smith, and
he began to dictate his demands while his troops were
carrying out aggressive attacks on neighbouring African
States. We should not doubt that the implementation of a
settlement in Namibia along the lines planned would
considerably complicate the task of ensuring the genuine
independence of that country and would cause a serious
exacerbation of the situation throughout the region.

22. The Soviet delegation has been consistently in favour
of the immediate exercise by the people of Namibia of its
inalienable right to self-determination and genuine independence on the basis of respect for the unity and territorial
integrity of that country. We are convinced that in order to
attain that goal an end must be put to the economic and
other kinds of co-operation with South Africa and that
there must be established political and diplomatic isolation
for the racist r&me of Pretoria. Now a decisive moment
has come for the adoption in connexion with the situation
in Namibia of action under Chapter VII of the Charter, and
the Soviet delegation calls upon the Security Council to do
its duty towards the people of Namibia and to the whole
world community.

18. Many representatives have pointed out quite rightly
that the present situation in southern Africa is fraught with
the most serious danger to international peace and security.
As was stressed, for example, by the representative of
Mauritius [209,&d meeting], we have witnessed the beginning of a permanent war in southern Africa which will
inevitably spread to other parts of the continent. The other
day the Government of Angola drew the attention of
Member States (s/12917/
to the new aggressive plans of
the Pretoria rigime which intends to use the Territory of
Namibia to attack Angola in order to prevent that country
from moving towards social reforms. It is clear that those
who oppose the adoption by the Security Council of
effective measures to avert this threat are acting in a way
detrimental to the interests of African peoples and the
strengthening of peace in Africa and throughout the world.

23. Mr. CARP10 CASTILLO (Venezuela) (interpretation

from Spani&): My delegation wishes to express its satisfactjon at seeing you, Sir, occupying the presidency during this
month of November. Venezuela and Gabon maintain the
closest co-operation and association, and we have worked
together to strengthen an organization like the OrganiZatiOn
of Petroleum Exporting Countries which has played and
continues to play an important historical role in the new
international co-operation schemes aimed at the achievement of a new international order and a new system of
relations based on justice and equity. We pledge You our
co-operation and wish you every success in the performance
of your functions.

19. We fail to understand how in the circumstances it iS
possible to favour the holding of any further consultations
with the South African authorities and to expect that they
will see reason and voluntarily agree to grant Namibia
genuine independence after so many years of stubborn
refusal to do so. Can we seriously place any hope in the
idea that talks between the South African authorities and

24. At the same time, we wish to express our gratitude to
Ambassador Jacques Leprette for the effiCienCY and firm3

ness, as well as lucidity,
debates last month.

all, because we regarded it as the product of serious
negotiation between the parties and therefore as a cornpro.
mise between the desirable and the feasible; secondly,
because we were assured that it had been very carefully
thought out and the sincerity and stature of its proponents
offered us, in our view, the most honourable of guarantees;
finally, because we believed, and we still believe, that a
peaceful, orderly transition with all its failings and limitations, is preferable to solutions of violence and of armed
struggle.

with which he conducted our

25. The Security Council is meeting yet again to deal with
the question of Namibia and the unlawful acts of the racist
Government of South Africa in that international Territory.
On this occasion those actions are fraught with dire
consequences both for peace and security in that region of
the world and for the prestige and credibility of the United
Nations.

31. The premeditated deception reveals yet again the true
face of the South African regime, whose arrogance has been
stimulated by the courteous treatment that regime has
received up to now, which almost turns leniency into
compromising complicity.

26. In his report the Secretary-General stated:
“The Foreign Ministers of the five Governments concerned, namely Canada, the Federal Republic of Germany, France, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America, held
discussions at Pretoria from 16 to 18 October 1978 with
the Government of the Republic of South Africa in
regard to the implementation of resolution 435 (1978).
Texts of official communications issued after these
discussions have been circulated as documents S/12900
and S/12902.“[S/12903,
para. IO.]

32. While on earlier occasions, as in the case of resolution
418 (1977), we have adopted measures condemning South
Africa’s attitude, on this occasion we believe with greater
conviction than ever that we must take the exceptional
measures contemplated in the Charter, because of that
country’s defiant attitude of the will of the people of
Namibia which endangers international peace and security.

In other words, South Africa’s reply is contained in those
documents. It is the same reply that the Secretary-General
would have received through his Special Representative had
the latter journeyed to Namibia or Pretoria. For that reason
my delegation does not consider a further visit by the
Special Representative to be advisable, since South Africa’s
reply, we repeat, is contained in that joint statement. In
those circumstances the visit could well be interpreted as an
acceptance of the electoral farce fabricated by South
Africa.

33. The Council adopted resolution 216 (1965) condemning the unilateral declaration of independence procIaimed
by a racist minority in Southern Rhodesia and imposed
sanctions against that regime under resolution 253 (1968)
in view of the prevailing situation in that colonial Territory,
brought about by a group of rebels against the colonial
Power. Namibia is an international Territory, but in the
case of Southern Rhodesia it was the United Kingdom
which was exercising its power over the Territory. We recall
these facts because if those sanctions were applied against
the Smith regime for rebelling against a single country, we
faiI to understand what arguments could be used not to
apply sanctions against South Africa, which has challenged
and defied the whole of the international community,
legally represented by the United Nations and in particular
by the Security Council.

27. South Africa’s decision to organize electoral proceedings in Namibia without United Nations supervision represents a heavy blow to and a defiance of its authority in the
international Territory. Consequently, anything done in
that Territory without the supervision of the United
Nations as the representative of the international community must be regarded as null and void,

34. Finally, my delegation is ready to vote in favour of
any draft resolution which embodies the elements included
in our statement.

28. The fundamental principles which are at the very root
of civiltied coexistence, and among which is to be found the
principle of self-determination of peoples expressed
through democratic elections, are being shamefully flouted
in Namibia. This unilateral action by South Africa is but
the last act in that country’s defiance of the United Nations
and the culmination of successive violations for which no
adequate remedies have yet been found.

35. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I have
no other speakers on the list and I should like now in my
capacity as representative of GABON to make a general
statement.
36. If there is one problem which has truly aroused the
concern of the international community since 1946 and
given rise to the greatest number of resolutions and
decisions in the United Nations, it is the question of
Namibia. Yet today, while the world has awaited and
continues to await a happy outcome of this thorny problem
following the adoption by the Council of resolution
435 (1978), the only ideal framework combining all the
elements of a peaceful settlement, the Council is compelled
yet again to deal with this distressing question of Namibia.
It must do so because the dynamics of peace triggered by
the adoption of resolution 435 (1978) have been brutaIly
brought to a halt and the effective and strict implementa-

29. Now we must not only apply sanctions or effective
measures to punish South Africa’s insolence; now it is a
question of determining whether the United Nations will
abandon Namibia to its own fate or, rather, to its own
misfortune. It is now a question of determining whether the
United Nations is powerless to act in the face of such an
affront, or whether this opportunity should be taken to
strengthen its prestige and credibility.
30. When my delegation voted in favour of the plan
submitted by the five Western countries members of the
Security Council it did so for a number of reasons: first of
4

tion of that resolution has, ipso sacto, been
put
Off
indefinitely, and also because of South Africa’s
contempt”
UOUsrejection of the Secretary-General’s plan.
37. In the light of this new negative and provocative
attitude by Pretoria which destroys any prospects
of m
of
the
internationally
acceptable peaceful settlement
Namibia problem, and which once again constitutes
a
challenge we cannot ignore and a threat to international
peace and security not only for the region but for the entire
world, the five Western countries members of the Council
have found nothing better to do than to change the spirit
and letter of resolution 435 (1978) in the sense desired
bY
Pretoria in order to help it to save face,
38. In fact, the elements to be found in the
joint
statement of 19 October by the Government
of South
Africa and the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of the five
Westem Countries [S/12900, annex IIJ create a situation so
new as to turn the statementinto a flagrant contradiction
of the plan and explanatory statementof the SecretaryGeneraladopted by the Counciland thus binding on it. It is
difficult for my delegation, therefore, to accept
such
proposalsarrived at outside the framework laid down by
resolution 435 (1978), which is the basicdocument
for the
true and effective decolonizationof Namibia.
39. My delegation believesthat the five Western countries
shouldhave brought all their weight to bear in negotiating
with South Africa on the ways andmeansof implementing
the Secretary-General’splan immediately, all the more SO
sincethey explicitly recognizedin this very chamber that
the plan adopted by the Council wasin keeping with their
proposals.My delegation,to its great regret, is bound to
note that this has been neither their approach nor their
concern.
40. On the contrary, the five Westerncountries hastened
to meet all South Africa’s demands,forgetting
that they
had denied SWAP0 the possibility of amending the report
of the Secretary-Generalwhen it wasbefore the Council for
discussion,by arguing that any amendment to that plan
would undoubtedly create a new situation likely
to call
everything into question.Wenote that this logic to which
we bowed in the long run, has not been carried
to its
natural conclusion since what wasdenied SWAP0
appears
to have been granted to South Africa with respect to a
document that wasin fact final and official.

42. The holding shortly of unilateral elections in Narnihii’*
despite the relevant resolutions of the United Natiorls’.-i”
particular resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978)~ is a
further repetition of Pretoria’s persistent and urrlj~‘t
defiance of the Security Council and of worlcf Pul)lic
opinion. It radically undermines the entire contc*t of tho
plan of the Secretary-General. Thus, mY delega*i*n wil1
categorically oppose the organization arlcl JK~ldillg Of WCll
elections,regardlessof their purposes and motives. True, WC
have been told that thesesham elections are regarded asan
internal processof designationof leaders. But wllut would
those leaders do? They would be leaders in the PaY of
Pretoria who would govern Namibia in the interests of and
to safeguardSouth Africa’s selfish interests.
43. What is most gallingis that we were not told that after
4 Decemberthose with whom the United Nations nlust dca1
would be those who are elected and that any Ch:lrlf$ in tllc
legal position of Namibia would depend on their gOUc1wil1.
This assertion is to bc found in paragraph 4 u,f the joint
statementof 19 October, and I quote:
“The South African Government will thereafter USC its
best efforts to persuadethem seriously to COllSider ways
and meansof achievinginternational recognition” /ibid/.
In a statement.to the press,Mr. Uotha, the South ATricnn
Minister for Foreign Affairs, did not fail to say that he W:IS
not certain that he could convince those leaders who may
be elected on 4 December.This statement is quite clear. It
tends to prove that Pretoria opted in favour of an internill
settlement, as happenedin Zimbabwe, where the African
group in power is the one most radically opposed to the
organization of an expanded conference as requested by the
Governmentsof the United States and the United Kingdom,
Such a situation is symptomatic and indicative of what
would happen were the Security Council to agree to the
holding of the unilateral elections on 4 Deccmbcr,
44. South Africa at presentoffers no guarantee us proof of
its good faith. Everything will depend on the goodwill of
those who are elected. All these dilatory and fr&ulent
tactics GUI therefore be seento have but one ain1 ulld t1wt is
to present us with a fait accompli, thus bypnssing the
Council plan in order to enable Pretoria to elu& international pressuresand extricate itself from the Namibian
hornet’s nest by placingits lackeys in positions of authority
while preserving its interest and privileges, So~~t1~Africa
wodd thus rebuild around its borders tile security
1)c1t
which had crumbled following the collapse of tile Porluguesecolonial empire in southern Africa.

41. With regard to the unilateral elections of 4 December,
the avowed purposeof which is to designate local leaders,
my delegation is of the opinion that the holding
of such
elections will undoubtedly endorse the appointment
of
leadersof an independentNamibiawithin the framework of
an internal settlement which was diabolically forged long
ago by the pitiful Pretoria r&me and which excludes one
of the most important components in the Namibian
equation, namely SWAPO. True, authorized voices have
spoken out to condemn and declare null and void the
elections of 4 December.Theseare empty condemnations
to which we have becomeaccustomedand which no longer
deceive us, since it is those samevoices which oppose an
effective condemnationof the South African Government
by United Nations bodies.

45. All these manoeuvresshould destroy the last illusions
of those who still believe in the good faith of Pretoria. My
delegation categorically rejects these alleged internal clcctions and hopes that all members of the Council will share
this position and demandthat South Africa should abandon
thoseelections.
46. In the face of all these conditions so dallgerous for
international peaceand security, the Security Council must
face its heavy responsibilitiesand take another step on the
sanctions ladder. It must show itself to be firm and
consistentwith its own resolutions, in particular resolutions
5

385 (1976), 431 (1978)
and 435 (1978).
By adopting
resolution 435 (1978), the Council gave an undertaking,
vis-8-vis the Namibian people and the international community, to implement it. Now it must live up to its
commitments.
What is at stake is the credibility of the
United Nations and the Security Council in respect of
decolonization. The Council must not compromise on the
basic purposes of the Organization, otherwise the whole
work of the United Nations will suffer the consequences.

Secretary-General in the implementation of resolutions
385 (1976) and 435 (1978). Furthermore, the draft contains a solemn note of warning to South Africa that its
non-compliance with resolution 435 (1978) would oblige
the Council to begin a process which could lead to aCtion
under the Charter, including action under Chapter VII.
50. It will be seen that the ultimate objective of the draft
resolution is to ensure South Africa’s compliance with
resolutions 385 (1976), 431 (1978) and 435 (1978). In our
view, there is no reason why South Africa should not
comply with these resolutions. As members know, the
Council had been led to expect South Africa’s compliance,
since it had accepted the principle of United Nationssupervised elections. Furthermore, South Africa had also
agreed to withdraw its presence from Namibia and to
facilitate the independence of the Territory, In view of
these solemn pledges, the Council has every right to expect
South Africa’s compliance with its resolutions.

47. While renewing its support of the sacred struggle of
the Namibian people for true independence, my delegation
Ilopes that the five Western members of the Council, going
beyond the selfish interests which have always guided them
in their choice, will join their voices to those of peaceloving and justice-loving peoples in order at long last to
compe1 the insipid authorities in Pretoria, who refuse even a
simple dialogue, to abide by the decision of the Organization. Unless this is done, one would be tempted to believe
that many of the champions of law are concerned with
breaches of law only when these are committed by their
adversaries.

5 1. We hope that, in view of these facts, it will be possible,
even at this late stage, for South Africa to reverse its steps
and return to the path of legitimate action in conformity
with the Charter, in order to lead the people of Namibia to
genuine independence.

48. Mr. 3AIPAL (India’): On behalf of the sponsors, I
should like to introduce briefly the draft resolution in
document S/12922, which was circulated this afternoon.
The draft is largely self-explanatory,
and I hope that
clarifications
are not called for. If I may say so, it is
action-oriented
and the result of exhaustive informal
discussions.

52. We trust that the Western members of the Council
who have been dealing with South Africa will impress upon
that country the seriousness with which the Council will
regard any situation that may derive from South Africa’s
refusal to comply with the Council’s resolutions mentioned
in the present draft resolution.

49. The main thrust of the draft resolution is, first, the
call for the cancellation of the unilateral elections scheduled for 4 December in Namibia and, secondly, the call to
South Africa to co-operate with the Council and with the

The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

6
Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00

78s70005-March

1980--2,200
