S/2020/1099

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 November 2020
Original: English

Implementation of resolution 2522 (2020)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2522
(2020), in which the Secretary-General was requested to report every three months
on progress made towards fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The report covers key developments relating to Iraq and
provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in Iraq since my previous
report of 11 August 2020 (S/2020/792) and the briefing to the Security Council by the
Special Representative for Iraq and Head of UNAMI on 26 August.

II. Summary of key political developments
A.

Political situation
2.
Preparations for early elections, a popular demand and the Government’s
priority, have been the focus of political activities. On 31 July, the Prime Minister of
Iraq, Mustafa Al-Kadhimi, announced that parliamentary elections would be held on
6 June 2021. The next day, the Independent High Electoral Commission issued a
statement expressing its readiness to hold elections in 2021, provided that four
conditions were met: (a) the finalization and publication of the electoral law and t he
technical annexes thereto; (b) agreement on the membership of the Federal Supreme
Court, which is necessary for the certification of electoral results; (c) the provision of
the necessary budget, security and technical support by the Government; and
(d) United Nations and international “support and monitoring”.
3.
The President of Iraq, Barham Salih, in a statement on 4 August, welcomed the
Prime Minister’s announcement and indicated that he would approve any request from
the Prime Minister to dissolve parliament, which he would subsequently submit to
the Council of Representatives for a vote. He noted that elections would be held
within two months of the dissolution vote, in accordance with article 64 of the
Constitution. The Government, the Independent High Electoral Commission, the
judiciary, parliamentarians, political blocs and others have since been preparing the
ground for early elections.
4.
On 13 August, the Prime Minister met the Board of Commissioners of the
Independent High Electoral Commission to discuss technical preparations. He

20-14445 (E)

121120

*2014445*

S/2020/1099

affirmed the Government’s determination to hold free, fair and credible elections,
urged the Commission to intensify its preparations, and reiterated that his
Government would employ all its capacities to hold elections on the set date. He also
requested that all ministries and departments facilitate the Commission’s work.
5.
On 24 August, the Speaker of the Council of Representatives, Mohammed
al-Halbousi, and other parliamentarians also met with members of the Indep endent
High Electoral Commission and its electoral security committee. During a review of
the Commission’s electoral preparations, the Speaker affirmed the Council of
Representatives support for the work of the Commission and underlined the need to
preserve the Commission’s independence in order to restore confidence in the
electoral process.
6.
The Council of Representatives reconvened on 5 September, the first
parliamentary session since 24 June. The parliamentary legal committee presented its
latest report on the finalization of the technical annexes to the electoral law. It
reported that the delineation of constituencies remained unresolved, noting that most
political blocs had not provided their final positions. During that session, the Council
of Representatives concluded the first reading of the draft amendment to the Federal
Supreme Court law, which, if passed, would allow the Court to reach a quorum. A
second reading of the law was completed during the session on 21 September.
7.
The session of the Council of Representatives on 26 September was set aside
for completing the electoral legislative annexes. However, parliamentarians were
unable to reach consensus on the delineation of constituencies and the annexes remain
under consideration in the Council of Representatives.
8.
The Government continued to discuss measures to address the current economic
situation, which has been worsened by the impact of coronavirus disease (COVID -19).
During the parliamentary session on 5 September, the Speaker noted tha t the Council
of Ministers had missed the 60-day deadline to submit an economic reform
programme, a requirement of the law on domestic and external borrowing ratified on
25 June. The Speaker requested the General Secretariat of the Council of Representatives
to invite the Ministers of Finance and Planning to appear in parliament to answer
questions on the matter.
9.
The economic reform programme was discussed at a meeting convened on
6 September by the Prime Minister and the Speaker and attended by minister s,
deputies and advisers. Participants also discussed the Government ’s general budget
for 2020, cooperation between legislative and executive authorities on the national
economy and the federal budget for 2021. The Ministers of Finance and Planning
attended the session of the Council of Representatives on 8 September to address
questions about the economic reform programme. The Government formally adopted
the White Paper for economic reforms on 13 October.
10. At a special session on 14 September, the Council of Ministers approved a draft
2020 federal budget law to organize the spending process and secure the necessary
expenditures for the remaining three months of the fiscal year. The draft was
submitted to the Council of Representatives for adoption on 21 September, but
subsequently recalled for further revision.
11. The Government renewed its commitment to empower women and advance their
political, economic and social participation. On 1 October, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs announced Government plans to adopt a national development plan for
women, which would complement existing legislation to strengthen women’s
participation in senior decision-making roles.
12. The Government made progress on its commitment to compensate victims of
the violence perpetrated against demonstrators since October 2019. On 11 August, the
2/16

20-14445

S/2020/1099

Council of Ministers adopted a decision to provide medical treatment to injured
protesters. It further granted protest victims, to be identified by the Government,
certain rights and privileges available under the Martyrs’ Foundation law (2009).
During a speech on 30 August, on the occasion of the Ashura’ religious festival, the
Prime Minister announced that the Government had completed the first phase of its
investigation by compiling a list of martyrs, had begun to review the list of the
wounded, and had started to make compensation payments.
13. Protests continued in central and southern governorates. Protesters called for
broad reforms, accountability for perpetrators of protest-related violence, job creation
and the improvement of public services. Protests escalated in Basrah and Dhi Qar
following violence against activists, including targeted killings. On 16 August, clashes
broke out with the security forces as protesters gathered in front of the Governor’s
residence in Basrah to demand justice for an activist assassinated on 14 August.
Following the assassination of a woman activist on 19 August, demonstrators
demanded the removal of the Governor and set fire to the local office of th e Council
of Representatives.
14. In response to the events on 14 and 16 August, the Prime Minister dismissed
Basrah’s Director of National Security and its police chief on 17 August. He then
visited Basrah on 22 August to meet the family of the woman activist killed on
19 August. While there, he publicly promised to hold accountable those responsible
for the killing of activists. Separately, on 3 September, the Ministry of Interior issued
an order to disband the Law and Order Forces command, created in October 2019 to
protect major social gatherings, and transferred its personnel to the Baghdad police
department. This followed the Prime Minister’s announcement of a re -evaluation of
the command, after reports of illegal activity by its members in Baghdad .
15. Meanwhile, in Dhi Qar Governorate, the Security Media Cell of the Office of
the Prime Minister reported that an explosive device had detonated at the sit -in site
in Al-Haboubi Square in Nasiriyah on 21 August. The next day, protesters in
Nasiriyah set fire to offices of Kata’ib Hizbullah and the local headquarters of several
political parties.
16. In Sulaymaniyah on 12 and 22 August, protesters called for the immediate
dissolution of the Kurdistan Regional Government, the establishment of an interim
authority, early elections and the appointment of non -partisan candidates in judicial
and electoral institutions. During these demonstrations, the Halabjah municipality
headquarters was set on fire. In Dahuk Governorate, a protest took place on 19 August
against the opening of the Ibrahim Khalil border crossing with Turkey to Turkish
vehicles. On 27 September, protesters in Sulaymaniyah demanded the payment of
civil service salaries.
17. As a measure to counter corruption, the Prime Minister issued an exe cutive
order on 27 August to form a permanent committee to investigate “corruption and
major crimes”. The order clarified the authority and staffing of the committee and
noted that the Counter-Terrorism Service “shall implement the decisions issued by
investigation judges or the courts on the cases related to the work of this committee
in accordance with the law”. Arrests have since been made under warrants issued by
the committee. In addition, the Prime Minister has reported on an agreement with the
International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) for the arrest of several
“senior corrupt officials” living outside Iraq.
18. The Prime Minister also highlighted the threat of unauthorized weapons and the
need to control them as part of efforts to restore State authority, another government
priority. During a visit on 3 September to the Joint Operations Command, the Prime
Minister instructed security leaders to address the issue. On 8 September, the
spokesperson of the Commander-in-Chief reported that operations launched in
20-14445

3/16

S/2020/1099

Baghdad, Basrah and Maysan Governorates had led to the arrest of wanted persons
and the confiscation of unauthorized weapons.
19. The COVID-19 pandemic continued to affect daily life in Iraq and remained a
focus of Government activity, directed and coordinated by the High Committee for
Health and National Safety, chaired by the Prime Minister. On 15 August, the
Committee extended the partial curfew to seven days a week, restricted movements
between governorates and banned all tourist travel to Iraq, although airports remained
open to commercial passenger flights. On 7 September, the Committee adopted new
health measures that included increasing staff attendance in government institutions
to 50 per cent, and the reopening of all land border crossings for commercial purposes.
It also granted the Independent High Electoral Commission permission to open voter
registration centres and to exempt its staff from curfew regulations.

B.

Relations between Baghdad and Erbil
20. The federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government agreed on an
interim solution for budget transfers. A long-term agreement on resource- and
revenue-sharing remains pending, however. After a telephone d iscussion on
15 August with the Kurdistan Region Prime Minister, Masrour Barzani, the Prime
Minister of Iraq, Mr. Al-Kadhimi, committed to transfer 320 billion Iraqi dinar
(approximately $268 million) to the Region for each of the months of August,
September and October. By early October, the only confirmed transfer had taken place
on 17 August.
21. Several high-level reciprocal political visits followed. On 2 September, the
President of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, Nechirvan Barzani, travelled to Baghdad
to meet the President of Iraq, the Prime Minister of Iraq and the Speaker of the
Council of Representatives, and other Iraqi political leaders. Discussions focused on
finding “a constitutional solution” to differences between Baghdad and Erbil.
22. Building on four preceding visits to Baghdad between May and June, on
8 September, the Deputy Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, Qubad
Talabani, led a delegation to Baghdad to continue discussions with federal authorities.
While there, he met with the President, the Prime Minister and the Speaker and the
Ministers of Finance and Oil.
23. On 10 September, the Prime Minister of Iraq travelled to Erbil, where he met
with the President and the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq and the
leader of the Kurdistan Democratic Party. On 11 September, the Prime Minister of
Iraq travelled on to Sulaymaniyah, where he met political leaders as well as the
President of Iraq. Discussions focused on border management, resource - and revenuesharing, federal budget allocations to the Kurdistan Regional Government, and
cooperation between Iraqi armed forces and the Peshmerga. The Prime Minister also
visited the official border crossings with Turkey in Dahuk and Sulaymaniyah
Governorates.
24. The Speaker travelled to Sulaymaniyah and Erbil on 3 and 6 September,
respectively, for meetings with the leaders of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and the
Kurdistan Democratic Party. Discussions focused on the national parliamentary
elections. Other topics discussed included the importance of continued dialogue
between the federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government, the
amendment to the Federal Supreme Court law, and the need to unite political forces
to address the ongoing crisis.
25. On 9 October, the Prime Minister announced an agreement between the federal
and Kurdistan Regional Governments on administrative, service and security matters

4/16

20-14445

S/2020/1099

for the Sinjar district in Ninawa Governorate. The Prime Minister expressed optimism
that the agreement would accelerate the return of internally displaced persons to
Sinjar and constituted a first step towards the resolution of outstanding issues in the
ethnically diverse district. He pledged that the federal Government, in coordination
with the Kurdistan Regional Government, would implement the agreement in
cooperation with the people of Sinjar. On the same day, the President of the Kurdistan
Region of Iraq welcomed the agreement, which he described as “a step in the right
direction to restore and strengthen trust between Baghdad and Erbil”. He also
expressed his hope that the agreement would be followed by the resolution of all other
pending issues between the two sides, the peaceful return of Yazidis, the restoration
of stability and the start of reconstruction efforts.

C.

Security situation
26. Attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL, also known as Da’esh)
continued, primarily in Anbar, Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninawa and Salah al -Din
Governorates. In response, the Iraqi security forces conducted counter-terrorism
operations. On 23 August, the international counter-ISIL coalition completed the
handover of Camp Taji to the Iraqi security forces, the eighth transfer of a coalition
facility since March 2020. A coalition statement affirm ed that the handover resulted
from the success of the Iraqi security forces campaign against ISIL and was part of a
“plan coordinated with the Government of Iraq”. General Kenneth McKenzie,
commander of the United States Central Command, later announced du ring a visit to
Iraq on 9 September that the United States presence in the country would be reduced
from 5,200 to 3,000 troops. He added that the new footprint would allow the
continuation of advice and assistance to Iraq in fighting ISIL remnants, and was “due
to our confidence in the Iraqi Security Forces’ increased ability to operate
independently”.
27. Between 11 August and 2 October, the Security Media Cell reported 17
improvised explosive device attacks in the governorates of Babil, Baghdad, Dhi Qar,
Qadisiyah and Salah al-Din, targeting logistic and supply transport convoys
contracted by the international counter-ISIL coalition. Two Iraqis died and seven
more were wounded in these attacks. On 26 August, an improvised explosive device
exploded close to a United Nations vehicle travelling along the Mosul-Erbil road in
Ninawa Governorate, injuring one World Food Programme (WFP) staff member. The
Iraqi authorities launched an investigation into the incident. On 15 September, a
British diplomatic vehicle was struck by an improvised explosive device in Baghdad.
On 18 September, an improvised explosive device damaged the American Institute
for English Learning in Najaf. Meanwhile, on 30 September, the Security Media Cell
reported the detonation of an improvised explosive device, striking a civilian vehicle
on the road to Baghdad International Airport with no reported casualties.
28. On 11, 16, 27 and 29 August, and 14, 16 and 22 September, the Security Media
Cell reported that rockets had landed in the former International Zone, while a rocket
landed close to the Zone on 5 October. It also reported rocket attacks in the vicinity
of Baghdad International Airport on 14, 18 and 30 August, and 6, 10, 20 and
28 September. The Security Media Cell reported that the attack on 28 September
struck a house, killing two women and three children, and injuring two children. On
13 August, the Security Media Cell reported that three rockets had struck Balad
airbase, Salah al-Din Governorate, where United States and Iraqi troops are co-located,
while on 15 August it reported that two rockets had struck Camp Taji. In addition, on
30 September, according to a statement by the Kurdistan Regional Presidency, six
rockets landed in the vicinity of Erbil International Airport, with no c asualties. Claims
of responsibility for several rocket and improvised explosive device attacks were

20-14445

5/16

S/2020/1099

made by various armed groups. Iraqi political leaders publicly condemned the attacks
and called on the Government to take action to hold the perpetrators ac countable.
29. On 30 September, the Prime Minister received a delegation of ambassadors and
chargés d’affaires from 25 countries to discuss the security of diplomatic premises in
Iraq. A joint statement from the international representatives expressed “de ep concern
at the rise in the number and sophistication of attacks against diplomatic premises in
Iraq” and welcomed the action taken by the Government. In a telephone conversation
on 2 October with the Secretary of State of the United States of America, M ichael
Pompeo, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Fuad Hussein, reported that the
Government of Iraq had taken measures to protect the International Zone and
Baghdad International Airport. The Minister also noted that the conversation had
focused on bilateral relations and on a reported decision by the United States to
withdraw its Embassy from Baghdad.
30. The Ministry of National Defence of Turkey reported military activity
throughout the reporting period against Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) pos itions in
northern Iraq. On 11 August, the Iraqi Security Media Cell reported that a Turkish
drone targeted a military vehicle in the Sidakan area, northern Erbil Governorate,
resulting in the deaths of two senior Iraqi military officers and their driver. In a letter
dated 26 October addressed to the Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United Nations
referred to the military operation on 11 August in the Sidakan area of Erbil and not ed
that “Turkey targeted the identified PKK elements in that area”, adding that “it had
no information about the presence of ‘Iraqi border guards’ who allegedly lost their
lives at the operation site”.
31. On 11 August, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a statement noting that
Iraq “strongly condemns” the attack as “a violation of the sovereignty and sanctity of
[Iraq]” and the “international charters and laws that regulate relations between
countries”. Statements issued by the spokespersons of the Pr esidency and the
Commander-in-Chief also condemned the attack, while the statement from the
Presidency also called for an “immediate cessation of such aggressions … and
opening dialogue to resolve the border problems between the two neighbouring
countries”.
32. On 12 August, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq reported that the
Ambassador of Turkey to Iraq had been summoned to the Ministry and had received
a letter of protest. On the same day, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Turkey affirmed
in a statement that “as long as the PKK’s presence in Iraq continues to be tolerated”,
Turkey was “determined to take necessary measures to safeguard its borders”.
33. In a letter dated 2 September, addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2020/885), the Government of Turkey stated that “Turkey is obliged to take
appropriate measures against terrorist threats to its security emanating from Iraq”.
Referring to the statement made by the Permanent Representative of Iraq at the
Security Council meeting held on 26 August 2020, the letter noted that: “Any
criticism towards Turkey for exercising its inherent right of self -defence as outlined
in Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations, and acting within the context of
responsibility attributed by relevant Security Council resolutions to States Members
of the United Nations in the fight against terrorism is unacceptable”.
34. In identical letters dated 29 October, addressed to me and the President of the
Security Council (S/2020/1065), the Government of Iraq transmitted “a summary of
violations of Iraqi territory and airspace committed by Turkey between 13 July and
29 September 2020”. The letters state that “these violations of the sovereignty of Iraq
by Turkey are contrary to the principles of good-neighbourliness and constitute a
violation of the Charter of the United Nations and international law”. In the letters,
6/16

20-14445

S/2020/1099

the Government of Iraq also “reiterates its willingness to cooperate with … Turkey
with a view to finding common ground and arriving at appropriate solutions that will
bring an end to these repeated violations”.

D.

Regional and international developments
35. Iraq continued its efforts to establish stronger ties with its regional and strategic
partners and to diversify its economic partnerships. The Prime Minister visited
Washington, D.C., between 19 and 21 August. In the joint statement following their
meeting on 20 August, the Prime Minister, Mr. Al-Kadhimi, and the President of the
United States of America, Donald Trump, reaffirmed their commitment to “build a
prosperous and stable Iraq”, that “serves as a stabilizing force for the Middle East”.
During the visit, the Prime Minister also met with the United States Secretary of State
and other senior officials.
36. In parallel, on 19 August, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq and the United
States Secretary of State convened the second meeting of the two countries’ Strategic
Dialogue Higher Coordination Committee. A subsequent joint statement affirmed a
mutual commitment to “a robust and productive bilateral relationship”. In addition,
the United States announced $204 million in humanitarian assistance to Iraq and
$10 million for the UNAMI electoral support programme.
37. On 25 August, the Prime Minister participated in a third tripartite summit, in
Amman, with the President of Egypt and the King of Jordan. A joint communiqué
released after the summit outlined the intention to deepen tr ilateral “coordination,
cooperation and strategic integration … on the economic, development, political,
security, cultural and other levels”.
38. On 4 and 5 September, the President of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, Nechirvan
Barzani, met in Ankara with the President of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu. The resolution of tensions in the
border area, economic cooperation and the responses to the COVID -19 pandemic
were among the topics discussed.
39. Between 15 and 19 September, the Minister for Foreign Affairs travelled to
Berlin, Brussels and Paris for meetings with representatives from the host States and
international organizations to discuss efforts to achieve political stability and
economic development.
40. The Speaker of the Council of Representatives, Mr. al-Halbousi, visited Kuwait
on 16 and 17 September, where he met the Speaker of the Kuwaiti Parliament,
Marzouq al-Ghanim; the Prime Minister, Sheikh Sabah Khaled Al-Sabah, and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Sheikh Ahmad Nasser Al-Mohammed Al-Sabah.
Mr. al-Halbousi affirmed the Government’s commitment to resolve the file on
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals pursuant to Security Council resolution 2107
(2013).
41. The President of France, Emmanuel Macron, paid his first official visit to Iraq
on 2 September. He met separately with the President of Iraq, the Prime Minister of
Iraq and the Speaker of the Council of Representatives, the President of the Kurdistan
Region of Iraq and other political leaders in Baghdad. The parties pledged to enhance
cooperation in several fields, including security, politics, heal th and energy, and
reaffirmed their commitment to Iraqi sovereignty.
42. On 27 August, the Minister of Defence of France, Florence Parly, and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia, Prince Faisal bin Farhan Al -Saud,
travelled separately to Iraq. On 29 September, the Minister of Defence of Italy,
Lorenzo Guerini, visited the country.

20-14445

7/16

S/2020/1099

III. Update on the activities of the Mission and the United Nations
country team
A.

Political activities
43. The Special Representative engaged extensively with the President, the Prime
Minister and the Speaker, parliamentarians, political party leaders, the Independent
High Electoral Commission and others on preparations for early elections. In her
meetings, she underlined the readiness of the United Nations to provide support and
technical assistance to Iraq’s electoral authorities. She also emphasized that it was the
responsibility of the Government, parliament, political parties and other stakeholders
to implement the necessary measures for the conduct of free, fair and credible early
elections aimed at restoring public trust in the electoral process. The Special
Representative furthermore highlighted the necessary prerequisites for electoral
preparations to progress, which include the enactment of the elect oral law and the
technical annexes thereto, the finalization of the Federal Supreme Court law, voter
registration and budget allocation.
44. On 13 September, the Special Representative met with Grand Ayatollah Ali
al-Sistani. He stated that early elections should be conducted without delay, with
integrity and transparency, guided by a fair and just electoral law, and independently
of partisan interests. He further underlined that elections should be “supervised and
monitored” in coordination with UNAMI. The Grand Ayatollah’s statement was
welcomed by political leaders in Iraq, who affirmed their commitment to his
guidance.
45. In response to an increased number of killings and attacks on activists and
human rights defenders by unidentified armed assailants, the Special Representative
issued statements condemning the killings and urging the Government of Iraq to
increase its efforts to hold the perpetrators accountable and prevent the recurrence of
such attacks and intimidation against activists. On the occa sion of the issuance on
27 August of a special report on human rights violations and abuses in the context of
demonstrations in Iraq, from October 2019 to April 2020, by UNAMI and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), the Special
Representative reiterated the need for enhanced justice and accountability measures
to rebuild public trust. In meetings with government officials, she continued to
highlight the importance of bringing all weapons under the control of the Stat e.
46. Addressing the ongoing attacks against diplomatic missions and convoys, the
Special Representative engaged with a broad spectrum of actors and authorities,
emphasizing that such acts undermine Iraqi interests, and called for de -escalation and
resolution through constructive dialogue.
47. The Special Representative made visits to the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, where
she met separately with the President, the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime
Minister of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, the leader of the Kurdistan Democratic Party
and a leader of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, as well as others. In her meetings,
she discussed electoral preparations, as well as outstanding issues between the federal
Government and Kurdistan Regional Government, including the need to reach a longterm agreement on resource- and revenue-sharing, approve the federal budget and
resolve local tensions in Kirkuk and Sinjar. On 9 October, the Special Representative
attended the signing of the Sinjar agreement between the federa l and Kurdistan
Regional Governments, in Baghdad. The Special Representative issued a press release
welcoming the accord as a “first and important step in the right direction” that would
“help displaced people return to their homes, accelerate reconstructi on and improve
public service delivery”. She also emphasized continued United Nations support to

8/16

20-14445

S/2020/1099

help normalize the situation in Sinjar. Prior to the announcement, the Special
Representative actively engaged the authorities in Baghdad and Erbil, urging the m to
expedite an agreement on Sinjar and help rebuild the community through the
provision of services, security structures and a unified administration.
48. On 19 September, the Special Representative took part in the twelfth annual
Islamic conference on countering violence against women, organized by the Al -Hakim
International Foundation and attended by the President, the Prime Minister and the
Speaker. During the event, my Special Representative commended the Government’s
efforts towards the enactment of the anti-domestic violence law that protects all
family members, in line with the Iraqi Constitution and international standards. She
further urged parliamentarians to prioritize the adoption of the law. Other participants
also urged the Government to pass the anti-domestic violence law, endorse the national
action plan on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
support women’s economic empowerment and promote the equal participation of
women in political and electoral processes.
49. Meanwhile, the Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and
Electoral Assistance met with the Independent High Electoral Commission on 18 August
to discuss UNAMI support and preparatory requirements for elections. She also
liaised with the international community to garner their support for UNAMI project
proposals for enhanced electoral support, in collaboration with the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP).
50. The Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance,
along with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women), continued to work with the Government and civil society to
finalize the second national action plan on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security. On 31 October, she
represented UNAMI at an online event to mark the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000). She highlighted the challenges facing Iraqi women entering politics,
urged political leaders to expand opportunities for women’s participation and called
for a cultural shift to eliminate negative stereotypes of women in the media. The event
included the launch of a research study on the challenges and needs of Iraqi women
entering politics.
51. In addition, the Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and Electoral
Assistance led an online workshop for young people in Baghdad Govern orate on
27 September, as part of a series of regional workshops with young people in Iraq
organized by UNAMI, in cooperation with the Committee for Coexistence and
Societal Peace of the Prime Minister’s Office and the Amal Association, an Iraqi
non-governmental organization. Bringing together youth representatives and senior
local political actors, the workshop focused on the challenges faced by young people
in Iraq, including unemployment, limited access to local decision -making and
security concerns.

B.

Electoral assistance
52. UNAMI continued its support to Iraq’s electoral stakeholders, primarily the
Independent High Electoral Commission. On 24 August, UNAMI took part in a
meeting chaired by the Speaker and attended by members of the Legal Committ ee of
the Council of Representatives and electoral commissioners, to discuss technical and
administrative preparations for the early elections. Subsequently, UNAMI provided
inputs to the development of the Commission’s operational plan and electoral
timeline. In addition, on 6 September, UNAMI provided additional advice to the
Commission for the accreditation of international observer organizations.

20-14445

9/16

S/2020/1099

53. Following the approval of the High Committee for Health and National Safety,
the Independent High Electoral Commission started preparations to reopen biometric
voter registration centres and to resume the distribution of voter cards. To date,
14.3 million voters have been registered, but the process is not complete and not all
biometric voter cards have been distributed. In order to address these and other issues,
UNAMI met with the Chairman of the Board of Commissioners on 13 September to
discuss ways to accelerate the registration process. UNAMI also provided advice to
the Commission on its engagements with the Council of Ministers on the audit of
election technologies for voter identification and results management.
54. The work of the Independent High Electoral Commission has been hampered by
the lack of a budget and delays in the finalization of technical annexes to the electoral
law, which will define constituency delineation, seat allocation and the representation
of women in the Council of Representatives. The continued lack of clarity impedes
the Commission’s ability to develop a detailed implementatio n plan and operational
timeline for early elections.
55. Some progress has been made regarding the staffing of the Independent High
Electoral Commission. The Commission has appointed managers for its governorate
electoral offices and completed the selection of four Directors General at its
headquarters. However, several Director General posts remain to be filled, and
progress has been delayed by an ongoing review of previous appointments, as
requested by the Council of Representatives. All appointments rem ain subject to
confirmation by the Council of Ministers, which has led to temporary assignments in
sensitive operational posts. UNAMI worked closely with the Commission in
preparing an intensive induction and capacity development process to train new staff
for their functions, within increasingly condensed timelines.

C.

Human rights and rule of law developments and activities
56. Targeted killings of protesters, including civil society, political and human
rights activists continued, with limited measures taken to ensure accountability. In
separate incidents on 14 and 19 August, two human rights activists, including a
prominent women’s rights advocate, were assassinated in Basrah by unknown
gunmen. A further three activists, including one woman, were targeted by unidentified
armed men in Basrah on 17 August, resulting in injuries. According to activists,
unidentified armed men also attempted to assassinate an activist in Nasiriyah city on
14 August, an activist in Nasiriyah city on 19 August, two activi sts, in two different
incidents, in Baghdad on 19 August, and three activists in Babil in one incident on
20 August. On 21 August, an improvised explosive device detonated in Al -Haboubi
Square in Nasiriyah city, injuring 11 protesters. On 19 September, in Nasiriyah city,
unidentified gunmen attacked a vehicle carrying activists, seriously injuring one and
abducting a prominent activist who had previously received threats related to his role
in demonstrations.
57. UNAMI continued to document incidents that infringed freedom of expression.
In the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, on 19 and 20 August, security forces raided and
closed the offices of a television outlet in Dahuk and Erbil, respectively, for allegedly
inciting people to violate COVID-19-related preventive measures. The Ministry of
Culture of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, which has regulatory authority over
broadcast media, stated that it had not requested this action. In addition, UNAMI
identified several arbitrary arrests and detentions of journalists f or covering protests
in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, despite repeated statements from the Prime Minister
of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq in support of freedom of expression and the right to
demonstrate peacefully.

10/16

20-14445

S/2020/1099

58. To date, despite issuing compensation payments to injured protesters, the
Government has yet to take action to promote criminal accountability and to protect
at-risk protesters and activists from violence. The fact-finding body mandated to
examine violations related to the protests since October 2019, which the Government
committed to establish in May, is not yet in place, as its members have yet to be
appointed. Building on four previous special reports concerning the public protests,
on 27 August, UNAMI and OHCHR issued a joint comprehensive report documenting
patterns of human rights violations and abuses in the context of demonstrations in
Iraq. The report, covering the period from 1 October 2019 to 30 April 2020, reiterated
previous calls on the Government of Iraq to implement its commitm ents.
59. On 30 August, the International Day of the Victims of Enforced Disappearances,
UNAMI and OHCHR published a joint report on enforced disappearances allegedly
perpetrated by Iraqi Security Forces, including the Popular Mobilization Forces and
local tribal militias in Anbar Governorate in 2015 and 2016 during military operations
against ISIL. The report estimates that more than 1,000 Sunni Arab men and boys
were subjected to enforced disappearance. The report calls on the Government of Iraq
to carry out independent, effective investigations to establish the victims’ fate and
whereabouts, hold perpetrators accountable, provide redress to victims’ families,
establish a comprehensive domestic legal framework against enforced disappearances
and promote compliance with procedural safeguards of persons deprived of liberty.
60. During the nineteenth session of the Committee on Enforced Disappearances,
held online from 7 to 25 September, the Committee followed up on its 2015 periodic
review of efforts by Iraq to protect persons from enforced disappearances. The
Committee’s public sessions with the Government, originally planned for 14 and
15 September, were postponed owing to COVID-19 restrictions, then rescheduled for
5 and 7 October, with UNAMI facilitating the participation of the Government
delegation.
61. As part of measures to reduce overcrowding in detention facilities in response
to COVID-19, the Ministry of Justice reported the release of approximately 300
prisoners following a presidential special pardon in August, while the High Judicial
Council reported the judicial release of 17,585 detainees between March and August.
62. In partnership with Al-Namaa Centre for Human Rights and Iraqi artists, UNAMI
completed a countrywide campaign to raise awareness of the human rights dimensions
of COVID-19 and general awareness. The campaign included dissemination on social
media of 13 cartoons prepared by seven Iraqi artists, including three women, that
reached over 360,000 viewers from UNAMI platforms alone. A total of 117 youth
volunteers, including 27 women, disseminated 28,500 posters in 90 public spaces, in
18 governorates. A group of youth artists completed 20 murals in 10 Baghdad
neighbourhoods, raising awareness about the increase in domestic violence, st igma,
access to health care and education during the pandemic. Reflecting the country’s rich
cultural diversity, the cartoons were translated into seven languages spoken in Iraq.
63. ISIL continues to perpetrate violence against civilians. A total of 34 d eaths and
51 injuries were attributed to ISIL and resulted from attacks with the use of small
arms, the use of improvised explosive devices and rocket or mortar attacks.
64. Continued armed activities between Turkish forces and PKK have also affected
civilians. From 1 July to 30 September, five deaths and one injury were attributed to
Turkish military air strikes in northern Iraq. Responsibility for the killing of 11
persons and injuring of 34 persons was attributed to unidentified armed group s; and
an exchange of small arms fire between Iranian forces and PKK elements in northern
Iraq resulted in the injury of a 15-year-old boy and a man. In a letter dated 26 October
addressed to the Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the
Permanent Representative of Turkey affirmed that Turkey has “displayed maximum
20-14445

11/16

S/2020/1099

precision not to cause civilian losses”. The letter further stated that the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Turkey “categorically refuted allegations of civilian casualt ies as
PKK propaganda”.
65. On 3 August, the Council of Ministers endorsed a draft anti -domestic violence
law, prepared under the auspices of the Office of the Prime Minister, and on 5 August
referred the draft law to the Council of Representatives. On 7 S eptember, the
Directorate for the Empowerment of Women in the Council of Ministers secretariat,
supported by UNAMI, held a consultative meeting with stakeholders and relevant
United Nations entities to expedite the enactment of the draft law, with support from
UN-Women and civil society partners.
66. During interviews and focus group meetings conducted in Dahuk and Ninawa
in September and October, UNAMI continued to document barriers to education for
children and young adults of minority communities and children who remain displaced,
which are exacerbated by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. On 11 October, UNAMI
marked the International Day of the Girl Child by highlighting the continued
prevalence of early marriage among families who live in poverty, including those who
remain displaced in formal and informal settlements in territory formerly under ISIL
control.
67. On 10 August, the Prime Minister appointed a prime ministerial adviser on
components affairs. The post had been newly created to support efforts to promote
equal participation and fair representation of minorities during elections, to develop
legislative reforms for preventing discrimination against minorities, to promote the
return of displaced minority households and to encourage peaceful coexistence among
various components of Iraqi society.

D.

Humanitarian assistance, stabilization and development
68. The COVID-19 pandemic remains a focus of efforts and a significant challenge
to the Iraqi health system and humanitarian actors, increasing vulnerabilities among
displaced people and returnees, adding to pre-existing access challenges and
complicating logistics. The number of cases reported by the Ministry of Health of
Iraq rose to 379,141, including 9,339 deaths, as at 5 October, at which point there
were more than 62,620 active cases, the majority of which were treated at home.
Tackling the widespread transmission requires urgent measures, including a revision
of the country’s preparedness and emergency plans to respond to a rapid increase in
cases. With 16,931 health workers infected with the virus by early October, the risk
of collapse of the health-care system remains a serious concern. Meanwhile, the crisis
continued to affect the socioeconomic situation of the most vulnerable people in Iraq.
69. Considering the challenges, the United Nations country team undertook a
concerted effort, coordinated by the World Health Organization (WHO), to assist the
Government of Iraq in the development of solutions and mitigation measures. A rapid
assessment of health-care facilities revealed the urgent need to improve the
management of positive cases and implement proper isolation and quarantine protocols.
In response, WHO cooperated with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) to
support the Government of Iraq in the development of a social and behavioural change
campaign and worked with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) to distribute brochures and posters, as well as personal protective
equipment, to health facilities and at ports of entry. They also continu ed to provide
training and technical expertise at border crossings and airports with the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) and continued to strengthen the national health
infrastructure by providing ventilators, personal protective equipment and specialized
laboratory equipment, and support for the setting up of 140 isolation rooms with

12/16

20-14445

S/2020/1099

UNDP in partnership with the Ministry of Health. Furthermore, the WHO donated 10
fully equipped ambulances to the Ministry of Health in Ninawa, to ensure that people
in remote locations receive support and access to secondary health facilities.
70. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), through its local partner,
supported an orientation session on COVID-19 and its impact on women’s health for
reproductive health-care providers in Ninawa. UNFPA also supported family planning
services for hospitals and facilities in Erbil, Dahuk, Kirkuk and Sulaymaniyah.
71. Increased efforts to assist the Government’s response to the pandemic have yet
to be adequately funded. The calculated requirement to fund appropriate humanitarian
action stands at $662.2 million, including $264.8 million for COVID -19-related work
and $397.4 million for other areas of work. As of 1 October, the humanitarian
response plan and COVID-19 response plan were 68 per cent and 44 per cent funded,
respectively.
72. Protecting the 1.4 million displaced persons from the spread of COVID -19 has
been a major concern of humanitarian actors. As at 4 October, there had been 126
cases in 27 camps. Of those, 56 cases were still active and three persons had died. In
order to contain the spread, seven new quarantine and isolation areas were activated
in camps in Kirkuk and Ninawa.
73. So as to improve protection and increase the resilience of displaced families ,
UNHCR continued to provide cash assistance and sanitary kits to displaced families.
As at 12 September, a total of 98,153 refugees and internally displaced families had
received cash assistance of around $200 per family, along with 69,078 sanitary kits
for women and girls.
74. The Iraq Information Centre, run by the United Nations Office for Project
Services on behalf of the humanitarian country team, developed a campaign by text
message to improve hygiene awareness, which reached a total of 291,541 inte rnally
displaced persons. The Centre received calls and information requests from more than
16,000 people (79 per cent of callers were male and 21 per cent were female). Most
calls related to loss of income (49 per cent) and food insecurity (21 per cent).
75. The World Food Programme detected that over 3 million people do not have
enough food, which is attributed to a drop in income brought about by COVID -19.
Therefore, in collaboration with the Ministry of Trade, WFP released a new mobile
application called “Tamwini” (My food ration) that enables users to calculate food
entitlements and handle digital payments.
76. Even before the pandemic, more than 2.6 million children, including 1.5 million
returnees, 775,000 internally displaced children and 98,000 refugee children, required
assistance to access education, while between 20,000 and 45,000 children without
civil documentation were unable to enrol or to move on to secondary school. United
Nations entities jointly undertook advocacy initiatives with relevan t government
ministries and/or institutions so as to ensure that birth certificates and other
documents for children were provided to all citizens. Those efforts include advocacy
with the Ministry of Education to allow children who reach school-going age to enrol
without restrictions regarding required documentation. Meanwhile, UNHCR, in
collaboration with the Ministry of Interior, supported mobile civil documentation
missions in the areas most affected by conflict in order to provide civil documentation
for families who are missing different types of documents, including birth registration.
77. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
continued to support the Ministry of Education in broadcasting lessons to students
who are unable to physically attend school because of COVID-19 restrictions. On
22 August, UNESCO also trained 52 staff of the Communications and Media
Commission on combating misinformation amid the pandemic. On 20 September,
20-14445

13/16

S/2020/1099

UNESCO trained 80 teachers (50 men and 30 women) in the production of televised
classes.
78. The COVID-19 crisis also negatively affected the economic security of Iraqis
and the delivery of basic services. In order to respond to these secondary effects, the
United Nations country team completed a socioeconomic response plan for Iraq to
bridge the gap between humanitarian, development and peacebuilding efforts. The
plan, estimated at $1.4 billion (currently funded at 40 per cent), presents an integrated
support package to address the most pertinent needs and protect people who risk being
left behind, including women and girls.
79. In addition to strengthening the response to the COVID-19 crisis, the United
Nations country team continued to work on regular projects. Between 9 and
16 September, IOM supported the return of 120 families to Ninawa and rehabilitated
27 shelters in Anbar following returns in July. In addition, IOM rehabilitated 960 wardamaged houses, benefiting almost 10,000 returnees directly. IOM also continued to
provide mental health and psychosocial support services, reaching 970 women, 667
men, 212 girls and 184 boys. A national implementation review of the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, supported by IOM, noted that Iraq
was the first country in the region to complete a migration governance indicator
assessment and a national migration profile with national interministerial oversight.
80. The United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) completed
the rehabilitation of a 4.3 km-long irrigation canal in Salah al-Din Governorate on
11 August. The canal brought 18,000 acres of agricultural lands back into full
production. The waterway will benefit approximately 13,000 people, many of whom
are recent returnees.
81. The Mine Action Service cleared 74,088 m 2 of contaminated land in Anbar and
Ninawa Governorates of 199 improvised explosive devices. For those operations, the
Service deployed an explosive ordnance search team made up entirely of women.
After in-person interventions were suspended owing to COVID-19 restrictions,
remote technical support was provided to the Directorate of Mine Action and online
risk education training was delivered to humanitarian and stabilization actors. In
addition, the Service delivered mine-awareness information to approximately
280,000 Iraqis through a social media campaign, “Safe Steps”.
82. The International Labour Organization and the Ministry of Labour and Social
Affairs of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq signed an agreement on 10 August to boost
employment opportunities for internally displaced persons and refugees and their host
communities. The agreement facilitates the establishment of employment service
centres.

IV. Security and operational issues
A.

Update on security arrangements
83. The Department of Safety and Security in Iraq continuously monitored
developments throughout the country and implemented risk management measures to
enable United Nations operations. United Nations missions to Ninawa Governorate
were suspended on 26 August after an improvised explosive device impacted a United
Nations vehicle, resuming on 10 September after appropriate security assessments
had been conducted and measures approved by the United Nations senior
management team. Regular security advisories and alerts, including broadcasts
related to the outbreak of COVID-19, continued to be disseminated to keep United
Nations personnel informed of precautionary measures.

14/16

20-14445

S/2020/1099

84. The Department of Safety and Security supported an average of two field
missions per day across the country, with assessed risk levels ranging from medium
to high. Close coordination and engagement with the host Government continues to
ensure the proper flow of information and the necessary security supp ort for United
Nations operations, in particular as regards movements and access authorizations to
regions still affected by COVID-19 containment restrictions.

B.

Mission facilities, logistics, aviation, financial and legal issues
85. The Mission continues to implement all necessary protocols to prevent the
spread of COVID-19 and mitigate its risks within United Nations compounds and
offices. In this respect, UNAMI further developed its COVID -19 sensitization
campaigns for United Nations personnel; enhanced its medical isolation ward and its
preparedness to deal with cases; implemented signage for physical distancing within
compound common facilities; and strengthened its contingency planning, medical
evacuation capabilities and overall positioning in line with emerging guidelines from
WHO and the Division of Health-care Management and Occupational Safety and
Health.
86. The Mission continued to provide logistical and administrative support to the
United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) in the delivery of its
mandate, as requested by the Security Council in its resolution 2522 (2020).

V. Observations
87. I welcome the Government of Iraq’s continued efforts to address the various
crises the country is facing, as well as steps taken for the preparation of the early
elections. It is essential to create a conducive environment that allows electoral
preparations to be conducted in an effective and transparent way so as to enable the
holding of free, credible and inclusive elections.
88. Amid ongoing electoral preparations, UNAMI is stepping up its technical
assistance to advise and assist the Government of Iraq and the Independent High
Electoral Commission, including through addressing urgent capacity requirements.
89. Cooperation between the federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government is essential to address the challenges Iraq faces in safe guarding the
country’s stability and the well-being of its citizens. I call upon all actors to step up
mutual dialogue efforts in order to reach a long-term, sustainable agreement on the
issues of mutual concern.
90. More broadly, I reiterate my call upon all parties, domestic and external, to
pursue de-escalation and solve problems through dialogue and on the basis of mutual
respect. I am encouraged by the Government’s continued efforts to build balanced
and mutually beneficial relations, at the national, regional and global levels.
91. I acknowledge the efforts of the Government of Iraq to enhance State authority
and to bring all weapons under State control. However, the continued presence of
armed groups operating outside of State control remains of great concern; it
significantly hinders domestic stability. It is incumbent on all security actors to
cooperate with the Government of Iraq in its efforts to strengthen State control and
reintegrate former members of armed groups.
92. The continued attacks against diplomatic missions and convoys remain a
concern. I call for further concerted efforts by the Government of Iraq, working with
20-14445

15/16

S/2020/1099

all influential actors, to ensure the protection of all diplomatic missions and personnel
in Iraq, to deal with such security breaches in a firm and swift manner and to hold
accountable before the law those responsible for these attacks.
93. The recent establishment of a permanent committee to investigate corruption
demonstrates firm political will to fight endemic corruption in Iraq. Against this
backdrop, I would like to emphasize the importance of the independence and
impartiality of such a body, which must also be adequately staffed and funded and
report to an appropriate oversight mechanism.
94. The establishment of an independent fact-finding body to examine all
demonstration-related human rights violations was one of the earliest commitments
made by this Government. Compensation payments for deaths and injuries have been
made, but concrete steps to provide truth and accountability remain insufficient.
Accountability is essential to promote respect for democratic values and strengthen
public trust in State authority.
95. I remain deeply concerned about the enforced disappearances in Iraq. Enforced
disappearances and uncertainty about the fate of missing persons not only perpetuate
fear and resentment in society, but also erode citizens’ trust in the ability of their
Government to protect them.
96. Gaps in the funding of the 2020 humanitarian response plan and the
socioeconomic response plan for Iraq make it increasingly difficult to provide longer term support to vulnerable people and to save lives, mitigate poverty and build the
capacity of government institutions. I reiterate my calls for continued international
financial support despite current global economic constraints.
97. Finally, I would like to express my appreciation to my Special Representative,
Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, and the United Nations staff in Iraq for their continued
dedication to implementing the Organization’s mandate during extraordinary times
and under challenging circumstances.

16/16

20-14445
