S/2015/926

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 December 2015
Original: English

Letter dated 1 December 2015 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
By its resolution 2248 (2015), the Security Council requested me to update the
Council on the situation in Burundi and to present options for the future presence of
the United Nations in the country. On 18 November 2015, I dispatched my Special
Adviser, Jamal Benomar, to conduct consultations with key interlocutors in the
region and in Burundi. On the basis of those consultations, I have provided below a
review of the situation in Burundi and proposed options for the consideration of the
Council.
Situation in Burundi
Burundi has been a topic on the agenda of the Security Council ever since the
tragic events surrounding the coup dՎtat in October 1993 that sparked a decadelong civil war in which hundreds of thousands of people lost their l ives.
The United Nations has worked determinedly through different configurations
to provide essential support to the Government and people of Burundi in order to
help the country to fulfil its aspirations and turn the page definitively on the
violence of much of its past.
During this time, an impressive array of achievements was registered in the
areas of democratic process, human rights and security sector reform, although
numerous challenges remained.
The United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB) closed on 31 Dece mber 2014,
following a request by the Government of Burundi. Pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2137 (2014), the United Nations Electoral Observation Mission in
Burundi (MENUB) was established on 1 January 2015 to follow and report on the
electoral process. The mandate of MENUB expires on 31 December 2015.
Political discord and violence erupted in April 2015 when President Pierre
Nkurunziza announced his intention to run for another term. While the crisis
crystallized around the elections, it has deeper political roots. Violence in Burundi
has since reached alarming levels. Armed elements have been launching deadly
attacks in urban neighbourhoods in Bujumbura that risk spreading. The attacks are
being met with reprisals by the security forces. Serious human rights violations and
abuses are being committed in this context. Burundi stands on the brink of another
armed conflict that could unravel years of painstaking work to consolidate and
preserve peace and have potentially disastrous effects in an alrea dy fragile region.

15-21184 (E)

021215

*1521184*

S/2015/926

It is my firm conviction that politically motivated violence and human rights
violations and abuses in Burundi will not be halted without the prospect of an
inclusive political settlement and without accountability. However, until now, there
has been very limited progress in launching a credible and transparent process that
enjoys the confidence of all Burundian stakeholders and that would allow for
political differences to be resolved through dialogue. Launching such a dialogue
must be the absolute priority while we continue to find ways, with our partners in
the region, to stop the deterioration of the security situation and prevent massive
violence and a possible full-blown civil war.
Visit to Burundi and the region
My Special Adviser provided a detailed briefing to the Council on
30 November 2015 regarding the consultations he held in Addis Ababa, Kampala
and Burundi between 19 and 27 November 2015. In Addis Ababa, interlocutors from
the African Union highlighted the need for the United Nations and the African
Union to join efforts to support the peaceful settlement of the conflict in Burundi.
Given the role of President Yoweri Museveni as the facilitator mandated by the East
African Community for the dialogue, my Special Adviser further discussed with
senior Ugandan government officials the importance of a transparent, genuine and
inclusive dialogue and United Nations support for their efforts.
I wish to express my appreciation to the Government of Burundi for its
cooperation with my Special Adviser and his delegation during their visit to
Bujumbura. The mission met with key government representatives, including
President Nkurunziza, and with a wide range of Burundian stakeholders, political
parties and civil society organizations. My Special Adviser listened carefully with
regard to their assessment of the current situation in Burundi, including how the
United Nations can assist them in building a peaceful and stable society. The
Government and other national stakeholders explored with my Special Adviser ways
in which the United Nations could assist in supporting dialogue and disarmament. Mr.
Benomar will continue to work closely with the Government and all other concerned
stakeholders in providing support to national efforts to build and sustain peace.
The Special Adviser also used the opportunity of his visit to Burundi to hold
detailed consultations with the United Nations country team and representatives of
the African Union and the diplomatic community. All interlocutors provided
constructive inputs on how the United Nations could best support Burundi in the
current situation.
Options
During the extensive consultations, the options set out below were explored.
Option 1: a multidimensional integrated peacekeeping operation under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations. Subject to conducive political and
security conditions, the United Nations could deploy a multidimensional integrated
presence under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. The United Nations
peacekeeping operation would: (a) support the political process; (b) carry out securityrelated stabilization tasks; (c) provide support to the Government in its disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security sector reform efforts; (d) protect
civilians; (e) monitor and promote respect for human rights; and (f) create the
conditions for the provision of humanitarian assistance and the return of displaced

2/3

15-21184

S/2015/926

persons and refugees. Pursuant to resolution 2248 (2015), the Security Counc il
affirmed the importance of United Nations and African Union contingency planning .
That planning would continue and deepen, based on different scenarios with various
models of cooperation with the African Union and other relevant partners.
Option 2: a fully-fledged integrated special political mission. An integrated special
political mission would focus on the following key areas: (a) good offices and support
for an inclusive national dialogue process; (b) monitoring and promotion of respect
for human rights; (c) support for the authorities in strengthening the areas of rule of
law and security; (d) support for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration;
(e) broader issues of governance; and (f) socioeconomic development. The Special
Political Mission could operate in parallel with an African-led operation in the
country. Contingency planning for a possible transition from a special political
mission to a peacekeeping operation would also continue, as warranted by evolving
conditions on the ground.
While these two options are being considered, I will proceed with the
deployment of a support team to my Special Adviser, as mandated by the Security
Council in paragraph 7 of resolution 2248 (2015). The team will pursue the following
objectives: (a) work with the Government of Burundi and other stakeholders to
support a credible and inclusive political dialogue process that is nationally owned;
and (b) advise the Burundian authorities on strengthening security and rule of law
institutions, as well as the design and implementation of a credible disarmament
programme. The team will report to the Special Adviser, coordinate and develop
partnerships with regional and subregional actors, namely, the African Union, the East
African Community and the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, to
promote coherent international responses to the situation in the country. The team will
closely monitor the situation on the ground to provide reporting and situational
analysis to facilitate United Nations planning efforts. The team will cooperate with the
United Nations country team already on the ground, including the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Given the existing political realities and security conditions on the ground, I will
proceed with the deployment of the team as soon as possible. I also recommend that
the Council review the mandate of the United Nations presence as the situation on the
ground evolves.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

15-21184

3/3
