Resolutiow adopted on the reports of the Thfrd Committee

Article 7
1. Everyone has the right to equality before the
law and to equal justice under the law. Everyone, without distinction as to race, colour or ethnic origin, has
the right to security of person and protection by the
State against violence or bodily harm, whether inflicted
by government officials or by any individual, group or
institution.
2. Everyone shall have the right to an effective
remedy and protection against any discrimination he
may suffer on the ground of race, colour or ethnic
origin with respect to his fundamental rights and freedoms through independent national tribunals competent
to deal with such matters.
Article 8
All effective steps shall be taken immediately in the
fields of teaching, education and information, with a
view to eliminating racial discrimination and prejudice
and promoting understanding, tolerance and friendship
among nations and racial groups, as well as to propagating the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, and of the Declaration on the granting
of independence to colonial countries and peoples.
Article 9
1. All propaganda and organizations based on ideas
or theories of the superiority of one race or group of
persons of one colour or ethnic origin with a view to
justifying or promoting racial discrimination in any
form shall be severely condemned.
2. All incitement to or acts of violence, whether by
individuals or organizations, against any race or group
of persons of another colour or ethnic origin shall be
considered an offence against society and punishable
under law.
3. In order to put into effect the purposes and principles of the present Declaration, all States shall take
immediate and positive measures, including legislative
and other measures, to prosecute and/or outlaw organizations which promote or incite to racial discrimination,
or incite to or use violence for purposes of discrimination
based on race, colour or ethnic origin.
Article 10
The United Nations, the specialized agencies, States
and non-governmental organizations shall do all in their
power to promote energetic action which, by combining
legal and other practical measures, will make possible
the abolition of all forms of racial discrimination. They
shall, in particular, study the causes of such discrimination with a view to recommending appropriate and effective measures to combat and eliminate it.
Article 11
Every State shall promote respect for and observance
of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and shall
fully and faithfully observe the provisions of the present
Declaration, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the Declaration on the granting of independence
to colonial countries and peoples.
1261st plenary meeting,
20 November 1963.

37

1905 (XVIII). Publicity to he given to the United
Nations Declaration on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly.
Considering that the United Nations Declaration on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination1
provides that the United Nations, the specialized aget}cies, States and non-governmental organizations should
do all in their power to ensure the abolition of all forms
of discrimination based on race, colour or ethnic origin,
Considering the great importance of the speedy implementation of that Declaration in order to liquidate
all forms of racial discrimination ;1s soon as possible,
Considering it essential that, as a step towards the
elimination of all forms ,A racial discrimination, the
Declaration should be made known throughout the
world,
I. Requf'sts that all States shall undertake all necessary measures in order to implement fully, faithfully
and without delay the principles contained in the United
Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination ;
2. Requests the Governments of States and nongovernmental organizations to publicize the text of the
Declaration as widely as possible, using every means
at their disposal, including all the appropriate media
of communication ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General and the specialized
agencies to ensure the immediate and larg~-scale circulation of the Declaration, and to that end to publish
and distribute texts in all languages possible;
4. Im,ites the Governments of Member States, the
specialized agencies and the non-governmental organizations concerned to inform the Secretary-General of
action taken by them in compliance with the Declaration,
and requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
on this matter, which will be considered by the General
Assembly at its nineteenth session as a separate agenda
item.
1261st plenary meeting,
20 November 1963.
1906 (XVID). Preparation of a draft international convention on the elimination of
all forms of racial ·discrimination

The General Assembly,
Having adopted the United Nations Declaration on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,1
Considering that that Dei:-lardtion is an important step
towards the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination,
Deeply disturbed by the manifestations of discrimination L:ised on differences of race, colour or ethnic origin
still in evidence throughout the world,
Convinccd thcrcfore of the necessity of taking further
action towards the elimination of racial discrimination,
Emphasi:::ing in this connexion the importance of the
speedy preparatiou and adoption of an international
convention on the eli1uirn1tion of all forms of racial discrimination. ;;s envisaged in General Assembly resolution 1780 (XVII) of 7 December 1962,
l. Requests the Economic and Social Council to invite the Commission vn Human Rights, bearing in
mind the views of the Sub-Commission on Prevention
1 See

resolution 1904 (XVIII), p. 35.
