40

General AHembly-Twentieth Se88ion

3. Suggests that the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the executive secretaries of the regional
economic commissions, prepare biennial progress reports
on the application of the present resolution;
4. Invites the Committee on Housing, Building and
Planning to work out, on the basis of those reports,
additional practical and effective measures for the
implementation of the above recommendations and the
solution of the housing problem.
1390th plenary meeting,
7 December 1965.
2037 (XX). Declaration on the Promotion among
Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect
and Understanding between Peoples

The General Assembly,
Recalling that under the terms of the Charter of the
United Nations the peoples have declared themselves
determined to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war,
Recalling further that in the Charter the United
Nations has affirmed its faith in fundamental human
rights, in the dignity of the human person and in the
equal rights of men and nations,
Reaffirming the principles embodied in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, 9 the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 10 the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 11 General Assembly resolution 110 (II) of 3 November 1947
condemning all forms of propaganda designed or likely
to provoke or encourage any threat to the peace, the
Declaration of the Rights of the Child, 12 and General
Assembly resolution 1572 (XV) of 18 December 1960,
which have a particular bearing upon the upbringing
of young people in a spirit of peace, mutual respect
and understanding among peoples,
Recalling that the purpose of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization is to
contribute to peace and security by promoting collaboration among nations through education, science and
culture, and recognizing the role and contributions
of that organization towards the education of young
people in the spirit of international understanding, cooperation and peace,
Taking into consideration the fact that in the conflagrations which have afflicted mankind it is the
young people who have had to suffer most and who
have had the greatest number of victims,
Convinced that young people wish to have an assured
future and that peace, freedom and justice are among
the chief guarantees that their desire for happiness will
be fulfilled,
Bearing in mind the important part being played by
y01111g people in every field of human endeavour and
the fact that they are destined to guide the fortunes
of mankind,
Bearing in mind furthermore that, in this age of
great scientific, technological and cultural achievements,
the energies, enthusiasm and creative abilities of the
young should be devoted to the material and spiritual
1dvancement of all peoples,
9 Resolution 217 A (III) of to December 1948.
1 0 Resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960.
11 Resolution 1904 (XVIII) of 20 November 1963.
12 Resolution 1386 (XIV) of 20 November 1959.

Convinced that the young should know, respect and
develop the cultural heritage of their own country and
that of all mankind,
Convinced furthermore that the education of the
young and exchanges of young people and of ideas
in a spirit of peace, mutual respect and understanding
between peoples can help to improve international
relations and to strengthen peace and security,
Proclaims this Declaration on the Promotion among
Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and
Understanding between Peoples and calls upon Governments, non-governmental organizations and youth
movements to recognize the principles set forth therein
and to ensure their observance by means of appropriate
measures:
Principle I
Young people shall be brought up in the spirit of
peace, jm;tice, freedom, mutual respect and understanding in order to promote equal rights for all human
heings and all nations, economic and social progress.
disarmament and the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Principle II
All means of education. including as of major importance the guid,mce given by parents or family.
instruction and information intended for the young
should foster among them the ideals of peace, humanity,
liberty and international solidarity and all other ideals
which help to bring peoples closer together. and acquaint them with the role entrusted to the United
Nations as a means of preserving and maintaining
peace and promoting international understanding and
co-operation.
Principle I II
Young people shall be brought up in the knowledge
of the dignity and equality of all men, without distinction as to race, colour, ethnic origins or beliefs, and
in respect for fundamental human rights and for the
right of peoples to self-determination.
Principle IV
Exchanges. travel, tourism, meetings, the study of
foreign languages. the twinning of towns and universities without discrimination and similar activities
should be encouraged and facilitated among young
people of all countries in order to bring them together
in educational, cultural and sporting activities in the
spirit of this Declaration.
Principle V
National and international associations of young people should be encouraged to promote the purposes of
the United Nations, particularly international peace and
security, friendly relations among nations based on respect for the equal sovereignty of States, the final
abolition of colonialism and of racial discrimination and
other violations of human rights.
Youth organizations in accordance with this Declaration should take all appropriate measures within
their respective fields of activity in order to make their
contribution without any discrimination to the work
of educating the young generation in accordance with
these ideals.
Such organizations. in conformity with the principle
of freedom of association. should promote the free
exchange of ideas in the spirit of the principles of this

Resolutions adopted on the report~ of the Third Committee

Declaration and of the purposes of the United Nations
set forth in the Charter.
All youth organizations should conform to the principles set forth in this Declaration.

Principle V 1
A major aim in educating the young shall be to
develop all their faculties and to train them to acquire
higher moral qualities, to be deeply attached to the
noble ideals of peace, liberty, the dignity and equality
of all men, and imbued with respect and love for
humanity and its creative achievements. To this end
the family has an important role to play.
. Y?~mg_ people must become conscious of their respons1b1ht1es m the world they will be called upon to manage
and should be inspired with confidence in a future of
happiness for mankind.
1390th plenary meeting,
7 December 1965.
2038 (XX). Dedication of United Nations Day,
1966, to the cause of refugees

The General Assenibly,
Considering the decision taken by a group of voluntary agencies to promote a fund-raising campaign from
24 to 31 October 1966, to benefit refugees mainly in
Africa and Asia,
Consideri'!'g the support given to this initiative by
the Executive Committee of the Programme of the
Unite1 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the wish expressed by that Comrnittee 13 that in 1966
United Nations Day, 24 October, be dedicated to the
cause of refugees,
I. Expresses its keen satisfaction for the action thus
~mdertaken, as well as for the attachment shown by
its promoters to the ideals and objectives of the United
Nations in choosing 24 October as the launching date
for the campaign ;
2. Decides that, in 1966, United Nations Day will
be dedicated to the cause of refugees.
1390th plenary meeting,
7 December 1965.
2039 (XX). Reports of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees 14 and having heard
his statement, 15
Noting the increasingly universal character of refugee
problems,
Taking note of the difficulties encountered by the
High Commissioner in obtaining the funds required
to finance his programmes,
Considering that a greater effort could and should
be made by the international community to provide the
High Commissioner with the financial means required
by the tasks incumbent upon him,
13 .Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth
Ses.mm, Supplement No. llA (A/6011/Rev.l/Add.l), part
Two, para. 25 (5) (d) and (e).
14 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/5811/
~~v.1) and. Supple"!ent No. llA (A/5811/Rev.1/Add.I);
ibid., Twentieth Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/6011/Rev.l)
and Supplement No. llA (A/6011/Rev.l/Add.1).
15 lbid., Twentieth Session, Third Committee, 1359th meeting

41

l. Reqzu sts the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to pursue his efforts with a view to ensuri 11g an adequate international protection of refugees
and to providing satisfactory permanent solutions to
the problems affecting the various groups of refugees
within his competence;
2. lnvites States Members of the United Nations and
members of specialized agencies:
(a) To increase their support to the humanitarian
action of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and to continue to co-operate
with the High Commissioner in this respect;
( b) To make available to the High Commissioner
the financial means required to ensure the full implementation of liis p1 ogrammes.
1390th plenary meeting,
7 December 1965.

2040 (XX). Assistance to refugees in Africa

The General Assembly,
Having taken note of the fact that major refugee
problems continue to arise in various parts of Africa,
Realizing that substantial resources must be mobilized
iu order to provide the refugees with immediate assistance and constructive aid so that they can support
themselves in the host country until they can return
to their country of origin,
•
Noting with satisfaction that the African States are
showing a continuing interest in the problems of refugees by generously receiving refugees in a truly humanitarian spirit and by acceding in increasing numbers
to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees, 16
Having taken note with satisfaction of the efforts
rnade by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refug:ees, the World Food Programme, the specialized
agencies and many non-governmental organizations to
solve the problems of refugee~ in Africa,
Having regard to the need to provide the means
essential to uninterr11pted continuation of the work of
assisting refugees in Africa,
~ 1. ~-o"'!"'mends the Office of the United Nations High
Com1mss1oner for Refugees and the other inter-governmental and non-governmental organizations for their
untiring efforts on behalf of refugees in Africa;
2. lnvites States Members of the United Nations and
memb_ers of the specialized agencies to devote special
attent10n to the problems of refugees in Africa and to
co-operate actively with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees by placing the necessary means
at his disposal, particularly in the form of increased
financial contributions to the prograu1111es of the High
Commissioner's Office.
1390th plenary meeting,
7 December 1965.
2041 (XX). Expression of appreciation to the
United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees

The General Assembly,
Being informed rhat Mr. Felix Schnyder, the United
~ ati~ns 1_-ligh Commissioner for Refugees, will relm<Jmsh his post in the near future,
16 llnited

Nations, Treaty Si'l'i,·s, vol. 189 (1954), No. 2545.
