United Nations

S/PV.6397

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6397th meeting
Thursday, 14 October 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rugunda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Kodama
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Çorman
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Security Council mission
Briefing by the Security Council mission to Africa (4-10 October 2010)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-58084 (E)

*1058084*

S/PV.6397

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Briefing by the Security Council mission to
Africa (4 to 10 October 2010)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by three ambassadors who led the Security Council
mission to Africa: first, by myself in my capacity as
Permanent Representative of Uganda and leader of the
Uganda leg of the mission, and then by Her Excellency
Ms. Susan Rice, Permanent Representative of the
United States of America and His Excellency Sir Mark
Lyall Grant, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, who together led the Sudan leg of the
mission.
I would like to welcome the return of the
members of the Council and the Secretariat who took
part in the Council mission to Africa.
I now wish to make a briefing in my capacity as
Permanent Representative of Uganda about the trip.
I want to start by thanking the Secretariat, the
Security Council team and the authorities in Uganda
for organizing the visit to Uganda. The Security
Council mission arrived in Uganda in the late hours of
Tuesday, 5 October. The purpose of our visit to Uganda
was fivefold: to reiterate the Security Council’s support
for the improvement of relations among the countries
of the region and to encourage their strengthened
cooperation in all fields; secondly, to emphasize the
Security Council’s support for action against armed
groups in the region, particularly the Lord’s Resistance
Army; thirdly, to reiterate the Council’s support for the
Djibouti peace process and for the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in the stabilization of
Somalia; fourthly, to stress the Council’s firm
commitment to the cause of peace in the Sudan, to the
full implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and to the successful negotiation of a
comprehensive and inclusive peace agreement for
Darfur; and fifthly, to examine the important
contribution by the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe

2

to the work of the United Nations missions in our
region.
On the morning of 6 October, Council members
visited the Entebbe Support Base. They were received
and briefed by the Director of Mission Support for the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
Mr. Paul Buades. He explained that operations
commenced at Entebbe in May 2003 and that his Base
was a distribution and storage centre for MONUSCO in
support of MONUSCO operations in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Since that time,
cargo and passenger services have steadily increased,
and savings have been made accordingly.
Council members were also informed that, in
addition to MONUSCO, the Base now provides
support for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT, the
United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi, the
United Nations Peace-Building Support Office in the
Central African Republic and United Nations agencies,
including the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. Other stakeholders
include the Regional Service Centre and the Regional
Procurement Office.
Mr. Buades said that the Regional Service Centre,
as a component of the global field support strategy,
responds to the demands received both from Member
States and from the field. He elaborated that these
demands can be summarized in three categories: first,
to deliver services faster to help support missions
implement their mandates; secondly, to improve the
quality of the services delivered; and thirdly, to
increase efficiency and achieve a more cost-effective
use of resources. This framework allows the
consolidation of mission resources for the purpose of
achieving service improvements and efficiencies at the
regional level.
Council members were briefed on the shared
services, which include evacuation and safe haven for
the regional missions; entry points for cargoes destined
to missions; aircraft handling, receipt and inspection
services; and the rotation and training capability of
troop-contributing countries.
After the briefing, Council members were taken
on a walking tour of the base by the Deputy Base
Manager. Council members noted the logistical support
being provided to peacekeeping operations in the
region, which contribute to enhancing efficiency and

10-58084

S/PV.6397

responsiveness. They expressed keen interest in the
consequences resulting from the potential closure of
missions such as MINURCAT.
After the briefing and the visit to the Base,
Council members proceeded to meet with President
Yoweri Museveni. During that meeting, they held frank
discussions. The meeting was also attended by senior
officials of the Government of Uganda.
On the Sudan, President Museveni recalled that
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement was a
compromise reached between the parties in the Sudan
after years of conflict, and that it was therefore was
imperative that it be implemented fully. He stressed the
importance of supporting the efforts of the parties to
ensure peaceful, credible and timely referendums that
would reflect the will of the people concerned in the
Sudan. He said that he was relieved that, during the
high-level meeting on the Sudan convened by the
Secretary-General on 24 September in New York, both
parties reaffirmed their commitment to holding the
referendums on time. He cautioned that any attempt to
interrupt the process could be a recipe for the
resumption of conflict. He urged the United Nations to
be proactive and ensure a credible process that would
be respected by all and consistent with the United
Nations playing its rightful role in conflict prevention.
On the role of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), he recalled that, as one of the
guarantors of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
IGAD still had a critical role to play and that its Chair,
Prime Minister Meles Zenawi of Ethiopia, was playing
that role on behalf of the organization.
On Somalia, he was confident that security and
stability in that country were achievable if the
international community provided the support
necessary for the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) and AMISOM to stabilize the country. The
African Union (AU), he said, would continue to
support the Djibouti peace process because it was a
political process agreed upon by the Somali people. He
pointed out that the decision of the African Union to
deploy up to 20,000 troops in AMISOM was a
demonstration of the continent’s commitment to
supporting peace and stability in Somalia. He
cautioned, however, that success would depend on the
availability of financial resources and equipment to
support the TFG in stabilizing the country, and that the
support of the international community, and the United
Nations in particular, was critical.

10-58084

On regional cooperation, President Museveni
stressed the importance of strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of peace
and security. He was of the view that, where the United
Nations has worked closely with the AU, the results
have been good. He cited the example of Burundi,
where the United Nations had supported a regionally
led peace initiative.
On the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), he
expressed satisfaction at the level of cooperation
among countries of the region in addressing the
menace it represented. He was confident that the
Lord’s Resistance Army was not a long-term problem,
since countries of the region were now working
together to solve it. He called once again on the
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, to support regional efforts to end the LRA
menace.
On the Entebbe Support Base, he assured the
Council of Uganda’s readiness to continue hosting and
supporting the United Nations missions in the region.
In conclusion, the Security Council mission to
Uganda was useful and fruitful. Council members had
an opportunity to interact with President Museveni on
issues of concern to regional security and to see first
hand the important work being undertaken at the
Entebbe Support Base in support of United Nations
missions in the region.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Susan
Rice to make her statement.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): It was an
honour to lead the portion of the trip in Southern Sudan
and to co-lead it with Ambassador Lyall Grant in
Khartoum.
I should like to begin by thank Special
Representative Haile Menkerios and his team, who on
very short notice were able to welcome the Council
and support our visit supremely well. I want to extend
the same thanks to the Secretariat, the entire staff of
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and
the United Nations security personnel, as well as the
Government of Southern Sudan, for working hard to
make this mission a success.
The purpose of our visit was to underscore that
the Security Council is united in its desire to see the

3

S/PV.6397

Sudan’s referendums on self-determination carried out
in accordance with the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). We delivered the message that the
referendums should be held on time, that they should
be credible and that the results must be respected. We
sought to assess the status of preparations for the
referendums, as well as UNMIS’s performance in
providing assistance for CPA implementation. We
delivered the message that we expect UNMIS to have
full and unhindered access and emphasized the
importance of addressing the humanitarian and
development challenges facing Southern Sudan,
regardless of the outcome of the referendums.
When we arrived in Juba on 7 October, crowds
lined the street outside the airport to welcome the
Security Council as we drove to meet with Southern
Sudan’s President, Salva Kiir. During that meeting,
President Salva Kiir told the Council that people are
“gripped with fever for the referendum”. He said that
expectations in the South are very high and that people
are focused on the referendums’ date of 9 January
2011. President Kiir also warned that he fears that the
North may be preparing for war and may be moving
troops southwards. He stated that the South proposes a
United Nations-administered buffer zone, spanning 10
miles to the north and south of the border, in which no
troops would be present. President Kiir also shared his
concerns about unresolved border demarcation, the
delay in preparing for the referendum in Abyei and the
slow progress in the popular consultations process and
in negotiations on post-referendum issues such as oil
and wealth-sharing. He assured the Council that if the
southern referendum is delayed, the South will not
issue a unilateral declaration of independence, but
rather will conduct its own referendum in the South
and in the diaspora communities abroad.
Later that evening of 7 October, we attended a
reception hosted by the Government of Southern
Sudan, during which we spoke with the Southern
Sudan Referendum Bureau, which is composed of a
Chairman and four members. At the reception, we also
met with a cross-section of members of civil society in
the South, including the Archbishop of Juba, the
Coalition of Civil Society Organizations in Juba, the
South Sudan Islamic Council and the South Sudan
Youth Forum, as well as women leaders. They spoke
about the very tight timetable leading up to the
referendums and relayed concern that the Abyei
referendum commission has not yet been formed. One
person said that the North is “beating the drums of

4

war”. They asked for international pressure and
referendum observers on the ground.
The next morning the Security Council visited the
Rajaf police training centre, where Southern Sudan is
training a professional civilian police force. These
police, who will help provide security during the
referendums, demonstrated procedures for high-risk
arrests, VIP protection and crowd control.
Impressively, the South started this centre from
scratch, which demonstrated its commitment to
institution-building. There are now 5,400 new recruits,
more than 300 of whom are women, with 6,000 more
scheduled to begin basic training in November. Asked
by some members of the Council about their
motivation for joining the force, many of the recruits
said “for freedom and to secure our country”.
We had intended that the last leg of our trip in
Southern Sudan would be a visit to the town of Wau in
Western Bahr al-Ghazal to obtain a perspective on the
experience of Southern communities outside of Juba.
We had planned to visit a school and a clinic and to
meet with civil society. Unfortunately, the United
Nations plane taking us there experienced mechanical
difficulties just before takeoff. That part was fortunate,
given the nature of the problem. We were very grateful,
however, to the Russian helicopter contingent at the
Juba airport, which hosted us on its base and gave us a
good understanding of how it lives and how it operates,
while we were reconfiguring our programme. And we
are also grateful to UNMIS, which provided an
additional extended briefing to us that afternoon.
UNMIS reported that the Mission has increased its
presence at the state and county levels and is working
with local authorities to mitigate risks throughout the
referendum process.
In conclusion, we found that Southerners are
simultaneously very hopeful and very anxious. The
message we repeatedly heard is that they are strongly
committed to the 9 January date for the referendums
and, yet, they are concerned that this expectation may
not be met. And there is some fear of a resumption of
violent conflict. The international community and the
Security Council must remain steadfast in support of
full implementation of the CPA, including on-time
peaceful referendums and respect by all parties for the
results of the referendums.
The President: I thank Ambassador Rice for her
briefing. I now give the floor to Ambassador Sir Mark
Lyall Grant to brief the Council.

10-58084

S/PV.6397

Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would now like to brief colleagues on the meetings that
the Security Council mission held in Darfur. First, I
would like to thank Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Joint Special
Representative for the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), and the staff
of UNAMID and the members of the United Nations
country team for welcoming the Council and
supporting our visit. I would also like to thank the
Secretariat for their excellent support throughout,
particularly given the fluid nature of the programme in
Darfur.
On arrival in El Fasher in Northern Darfur on
7 October, the Security Council mission met with Joint
Special Representative Gambari and UNAMID senior
staff, who provided a briefing on the current security
situation, including the lack of access to Jebel Marra
due to clashes between the Government and rebel
forces, and on the Mission’s work in protecting
civilians and its engagement in support of the African
Union-United Nations-led peace process for Darfur.
Sadly, that evening we received the news that a
member of UNAMID’s civilian staff had been
kidnapped by armed men in El Fasher. He has yet to be
released.
The next morning, following a tour of the
UNAMID supercamp, we met members of the United
Nations country team and representatives of
international non-governmental organizations. At that
meeting, those humanitarian representatives expressed
serious concerns about ongoing insecurity in Darfur,
restrictions on access to populations in need and
attacks on peacekeepers and humanitarian workers.
We then had a meeting with the Governor of
Northern Darfur. He argued that Darfur had seen
significant improvements in the security, political and
economic situation. He highlighted the commitment of
the Government of the Sudan to support development
in Darfur and the voluntary return of refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs), including through
its new Darfur strategy. He called on the international
community to put greater pressure on rebel groups to
join the Darfur peace process and criticized the
indictment by the International Criminal Court of
President Al-Bashir. In reply, the Security Council
mission expressed its concern about the upsurge in
violence in Darfur, the number of civilian casualties
and the continued restrictions on humanitarian access.
We also reiterated the Security Council’s support for
UNAMID and its personnel and underlined the
Security Council’s call on the Government of the

10-58084

Sudan and all relevant parties to cooperate fully with
UNAMID. We expressed the Security Council’s
support for the African Union-United Nations-led
peace process and the work of the Joint Chief
Mediator, Mr. Djibril Yipènè Bassolé, and urged all
rebel groups to join the Doha peace process without
preconditions or further delay. Members of the Security
Council mission also underlined the need for action on
impunity.
Later that day, we visited Abu Shouk IDP camp
close to El Fasher and separately met a delegation of
IDPs from the Abu Shouk and Al Salaam camps. The
visit to Abu Shouk, where we were able to walk
through the marketplace and talk with individual IDPs
for a while, brought home to us the realities of
displacement. Many of those whom Council members
met had been living in the camps for six or seven
years. Our meeting with the IDP delegation, which
took place outside the UNAMID community policing
centre in Abu Shouk enabled us to get a better
understanding of the concerns of IDPs regarding food,
medical and educational support available in the
camps, as well as of their desire to return home.
Several IDPs told the mission that it was the absence of
security and the rule of law that prevented them from
returning to their homes. Before leaving for Khartoum,
we visited a health clinic in El Fasher which provides
medical services to women and newborn children, as
well as treating victims of sexual and gender-based
violence.
In conclusion, we returned with deep concerns
about the security situation in Darfur, its impact on
civilians and the continuing restrictions on access by
UNAMID and humanitarian workers. We also returned
with a renewed conviction of the need for all parties
immediately to cease hostilities and for all rebel groups
to join the peace process immediately and without
preconditions. That is the only way that progress will
be made towards a comprehensive peace agreement in
Darfur.
With your permission, Mr. President, as co-lead
with the United States of the Khartoum leg of the
Security Council mission, I will now turn to the
meetings the mission held there.
I would like to thank the Government of the
Sudan for facilitating our visit. In Khartoum, the
mission met Vice-President Taha, Foreign Minister
Karti, the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission,
the Governor of Blue Nile, the Deputy Governor of
Southern Kordofan, representatives of Southerners in

5

S/PV.6397

the North and international non-governmental
organizations. We were accompanied throughout by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Haile
Menkerios, and we are grateful for his leadership and
support.
In our meetings with Vice-President Taha and
Foreign Minister Karti, we heard — as we had from
Vice-President Kiir in Juba — a strong commitment to
fully implement the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA). In particular, we heard recognition of the need
for the referendum to be held on time, to be peaceful
and credible, and for outcomes to be fully respected.
The Security Council mission welcomed those
commitments
and
reiterated
the
Council’s
determination to support the parties in their full and
timely implementation of the CPA, which remained
their responsibility.
During those meetings, we also heard
commitments to tackle the key outstanding CPA issues,
including Abyei and the post-referendum arrangements
on border demarcation, citizenship and wealth-sharing.
Vice-President Taha affirmed that the resolution of
such issues was urgent, but not a precondition for the
holding of the Southern Sudan referendum.
In our meeting with the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission, we heard from the Chair,
Mr. Khalil Ibrahim, about the challenges that the
Commission faces in preparing to hold the referendum
on 9 January 2011. Mr. Ibrahim set out the timetable
for the various stages of the process, which was clearly
very tight, and informed us about the progress in
preparing the registration and ballot papers. We heard
that the registration process was due to start on
14 November. The Security Council mission
underlined the need for a timely and credible process.
In our meetings with representatives of
Southerners in the North, the Security Council mission
heard concerns about the integrity of the referendum
process and about security for Southerners in
Khartoum and elsewhere the North.
During our visit to Khartoum, we also had the
opportunity to examine in more detail the popular
consultations process. The Governor of Blue Nile and
the Deputy Governor of Southern Kordofan told us of
their hope that the popular consultations would

6

transform relationships with Khartoum into a true
partnership. At that meeting, we heard that it would be
important, but challenging, to conclude those processes
before the referendum.
Before closing, I would like to recall that during
our visit to Khartoum, the issue of Darfur was also
discussed. In our meetings with Vice-President Taha
and Foreign Minister Karti, the Security Council
mission heard of the commitment of the Government
of the Sudan to pursue peace and development in
Darfur. The importance of all rebel groups joining the
peace process immediately and without preconditions
was also underlined. As it had in El Fasher, the
Security Council mission reiterated our concern about
the security situation and restrictions on access for
UNAMID and humanitarian workers and the need for
urgent progress in the AU-United Nations-led peace
process, which all rebel groups should join without
delay or preconditions.
The Security Council mission returned to New
York convinced of the urgency of the challenges facing
the Sudan. As a result of the meetings we held
throughout our visit, we return with a better
understanding of those challenges and the political will
that will be required to meet them. We heard a strong
commitment by both parties to fully implement the
CPA, including by holding peaceful, timely and
credible referendums and by coming to agreement on
post-referendum arrangements. The Security Council
mission welcomed those commitments and underlined
the importance of translating them into concrete action.
The Security Council will continue to follow
these issues extremely closely over the coming months.
The President: I thank Ambassador Lyall Grant
for his briefing.
On behalf of the Council, I should like to express
appreciation to all the members of the Security Council
and the Secretariat who participated in the mission for
the manner in which they discharged their important
responsibilities on behalf of the Council.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

10-58084
