S/PV.7476

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7476th meeting

Monday, 29 June 2015, 10.40 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ibrahim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Hmoud
Mr. Baublys
Mrs. Schwalger
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) (S/2015/468)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-20063 (E)
*1520063*

S/PV.7476

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014)
(S/2015/468)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Kyung-wha
Kang, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2015/468, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014).
I now give the floor to Ms. Kyung-wha Kang.
Ms. Kyung-wha Kang: I have the honour to deliver
the following statement, prepared by the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O’Brien. He deeply
regrets that he is unable to present it in person today,
owing to previously scheduled travel plans that could
not be changed, but he would like to assure the Council
that he will do so next time.
Three years ago, the United Nations expressed its
condemnation and deep concern about the 1,200 people
who had been killed in Syria up to that point, and about
the 10,000 refugees who had fled to neighbouring
countries. There were already warnings that what
was happening in Syria included atrocities that could
amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Today, more than 220,000 people have been killed and
more than a million injured. Some 7.6 million have been
displaced inside the country, and more than 4 million
have fled across its borders. And the violence continues
with utter impunity.

2/6

29/06/2015

Over the past month, that violence, which has
been perpetrated by all parties to the conflict, has
neither abated nor diminished in brutality. The
continued use of explosive weapons in populated towns
and cities in Aleppo, Dar’a, Idlib, Damascus, Deir
ez-Zor and Hasakeh governorates, among others, has
killed hundreds of people, many of them children, and
displaced tens of thousands. Indiscriminate attacks
on Government-controlled areas in Aleppo killed at
least 116 people in April and May, nearly half of them
women and children. In the past week, the situation
has deteriorated significantly in Kobani/Ain Al-Arab
following attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) aimed at reclaiming that city, which
have reportedly resulted in civilian deaths and further
displacement.
The Government’s use of barrel bombs in populated
areas has continued, causing hundreds of civilian deaths
and widespread destruction across the country. Some of
those incidents are described in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2015/468), including barrel-bomb attacks that
killed more than 200 civilians in Aleppo, at least 24 of
them children. A barrel-bomb attack on a mosque in
Aleppo on 22 June reportedly killed 10 people. Attacks
on medical facilities continue, in blatant disregard for
international humanitarian law and resolution 2139
(2014). According to the Physicians for Human Rights
organization, the month of May was the worst on record
for such attacks since the start of the conflict, with
15 verified attacks on medical facilities, all by aerial
bombardment, including eight barrel-bomb attacks.
Ten medical staffers were killed.
Intense fighting across the country has displaced
tens of thousands more people. In Tel Abyad, some
50,000 people have been forced from their homes since
May. In Dar’a, fighting between Government forces
and non-State armed groups began in the early hours
of 24 June, displacing at least 40,000 people. In the city
of Hasakeh, an ISIL attack displaced at least 60,000
people in the past week, and in Raqqa, thousands of
Kurds were told by ISIL to leave the governorate.
Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon continue to bear the lion’s
share of the ever-growing burden of caring for those
who flee Syria. Turkey, for example, is already hosting
1.8 million refugees, and took in at least 23,000 of those
who fled Tel Abyad in mid-June. I would like to thank
those neighbours of Syria and to echo the comments
made recently on the subject by the High Commissioner
for Refugees, Mr. António Guterres (see S/PV.7433).

15-20063

29/06/2015

The situation in the Middle East

The rest of the world should step up to do substantively
more to address the consequences of this conflict. It is
crucial that other countries welcome Syrians who are
seeking a safe haven.
Despite the extremely challenging environment,
humanitarian organizations operating from within
Syria and from neighbouring countries continue to reach
millions of people in need. Each month, the World Food
Programme (WFP) has been feeding approximately
4.1 million people; the World Health Organization
is distributing medicines and supplies to around
2.7 million; and UNICEF is reaching 2.2 million with
water, sanitation services, education and other support.
The Office of the United Nations High Commission
for Refugees continues to provide more than 240,000
people with core relief items and protection services,
and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East supports around
480,000 Palestine refugees. That is complemented by
the ongoing programmes run by non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), which reached more than a
million people in May.
However, aid deliveries to the 4.8 million people in
need in hard-to-reach areas remain a serious challenge,
owing to active conflicts, poor security and deliberate
obstruction by the parties to the conflict. United Nations
agencies and partners are reaching only about 34 per
cent of hard-to-reach and besieged areas every month.
Of the 48 inter-agency requests made to the Government
so far in 2015, 20 were approved following meetings in
April and June and 12 have been put on hold because
of poor security, leaving 16 awaiting Government
approval. The recent progress in the approval of access
to some locations must continue, and we call on the
Government to approve the pending requests and allow
rapid, unimpeded and sustainable access to all hard-toreach locations. We also note the Government’s quick
approvals in May and June of a number of short-term
visas for United Nations and international NGO staff
to attend humanitarian meetings hosted in Damascus
within the context of the whole of Syria, and we very
much hope that trend will continue.
Parties to the conflict continue to besiege 422,000
civilians. Some humanitarian assistance, including
medical supplies, was delivered to eastern Ghouta,
besieged by Government forces, during April and
May, and assistance was airlifted into western
neighbourhoods of Deir ez-Zor under siege from ISIL
forces. But the assistance that the United Nations and

S/PV.7476

partners have managed to get into besieged areas in
the past three months has been wholly inadequate.
Aid agencies are working hard to assist the millions
of Syrians affected by the conflict. But those efforts
require adequate resources. Only a quarter of the total
appeal for lifesaving work in Syria and the region has
been funded as of today, and food assistance across the
region is now in jeopardy.
Since January, WFP has had to reduce its food
provisions by 30 per cent, and more cuts are anticipated
in the next three months owing to serious funding
shortfalls.
Resolution 2165 (2014) continues to be a strong tool
for humanitarian organizations attempting to reach
Syrians in need. Resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191
(2014) have enabled the United Nations and partners
to reach people in need who were largely inaccessible
before. United Nations cross-border food and medical
shipments have increased significantly over the past
six months. The 92 shipments since 1 December have
included food assistance for 2.6 million people; basic
household items for more than 1 million people; medical
supplies and treatments for over 1 million people; and
water and sanitation supplies for more than 600,000
people. Active fighting and shifting conflict lines have
had an impact on the use of certain crossing points.
Given the fluid and dynamic nature of the conflict in
Syria, it is crucial for United Nations agencies to be able
to use any and every route — across both borders and
conflict lines — to reach those who require assistance.
The parties to the conflict continue to violate
human rights and international humanitarian law with
impunity by killing and torturing civilians, blocking
humanitarian access and destroying and besieging
communities. The siege on more than 422,000 people
must be lifted. Those who need protection and assistance
in all parts of Syria must be provided with rapid and
unhindered access to such assistance, including to
medical services and surgical supplies. The relentless
use of barrel bombs by the Government must be halted
immediately, as must other forms of indiscriminate
attacks on civilians, which are strictly prohibited under
international humanitarian law. We look to the Council
to pressure the parties to get them to protect civilians
and abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian law, and to promote and seek systematic
accountability for violations.
For the people of Syria and the humanitarians who
assist them, it is hard to see an end to this nightmare of

15-200633/6

S/PV.7476

The situation in the Middle East

29/06/2015

violence and destruction. We look to the leadership of
the Council to press for a political solution.

the root causes of the crisis and to be preoccupied with
marginal issues is something else entirely.

The President: I thank Ms. Kang for her briefing.

There is no doubt that improving the humanitarian
situation in Syria — in concrete and real terms — entails
abandoning the wrong approach that I have just referred
to. We cannot talk about ending the suffering and
hardships of Syrians or about ending the humanitarian
crisis in Syria against a backdrop of silence on Turkey
and Jordan’s continued use of their territories as bases
and conduits for foreign terrorists and mercenaries.
We cannot end the humanitarian crisis as long as the
regimes in Saudi Arabia, Qatar and other countries
still prefer to support terrorism generously and call it a
revolution instead of funding the humanitarian response
plan — funding for which has not yet exceeded 25 per
cent.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): After the issuance of the Secretary-General’s
sixteenth report (S/2015/468) on the implementation of
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014),
on the humanitarian situation in Syria, there are still
some Member States in the Organization that deal
with that painful situation in isolation from the foreign
interventionist, political, economic and military
backdrop. Perhaps that situation reaches its utmost
level of absurdity when those Member States present
themselves as both the opponent and the judge at the
same time. It is currently clear for everyone that many
of those who lament the misery of the Syrian people
are — in reality — the ones causing such misery. The
cards are now on the table, the veil has fallen, and the
shedding of Syrian blood in the north and south of the
country is coordinated through attacks organized in the
operational military and intelligence headquarters in
both Jordan and Turkey.
That reality proves the lack of correctness and
credibility in the approach adopted by some parties,
since the beginning of the crisis, in dealing with the
situation in Syria in general and with the humanitarian
issue in particular.
To settle political scores with the Syrian
Government is one thing, while to adopt internationally
unacceptable coercive measures against the Syrian
people is something else.
To disagree with the Syrian Government is one
thing, while to deny Syria’s role in protecting its people
and maintaining its sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity — and to refuse to coordinate the
fight against terrorism with Syria and provide it with
humanitarian assistance — is another thing.
To see the reality and deal with it as it is — in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and the rules of international law — is
one thing, while to be obsessed with targeting the Syrian
Government with baseless allegations and to interfere
in Syrian domestic affairs is something else.
To deal with the catastrophic consequences of the
humanitarian crisis in Syria is one thing, while to ignore
4/6

How can we improve the humanitarian situation in
the country in the light of the fact that the American
Central Intelligence Agency spends $1 billion annually,
according to the Washington Post, on training terrorists
in camps in Jordan, Qatar, Turkey and Saudi Arabia, as
well in some European States, so as to form an army of
10,000 so-called moderate terrorists?
That was not included in Mr. Ban’s report and
would never be included in his reports.
The sponsors of terror try to link every heinous act
on earth to the Syrian State; they have fabricated false
witnesses; they have organized formal and informal
conferences and meetings within and outside the United
Nations. The last meeting of that type was the recent
Arria Formula meeting, organized by France and Spain.
The goal of those meetings has been to tarnish the
image of the Syrian Government. However, they have
deliberately neglected the role of the armed gangs that
they brought into Syria to commit murder, slaughter,
looting and ethnic and religious cleansing. They have
ignored the massacres and murders committed by
those gangs against civilians before each meeting of
the Security Council on Syria. They have conducted
interviews with takfiri and terrorist warlords, with
gunmen, with those armed with machetes and swords,
with those who eat human livers and hearts, and have
given them legitimacy. They have presented them to
the media as revolutionaries in order to cover up the
slaughter, bloodshed, rape, captivity, bombings and
beheadings. They have ignored the indiscriminate
mortar shells that fall daily on civilians in Damascus,
Aleppo and other Syrian cities, killing thousands of
innocent people.
15-20063

29/06/2015

The situation in the Middle East

The Saudi documents newly leaked through
WikiLeaks prove that Turkey, Qatar and Saudi Arabia
have been working since the first months of the crisis
in Syria to militarize the situation by providing money,
weapons and support to terrorist groups. They have
successively referred to that as the “Arab spring”,
peaceful mobility and then moderate movement.
WikiLeaks has also revealed that those three regimes
in particular have formed a joint military committee for
that purpose. It might be useful for some colleagues in
the Council to familiarize themselves with the contents
of the telegram sent by the Saudi Ambassador to
Lebanon to his capital on 1 March 2012, during the first
year of the crisis in Syria, while some delegations in the
Council were maintaining that what was happening in
Syria was a purely peaceful “spring” movement.
Here I will quote an excerpt from the cable sent by
the Saudi Ambassador:
“We must continue to support the Syrian armed
resistance by offering a high salary to each recruit
defecting from the regular army and providing
weapons equal to those possessed by the regime.
We must support the neighbouring countries of
Syria, especially Jordan, and also provide financial
support to the populations living close to the
Syrian borders with Lebanon and Iraq in order to
promote an environment conducive to the Syrian
revolution”.
Before the leaking of the Saudi documents, the
Turkish press revealed certain videos that proved
the involvement of the Erdoğan regime in smuggling
weapons into Syria by way of convoys intended
to contain medical aid. By the way, those convoys
passed through the border checkpoints requested by
OCHA at the time of the adoption of resolution 2165
(2014) on humanitarian access. At that time, we had
requested guarantees on the communications and
nationalities mechanism, but they were never provided
by the Secretariat. However, they did provide weapons,
instead of humanitarian assistance, through the border
checkpoints that OCHA had insisted on in the light of
resolution 2165 (2014).
Judge Aziz Takçı, one of the four Turkish judges
arrested by the Erdoğan regime after the scandal, has
confirmed that more than 2,000 trucks loaded with
missiles, rockets and bombs have been sent to Syria
through Turkey. Also, the leader of the Turkish People’s
Democratic Party has confirmed that the massacre that
took place in the town of Ayn al-Arab/Kobani last

S/PV.7476

week, which claimed the lives of dozens of Syrians,
was a result of the years of support by the Turkish
Government to Daesh extremists. The Daesh terrorists
travelled to Ayn al-Arab through Turkish territory.
Prior to the aforementioned scandals, United
Nations reports revealed the smuggling of weapons
from Libya to Syria via Turkey and Lebanon. Prior
to the current report, we forwarded to the SecretaryGeneral and to the Council all of the documents and
information proving the involvement of Turkey, Qatar
and Saudi Arabia in the smuggling of weapons and
facilitating the entry of terrorists into my country,
Syria.
However, we have encountered and continue
to encounter the flagrant denial of that by some
members of the Council. Yet with each passing day, the
correctness and credibility of our statements made since
the beginning of the crisis, both within and outside the
Council, have become increasingly clear, and now the
crimes of terrorism have reached the countries of those
that were denying its presence in Syria.
I would like to emphasize that the Syrian
Government is ready to cooperate with all sincere
stakeholders in the Security Council to improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria, despite our awareness
that some members of the Council have gone too far in
their support for terrorism and have thus become part
of the problem rather than part of the solution. Some
of those members have used their support for human
rights and the provision of protection and assistance to
civilians as a tool to exert pressure in order to settle
political scores with the Syrian Government.
In order to prove the hypocrisy and double standards
related to the efforts of those countries in dealing with
those noble principles, it is enough to note that they
not only hid the Saudi regime’s support for terrorism
in Syria, but they went even further by covering up
the Saudi war crimes in Yemen. In fact, such actions
have prevented the delivery of humanitarian aid, thus
causing widespread famine in Yemen, especially in
the holy month of Ramadan. The Saudi regime has
prevented even aircraft operated by the Red Cross from
delivering medical aid to Yemen.
Despite all of that, we have not seen any of the
Member States that have appointed themselves the
promoters of human rights and the protectors of
civilians in Syria say a word to condemn such Saudi
practices. Yet those Member States have not missed an

15-200635/6

S/PV.7476

The situation in the Middle East

opportunity to hold fabricated emergency meetings and
side events in order to direct false allegations against
the Syrian Government, which has so far signed six
humanitarian response plans with the United Nations
enabling it to provide humanitarian assistance to nearly
10.5 million Syrian citizens in April, May and June.
Of course, the report did not mention the Syrian
Government’s cooperation. All of the assistance that
was described in the report was indicated as being
provided by United Nations agencies, disregarding the
Syrian Government’s efforts to provide protection to
the agencies that are providing aid.
In Syria, we are fighting terrorism on behalf of
humanity as a whole. The Syrian army, by eliminating
foreign terrorists in Syria, is protecting dozens of
innocent people who could become potential victims of
those terrorists when they return to their countries to
carry out such activities there. The recent tragic events
in Tunisia, France and Kuwait have proved us right.
Those who seek to discredit that illuminating truth
are partners in spreading the scourge of terrorism.
However, Syria’s steadfast Government, people and
army have led the Security Council to adopt three
important resolutions under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, on combating Daesh,
the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist organizations,

6/6

29/06/2015

as well as on combating the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters.
Despite the lack of implementation of those
resolutions and despite the many groups that are
conspiring against us in Syria and continuing to provide
misinformation and false allegations, we will continue
to fight our war against terrorism in order to protect our
people and to rid the world of that scourge. The terrorist
war has been unleashed and is now hitting targets in
Damascus and Baghdad and spreading to Abuja and
Tunisia. It has reached Kuwait and Paris and Sydney
and Boston. The Council is therefore called upon to
wake up before it has regrets, at a time when regret will
have no benefit.
Finally, the Government of Syria is exerting its
utmost effort to end the crisis in Syria via the peaceful
means adopted by the Security Council and, naturally,
approved by the Syrian Government and by all of
those with good intentions. We will continue to exert
peaceful efforts towards a peaceful resolution of the
Syrian crisis, without foreign intervention in Syria’s
domestic affairs.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

15-20063
