S/PV.9133

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9133

rd meeting
Thursday, 15 September 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ravindran
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-59206 (E)
*2259206*

S/PV.9133

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Italy to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Maximo
Torero, Chief Economist, United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization; and Mr. David Beasley,
Executive Director, World Food Programme.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: Four years ago, the Security
Council made a connection between its responsibility
to maintain peace and security and its commitment
to address food insecurity and conflict-induced
hunger. At that time, the Council asked to be swiftly
informed when the risk of conflict-induced famine and
widespread food insecurity occurred. That risk, as we
will hear and discuss today, is now upon us; and so,
regretfully, here we are again today.
Last month, we shared a white note to highlight
four contexts where this risk is clear: Ethiopia, northeast Nigeria, South Sudan and Yemen. Of course,
food insecurity has reached alarming levels in other
situations that also demand our attention, such as
Afghanistan and Somalia — and you, Madam President,
may perhaps permit me to make reference to Somalia
before I conclude. And the Secretary-General recently
wrote to all Member States to convey his concern.
More than 200,000 people are already at risk of famine.
That number is expected to reach 300,000 very soon,
as I imagine we will hear from our colleagues from
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and from the World Food Programme. Famine
will happen in Somalia, and we feel it will not be the
only place either.
2/23

15/09/2022

In the four contexts I mentioned, recent assessments
have identified hundreds of thousands of people facing
catastrophic levels of hunger — or phase 5 of the
Integrated Phase Classification system, which monitors
food security and food insecurity worldwide. As we
have all come to know, phase 5 is the system’s ultimate,
most devastating phase. It simply does not get any worse
than that, and it is rare for people to return from it.
This widespread suffering comes down to the direct
and indirect impact of conflict and violence, as well as
the behaviour of the fighting parties. A similar pattern
recurs in each context: civilians are killed and injured;
families are forcibly displaced from the land they
depend on for their livelihoods and their food; explosive
remnants of war disrupt people’s access to markets,
agricultural production and income generation; civilian
infrastructure and equipment essential for people’s
food security are stolen, damaged or destroyed; and
food stocks are looted and livestock is killed.
In those contexts, economic decline and rising
prices have put sufficient food out of reach for the most
vulnerable. In the most extreme and egregious of cases,
the fighting parties have deliberately cut off access to
the commercial supplies and essential services that
civilians rely on to survive. Hunger is sometimes used
as a tactic of war.
Humanitarian organizations have extended relief
lifelines to people in all those crises, working with local
aid groups — again, the front-line responders who are
the first to deal with trouble and the first to understand
the suffering of their people. Sometimes they are the
only ones there on the ground. Too often, we all face
interference, impediments, harassment and attacks on
our staff and our reputations and the looting or diversion
of assets. That prevents us from reaching people in need
and it makes their suffering worse. Humanitarians will
stay and deliver, but the conditions in some contexts are
simply too difficult and unacceptable.
Other drivers of hunger, including drought — which
I will come back to — the effects of the coronavirus
disease pandemic and rising global commodity prices
are also compounding food insecurity and misery. The
secondary impacts of the war in Ukraine are also among
the drivers of food insecurity in many armed conflicts,
increasing food and fertilizer prices and contributing to
spikes in energy prices.
Finally, although we are here to discuss the link
between conflict and hunger, I would be remiss if I did
22-59206

15/09/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

not point out that every single one of the countries I
mentioned, people are quite literally on the front lines
of climate change. People are feeling the impact of
climate change first. The Secretary-General has made
it clear recently, in both public and private statements,
that climate change is here. It stalks the land.
If I may, I will offer a brief snapshot of the situation
in each of those countries in crisis.
In Yemen, I know all too well that more than seven
years of armed conflict have wreaked havoc on people
across the country. Some 19 million people — six
out of 10 — are acutely food insecure. An estimated
160,000 people are facing catastrophe, as per the
Integrated Phase Classification 5 that I mentioned,
and 538,000 children are severely malnourished. The
situation there may worsen due to funding gaps for
the humanitarian response and continuing economic
instability. Disruptions to commercial imports could
also exacerbate food insecurity — a prospect that has
become very real over recent weeks, as we will hear
from the other briefers, as a lack of funding threatens
the operations of the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism for Yemen, which inspects all
commercial imports, including food, to Yemen’s Red
Sea ports. We hope that particular funding gap will
quickly be addressed so that we can avoid a shutdown
of the Mechanism due on 1 October.
In South Sudan, 63 per cent of the population,
or 7.7 million people, were projected to be in
crisis — or worse, at catastrophic levels of acute
food insecurity — during the peak season this year.
Assessments project that 87,000 people, mostly in
Jonglei state and the Greater Pibor Administrative Area,
could face catastrophe in the form of Integrated Phase
Classification 5. I should add that South Sudan was one
of the most dangerous places to be an aid worker last
year, with 319 violent incidents targeting humanitarian
personnel and assets. Five aid workers — our
colleagues — were killed in 2021, and five more have
died since the beginning of this year, while doing their
best to get people the help they need and deserve.
In Ethiopia, more than 13 million people need
life-saving food assistance across Afar, Amhara and
Tigray. In June, 87 per cent of people surveyed in Tigray
were food insecure, more than half of them severely
so. I am sure that Mr. Beasley will speak on the World
Food Programme’s assessment, but one in February
also found very worrisome food insecurity in parts of

S/PV.9133

Afar and Amhara. We saw some recent improvements
in the delivery of humanitarian assistance in northern
Ethiopia, but that is done now. The resumption of
hostilities in recent weeks is undoing that progress.
Elsewhere in Ethiopia, in parts of Benishangul-Gumuz
and southern and western Oromia, food insecurity and
malnutrition are also believed to be extremely high.
The prediction of famine in the Horn of Africa will not
be limited to Somalia, and the numbers of people at
risk in Ethiopia dwarf even the level of stress that we
see in Somalia.
Turning to north-east Nigeria, we project that
4.1 million people are facing high levels of acute food
insecurity in the conflict-affected states of Adamawa,
Borno and Yobe. They include 588,000 people who
already faced emergency levels between June and
August, almost half of whom were inaccessible to our
colleagues due to insecurity. Therefore, food security
assessments could not be conducted in those areas, but
we can deduce and fear that some people may already
be at the level of catastrophe and are dying.
Our white note recommends specific steps for
each country. Member States could take the following
actions in all four of those places and well beyond.
First, they must leave no stone unturned in the
pursuit of peaceful and negotiated resolutions to
conflicts and other situations of violence. We may hope
to see that in Yemen and elsewhere; we may plead to
see that in Ethiopia.
Secondly, they must remind and encourage States
and armed groups to abide by their obligations under
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. They must not take any actions that
threaten the survival of civilians, and they must ensure
the rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian
relief. I say that knowing full well how absurd that may
seem to some.
Thirdly, they must support an integrated response
to address the underlying drivers of acute food
insecurity. That is a matter of supporting the economies
of countries facing severe large-scale hunger. The
issues of economic collapse and shocks also related to
the climate are those increasingly becoming the agenda
of humanitarian action.
Fourthly, they must sustain humanitarian financing
for those crises. In all those countries, we are well below

22-592063/23

S/PV.9133

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

half of the required funding. Without those resources,
we will do little.
Finally, I want to highlight an issue that, as I have
already mentioned, is central to peace and security:
climate change. I have just come back from Somalia
and a 10-day visit to Pakistan with the SecretaryGeneral, where the absolute clarity of purpose that
we tried to express in those visits was that the impact
of climate change is felt variously by those who did
little to create it. Access to climate financing remains
pitifully little — Somalia has received nothing. Yet if
we want to invest in resilience; if we want to shelter
the peoples of those countries from a repetition of the
shocks of this year; and if we want Somalia to survive
the famines that will come later this year and into next
year, we need the attention of the climate community
and the money pledged by Member States, most — if
not all — of which has not yet reached its destination.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Torero.
Mr. Torero: I thank you, Madam President, for the
invitation to brief the Security Council at this important
meeting today.
As Council members are aware and as Mr. Griffiths
has just explained, hunger has been steadily increasing
in recent years. That is driven by conflict, now also
being exacerbated by the war in Ukraine; the impact
of climate change; economic slowdowns, downturns
and instability; and rising inequality, which has been
exacerbated in the wake of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19). And all of those have been aggravated
by rapidly rising food prices. The link between armed
conflict, food insecurity and famine endures. Conflict
has immediate and lasting effects on every dimension of
agrifood systems, reducing food production, destroying
crops, disrupting markets and restricting access to
food. Conflicts also severely hamper humanitarian
access to civilians. In the long term, they lead to the
complete loss of livelihoods, supply-chain disruptions,
mass displacement, increased pressure on limited
resources and lower resilience. Conflicts also involve
macroeconomic disruptions, increased public deficits
and debts, reduced foreign exchange reserves, currency
depreciation and growing inflation, all of which feed
into diminished capacities for social protection and
livelihood support.
4/23

15/09/2022

In addition, because of the slowdowns and
downturns that we are facing today, countries, especially
food-importing countries — and that is what most of
the countries with food crises are — are challenged
not only by high prices but because their currencies
are being devalued. The Global Report on Food Crises
2022 Mid-Year Update was published on Monday, and it
forecasts that through the end of this year, 205 million
people will be facing the Cadre Harmonisé’s three
highest phases of acute food insecurity, or Integrated
Phase Classification (IPC) 3 or greater. That means
they will be in need of urgent humanitarian assistance.
That is higher than at any point in the seven-year history
of the Global Report and represents an increase from
193 million people, reported in the 2022 edition of the
Report, released in May. Without urgent humanitarian
assistance, a record-breaking 970,000 people are
expected to be facing IPC 5, or famine-like conditions,
across five countries. The consequences of COVID-19,
which have had an impact through the slowdowns and
downturns, and of the war in Ukraine, are having direct
and indirect effects on those countries and are likely to
worsen in the second half of 2022 and early 2023.
Although it is not included in great detail in
the white note, it is important to describe the dire
situation in Somalia. Two weeks ago, the IPC Famine
Review Committee concluded that without significant
humanitarian assistance, agropastoral populations in
two districts and displaced populations in the town
of Baidoa in the Bay region will face famine between
October and December 2022. Those conditions are
expected to persist until at least March 2023, owing to
decades of conflict, severe economic shocks and mass
population displacement, on top of the failure of four
consecutive rainy seasons, with an unprecedented fifth
failed season forecast. In addition, several areas of
central and southern Somalia face an increased risk of
famine through at least December 2022. Those facing
the famine risks are agropastoralists, and many are
in areas where insecurity is hampering humanitarian
access. In total, 300,000 people are expected to be in
IPC 5 conditions between October and December.
I should also draw the Council’s attention to
Afghanistan, where the humanitarian situation
remains highly fragile. Approximately 19 million
people are projected to face high acute food insecurity,
notwithstanding a harvest similar to last year’s, and
winter is fast approaching. Spiralling food, fuel,
fertilizer and transportation costs resulting from the
22-59206

15/09/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

war in Ukraine are only compounding an already brutal
situation. The country is largely agricultural, with
80 per cent of livelihoods dependent on agriculture.
The sector has proved to be most resilient and offers
enormous potential to expand food production, boost
rural economies and drive economic recovery from the
village level.
Currently, there is no updated food security data
for Ethiopia, but it is highly likely that the situation
has deteriorated considerably in 2022. Together with
the drought affecting southern areas, the resumption
of hostilities in Tigray directly threatens the meher
harvest in October. Last year, farmers in the region
produced 900,000 tons of cereals during the meher
season — the equivalent of seven to eight months of
the region’s annual cereal requirements — which is far
greater than the amount of food that entered the region
through commercial or humanitarian sources. That
underscores the potential critical impact of further
disruptions to food production, especially if access
remains constrained.
Heightened
and
increasingly
politicized
intercommunal violence has been affecting South
Sudan since 2020. Together with the lingering impact
of the prolonged conflict, severe macroeconomic
challenges and significant livelihood losses, owing
particularly to the widespread floods of the past
four years and the insecurity caused by the frequent
clashes, are driving dire levels of food insecurity.
About 7.74 million people — almost two‑thirds of the
total population — are estimated to be facing IPC 3 or
worse acute food insecurity during the lean season. In
Leer county, where IPC 5, or famine-like conditions,
were reported, armed clashes have continued to drive
displacement in 2022.
In northern Nigeria, the security situation continues
to deteriorate, owing to escalating hostilities among
non-State armed groups, criminality and intercommunal
violence. With the end of the rainy season in September,
the violence is likely to experience a seasonal jump,
disrupting food systems, limiting access to markets and
creating new rounds of displacement. Approximately
4.14 million people were estimated to face acute food
insecurity in the north-eastern states of Adamawa,
Borno and Yobe, with many in areas inaccessible to
humanitarian assistance.
In Yemen, the outlook on food insecurity is
expected to be better than projected. Some assumptions

S/PV.9133

for the projections were disproved, while the assumed
ripple effects of the war in Ukraine on the international
markets have not appeared. Additionally, funding for
food assistance improved slightly, and major cuts in the
number of beneficiaries were prevented. The conflict
eased considerably after the parties agreed on a truce
in April. However, movement restrictions continue to
constrain humanitarian access.
When the Council speaks, the world listens.
Preventing conflict is the most effective means of
preventing famine. Halting violence and insecurity not
only saves lives immediately, but it opens up opportunities
for immediate assistance, resilience-building, lasting
development and, ultimately, locally owned pathways
to peace and stability. It is essential that we act now to
minimize all the potential calamities that I have just
enumerated. We hope that we can accelerate taking
action so that we minimize such risks in the future.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Torero
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Beasley.
Mr. Beasley: It is great to be with members of the
Security Council, albeit on a truly sad occasion. This
morning I returned from Central America, where I saw
first-hand how conflict thousands of miles away on one
continent is adding fuel to the flames of what is already
a severe hunger crisis on another. During my visits to
Guatemala and the Darién Gap, in Panama, I heard
tragic stories from people migrating northward out of
sheer desperation. The impact of climate crises and the
ongoing economic ripple effects of coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) had already exhausted many families’
ability to cope, and now soaring prices, sparked by the
global grain, fuel and fertilizer shortages and inflamed
by the Ukraine conflict, have left them in despair. They
literally have nothing left. They can stay and starve, or
they can leave and risk death for the chance of a better
future in the United States.
And that is just one corner of our planet. We know
of similar stories driven by war in many other nations
across the globe. We are here today to raise the alarm
about those severe food crises, especially in Ethiopia,
north-eastern Nigeria, South Sudan and Yemen. And
as my good friend Martin Griffiths said, there is also
Somalia, which I would be remiss not to mention. I just
returned from there, where Mr. Griffiths and I were just
a week ago. As Council members know, we are already
facing a global emergency of unprecedented magnitude,

22-592065/23

S/PV.9133

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

with the threat of mass starvation and famine growing
constantly. As 2022 began, we were already facing the
perfect storm, due to emerging conflicts, COVID-19’s
economic ripple effects, climate change, rising fuel
prices — and then, just when one might think it could
not get any worse, Ukraine. Since that conflict began,
soaring food, fuel and fertilizer costs have driven an
additional 70 million people closer to starvation. What
was a wave of hunger is now a tsunami of hunger.
In the 82 countries where the World Food Programme
(WFP) currently operates, as many as 345 million
people are now acutely food insecure. In other words,
they are marching towards starvation — Integrated
Phase Classification (IPC) levels 3, 4 and 5. That is two
and a half times the number of acutely food-insecure
people before the pandemic began. It is hard to believe
that number was only 80 million just a few years ago.
Here is what is incredibly troubling. Of the 345 million
marching towards starvation, almost 50 million live
in 45 countries that are knocking on famine’s door at
IPC level 4. In 2007 and 2008, because of the high
inflation and soaring food prices at the time, there were
riots, protests and civil unrest in 48 nations. Today the
economic factors we see are far worse. Despite the hard
work on the Black Sea Grain Initiative and ongoing
efforts to get Russian fertilizer, for example, back into
the global markets, there is a real and dangerous risk of
multiple famines this year. In 2023, the current foodprice crisis could develop into a food-supply availability
crisis if we do not act.
Let me quickly touch on the countries on which the
Council requested information. In northern Ethiopia, the
resumption of fighting threatens to push many hungry,
exhausted families over the edge. The humanitarian
truce declared in March enabled the WFP and its
partners to reach almost 5 million people in the Tigray
area. But the recent outbreak of violence is threatening
those humanitarian relief efforts just as families
are struggling through the current lean season. Our
assessment in Tigray shows that hunger has deepened.
Some 5.2 million people — in other words, 89 per cent
of the population — are food-insecure. Almost half are
suffering from a severe lack of food. As the Council
can imagine, our teams are working day and night to
help those in need. But we need fuel, funding and the
full movement of supplies across the lines of control
to get help to where it is needed most. The recent theft
of WFP fuel supplies in Tigray does not make our task
any easier. The harvest is next month, and the lack of
6/23

15/09/2022

fertilizer means it is likely to be poor. We need to get
food to people in northern Ethiopia now.
In north-eastern Nigeria, a toxic mix of escalating
violence, displacement, damaged livelihoods and
soaring food prices is clearly fuelling a growing foodinsecurity crisis. The current lean season is coming to
an end. There are an estimated 4.1 million food-insecure
people in the north-east, half a million of whom are in
inaccessible areas. We are hoping to reach 2.1 million
people across north-eastern Nigeria. But as the gap
between needs and resources grows wider, as many as
1 million people may not receive the food assistance
they need. That encourages migration, extremism and
exploitation and makes famine more likely.
Meanwhile, in South Sudan, the situation is even
worse, as the conflict continues and is compounded by
flooding in seven of the country’s 10 states to fuel a foodsecurity crisis that is truly becoming catastrophic. There
is widespread population displacement. A changing
climate has rendered previously fertile agricultural
land unusable and food prices have doubled, while the
value of the currency has depreciated by almost a third
since February. That has all combined to push basic
foodstuffs beyond the reach of most of the population.
At the same time, as the Council is aware, fighting
among armed groups has intensified and humanitarian
agencies in the country are being targeted by armed
groups and subjected to looting and extortion. We
have seen what is happening in Haiti today. Now South
Sudan is facing its highest rates of acute hunger since
independence in 2011. Some 7.7 million people, more
than 60 per cent of the population, are facing critical
or worse levels of food insecurity. Without political
solutions to end the violence and substantial investment
in humanitarian relief programmes, many people in
South Sudan will die.
Finally, in Yemen, the humanitarian situation
is deteriorating despite the fragile truce, due to the
worsening economic outlook. The conflict in Ukraine
is stoking inflation, owing to Yemen’s almost total
reliance on food imports, and thereby pushing more
people into extreme poverty, as accelerating inflation
erodes the value of already meagre incomes. Compared
with just 12 months ago, food prices are now 70 per cent
higher in the north of Yemen and 40 per cent higher in
the south. We at the WFP hope to feed approximately
18 million people, which will obviously be one of the
biggest humanitarian programmes of all time. However,
since the start of this year, our cost of doing business
22-59206

15/09/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

in Yemen has risen by 30 per cent, from $1.97 billion
to $2.6 billion. As a result, as members can imagine,
we have had to cut the assistance we provide. As of
September, 13 million people will now be receiving
two-thirds rations. With fuel costs and the cost of
transportation logistics, our operations have increased
globally by more than $800 million per year.
The conflicts that rage in so many parts of our
world today are pushing millions of blameless civilians
ever closer to starvation and famine. I urge the Council
to show the leadership that the world urgently needs
right now. Some Council members have stepped up
to provide generous funding for emergency food
assistance, and that has helped our teams to avert
famine. Others need to do the same. However, beyond
funding, we urgently need political solutions to end
these wars. In the meantime, we need access to reach
all those in need. We need the Council’s help with both
of those tasks.
I want to remind everyone that I warned the Security
Council in April 2020 (see S/2020/340, annex II) that
we were then facing famine and starvation of biblical
proportions. The Council stepped up with funding and
a tremendous response, and we averted catastrophe.
We are on the edge once again, and even worse. We
must do all that we can — all hands on deck, with every
fibre of our bodies. The hungry people of the world are
counting on us, and we must not let them down.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Beasley for his comprehensive and precise briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): At the outset, I want to
thank the French presidency of the Security Council
for supporting the convening of today’s meeting, as
proposed by Brazil and Ireland. As co-focal points in
the Council on food security and armed conflicts, we
aim to keep highlighting the centrality of food security
to conflict prevention and resolution, as well as to
the mitigation of the impact of armed disputes on the
most vulnerable populations. I would also like to thank
our briefers today for their very precise and relevant
briefings. Each of them highlighted a complementary
aspect of the impact of conflict on food security, as
well as recommendations for the United Nations and its
Member States to tackle the issue.

S/PV.9133

The state of global food insecurity, especially in
countries involved in conflict, is more alarming than
ever. According to the most recent Global Report on
Food Crises, we are witnessing the highest numbers of
people in a situation of crisis or worse since the report
was first published. That number, 205 million, is almost
equivalent to Brazil’s total population. By all metrics
and parameters, such a high level of food insecurity
is unacceptable.
The white note that we are discussing today
illustrates why this picture is even grimmer in countries
affected by conflict. In Yemen, agricultural lands
are at risk from landmines, despite the suspension of
hostilities. In South Sudan, many children will suffer
lifelong consequences due to violence and their lack
of access to school and school meals. In Ethiopia,
harvests are going to waste due to forced displacement.
And in north-eastern Nigeria, non-State armed
groups are impeding the use of roads that are vital
to the distribution of food. None of that happens in a
vacuum but rather compounds an already worrisome
combination of climate extremes and macroeconomic
shocks. The conflict in Ukraine, coupled with the
effects of the unilateral sanctions applied by some
countries, has aggravated the situation.
Armed conflict and food insecurity form a perverse
cycle that traps populations and countries in a spiral
of deteriorating living conditions. Conflicts generate
forced displacement, the destruction of essential
infrastructure and the degradation of otherwise
viable soil. Food insecurity intensifies competition
over resources and hampers any other form of human
development that could lead to the necessary conditions
of stabilization and sustainable peace. We need to break
that cycle, and we need concrete action in the three
pillars of the United Nations to do it.
Allow me to start with the humanitarian front. The
World Food Programme (WFP) briefing and the white
note of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs send a clear message. Two simultaneous
factors, the increase in food prices and the growing
number of people suffering from acute food insecurity,
are putting humanitarian food assistance efforts at
risk. Those two factors put the system under pressure
and enlarge the funding gap. Donor countries and all
those in a condition to do so need to step up so that no
humanitarian agency has to choose between the hungry
and the starving.

22-592067/23

S/PV.9133

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Market stabilization and transparency measures
can also play an important part. Such measures help
to lower food prices, which can alleviate the pressure
both on the WFP and in affected countries and can
improve food accessibility. The white note gives a
clear example showing that in the case of Yemen,
decreasing purchasing power and increasing food
prices are contributing to deteriorating humanitarian
conditions. In that spirit, building a truly open and
fair multilateral trading system for the agrifood sector
and eradicating historical price- and trade-distortive
practices and subsidies are also important steps for
supporting livelihoods, including for populations
affected by conflict.
That brings me to my second point, which is the
key role of sustainable development in mitigating food
insecurity and advancing durable solutions in conflictaffected countries. Actions to generate or rebuild
productive capacities, including the delivery of seeds
and the improvement of crop production, such as those
that the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) promotes in Ethiopia, are essential to
preventing producers and consumers from falling into
internal displacement and severe food insecurity. When
accompanied by effective early-warning systems,
investments in such durable solutions can also be
concrete means for preventing conflicts and promoting
long-term stabilization in post-conflict scenarios.
Brazil has vast expertise in producing more with
fewer inputs and maximizing agricultural yields
even in unfavourable conditions, as well as extensive
experience in South-South cooperation and longstanding partnerships with the WFP and the FAO. We
stand ready to support that agenda and would like to
call on all Member States to step up their efforts, in
providing not only humanitarian assistance but also
technical capacity and technology transfers, so that
countries affected by conflicts can build productive,
competitive and sustainable food systems. As the FAO
has indicated on multiple occasions, only a small fraction
of the resources directed to food and agricultural
assistance goes to capacity-building projects. Of
course, many, if not all, of those measures do not fall
under the purview of the Security Council, and we do
believe that the Council must maintain its strict focus on
peace and security. However, the appropriate bodies for
advancing development-oriented solutions may often
lack technical and political expertise with regard to
conflict-affected areas. In that context, we believe that
8/23

15/09/2022

the Peacebuilding Commission is uniquely positioned
to help fill that gap by playing its bridging role between
peace and security and development solutions, as well
as mobilizing international support, in cooperation with
the Rome-based agencies and the entire United Nations
system, while preserving its demand-driven approach
and alignment with the peacebuilding priorities of the
countries in question.
Last but not least, there is the peace and security
aspect. Bridging humanitarian funding gaps and
sustaining agricultural production are indispensable
measures, but they will not succeed if conflicts keep
roads blocked and people unable to work the land.
The truce in Yemen and the Black Sea Grain Initiative
have shown that even small steps in favour of peace
and stabilization can have a positive impact on food
security. We need to preserve and build on those
incremental gains. Thanks to resolution 2417 (2018), the
Council has a framework to do that. We must uphold its
provisions, provide tools for its implementation in line
with the recommendations presented in the white note,
and secure it as a backbone of our action with regard to
food security and conflict.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this very important meeting.
I also thank the briefers for their messages to the
Security Council this afternoon. They have left us in no
doubt as to the severity and urgency of the situation, as
millions of people are facing conflict-induced hunger.
The stark briefings they delivered, not only in relation
to the situation set out in the white note but also to
Somalia and Afghanistan, make clear the need for the
Council to not only hear those warnings — as foreseen
under resolution 2417 (2018) — but to listen and to act.
We have a collective responsibility to those starving as
a consequence of unresolved conflict and insecurity. I
want to welcome the recommendations set out in the
white note received in advance of this meeting. They
underline the link between hunger and conflict. That
phenomenon is intrinsically linked to our responsibility
to maintain international peace and security. I will
focus my remarks on three areas.
First, today’s update is clear and irrefutable.
Conflict is exacerbating, driving and prolonging
hunger and famine. We are failing in our challenge
to reach zero hunger — a failure largely driven by
armed conflict. The demand for life-saving and
life-sustaining humanitarian aid is now outstripping
our capacity to respond. United Nations agencies and
22-59206

15/09/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

non-governmental organizations are forced to take
food from the hungry to feed the starving. Hard-won
progress has been reversed. Gains are being undone.
The future for millions is bleak. That is a damning
indictment both of the state of food insecurity globally
and the Council’s response to conflict-induced hunger.
The global insecurity crisis, exacerbated by
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, has stretched the
international response. Climate events such as the
protracted drought in the Horn of Africa have been
compounded by a shortage in humanitarian food
supplies and resources. Today’s briefers were also very
clear about the very real risk of famine brought about
by drought in Somalia. Ireland’s Minister for Overseas
Development Aid saw that first-hand earlier this month
in South Sudan. He witnessed the disproportionate
impact of hunger and conflict on women and children,
with child malnutrition rates doubling since February.
Conflict-induced hunger is taking lives today and
altering outcomes for generations to come — damage
we cannot undo, but which we can, and must, work to
prevent in the future.
My second point is that hunger is not only a
consequence of conflict. It is also cynically used by
some as a weapon of war.
In Yemen, explosive remnants of war have made
agricultural land unusable to populations totally reliant
on that land for their livelihoods. In north-east Nigeria,
farming assets have been stripped by non-State armed
groups. That has reduced the availability of food to
communities in need.
At the same time, parties to conflict are diverting or
blocking vital aid flows to communities in dire need. In
the Tigray region of northern Ethiopia, access to critical
aid supplies has been highly constrained. Humanitarian
workers in South Sudan, Ethiopia and other conflictaffected contexts have been targeted, abducted and
even killed in the course of their vital work. Ireland
condemns those acts in the strongest possible terms.
There can be no impunity for parties to armed
conflict who target humanitarian actors and who
utilize starvation and denial of access to humanitarian
assistance to civilians. The law is clear, including
the Security Council’s resolutions. There must
be accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law.

S/PV.9133

Thirdly,
although
essential,
humanitarian
assistance is not the answer to the scourge of conflictinduced hunger. The answer is peace. We often talk
around this table about the need to act early to prevent
suffering before it is too late. That means having the
courage to take action to protect civilians. That means
putting pressure on the parties to conflict to come to
the table. That is our job.
As in all contexts, sustainable peace requires
the active participation of women in all processes. It
requires the input of youth to determine their futures.
In Yemen, an expanded truce leading to a durable
ceasefire is the most viable path to an inclusive political
settlement, led and owned by the Yemeni people.
The conflict in Tigray is a stark example of conflictinduced hunger. Our message to the parties is simple:
stop fighting and return to the negotiations. That will
end the risk of famine. It has been Ireland’s consistent
view that the way to end conflict in Ethiopia is through
the African Union-led mediation process. We, the
members of the Security Council, should provide our
full support to that process.
The road to peace and security in South Sudan must
include accountability — accountability for the serious
violations and abuses of international humanitarian
law and human rights, including conflict-related sexual
and gender-based violence perpetrated by parties to
the conflict.
In north-east Nigeria, an end to the persistent
conflict will enable much-needed, and shamefully
blocked, life-saving humanitarian assistance and
protection. It will also shut off the drivers of forced
child recruitment and the abhorrent attacks on, and
persecution of, humanitarian workers.
The answer to the violence, the violations and the
suffering we have heard about today lies in peace and
security — the essence of our collective mandate. Our
political will must match the need if we are to break
that deadly cycle and reverse escalating conflictinduced hunger.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths, Executive Director
Beasley and Chief Economist Torero for their briefings.
Food security is both a key element for realizing
lasting peace and security and a long-standing challenge
facing the international community. We should stay

22-592069/23

S/PV.9133

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

calm and pragmatic and focus both on the present to
resolve urgent matters and on the long term to achieve
the goal of eradicating hunger. In that connection,
China wishes to stress the following three points.
We must promote the political settlement of hotspot issues. Armed conflicts undermine agricultural
production, destroy agricultural infrastructure, disrupt
trade in food, cause displacement and directly worsen
the local food security situations. As long as conflicts
and wars are not fully resolved, local populations will
continue to suffer from hunger. The international
community should vigorously promote the political
settlement of hot-spot issues and foster a peaceful and
secure environment for ensuring food security.
Secondly, we must ensure stable and smooth
industrial and supply chains. Secretary-General
Guterres has articulated that there is enough food
in our world for everyone, and the issue is about
distribution. Major food exporters and countries with
major grain companies should join efforts to curb
artificial inflation of food prices. So far, over 700,000
tons of grain has been shipped to destinations across the
world under the Black Sea Grain Initiative. At present,
owing to many obstacles in bank settlement, insurance
and shipping, millions of tons of Russian fertilizers
are stranded in ports in Europe, and there has been a
failure to export it on time. It is imperative to remove
such barriers to ensure the free and steady flow of key
agricultural resources.
Thirdly, we must help people in conflict areas
overcome difficulties. Last year, 53 countries and
regions were food insecure. At present, around
7.7 million people in South Sudan are facing food
shortages; 4.1 million people in Nigeria do not have a
secure food supply; Yemen is mired in the most severe
food crisis in recent years; in Somalia, millions are
struggling to earn a living amid a major drought which
is now in its seventh year; and the basic needs of many
Afghan families are not being met.
No one and no country should be left behind in
achieving food security. Assistance to regions and
countries in conflict must only be increased, not
decreased. Developed countries should earnestly
fulfil the commitment of spending 0.7 per cent
of their national income on official development
assistance. International financial institutions and
developed economies should step up their policy and
10/23

15/09/2022

financing support for developing countries facing
special difficulties.
Fourthly, food security capacity should be
comprehensively strengthened. At present, the world
food supply and demand pattern is characterized by food
production being highly concentrated in a few countries
and consumption highly dispersed geographically.
Helping more countries become more self-sustaining
with regard to food is the most direct and effective means
of improving food security. We should help the relevant
countries increase agricultural investment, support
the early recovery and reconstruction of agricultural
infrastructure and strengthen support for agricultural
technologies. Developed countries should reduce
trade and technical barriers and offer more support to
developing countries in funding technologies, markets
and capacity-building, among other things.
As the most populous country in the world, China
has managed to feed approximately one fifth of the
world’s population with less than 9 per cent of the world’s
arable land. That in itself is a major contribution to
global food security. China has provided more funding
and experts and undertaken more projects under the
framework of the South-South Cooperation programme
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) than any other developing country. We
set up the FAO-China South-South Cooperation Trust
Fund to help developing countries build their capacities
for poverty alleviation, agricultural production and
food security.
China has carried out agricultural cooperation with
more than 140 countries and regions and provided more
than 1,000 agricultural technologies to other developing
countries, driving their crop yield up by 30 to 60 per
cent on average, benefiting more than 1.5 million small
agricultural households. China will continue to work
with all countries in the world to contribute even more
to maintaining food security.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
also like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Mr. Maximo
Torero and Mr. David Beasley for their excellent
briefings. The magnitude of the crises they are describing
is, as David Beasley said, of biblical proportions. Their
projections of the hundreds of thousands of people who
will experience catastrophic levels of food insecurity
are indeed deeply alarming, and that call for action
must not go unheeded.
22-59206

15/09/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Four years ago, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2417 (2018). It recognized the
impacts that armed conflict has on food security
and expressed the Council’s intention to give its full
attention to the issue. Since that time, the need for our
dedicated attention to this issue has never been greater,
and we thank those who have brought this matter to the
Council’s attention.
I would like to make the following points on the
impact of food insecurity on some of the conflict
situations that we are considering today, as outlined by
the briefers.
On Yemen, we reiterate that the Houthis need to
end all violations of the current humanitarian truce and
fully implement it to see our way through this. The note
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs underlines how the blockading of roads by
the Houthis in and out of Taiz is perpetuating grave
hardships for the civilian population. And this purely
humanitarian issue affecting millions of Yemenis needs
to be resolved without delay. The note also makes clear
how urgent economic support can improve the living
conditions of the population.
In the Horn of Africa, including in Ethiopia
and Somalia, agricultural activity continues to be
undermined by climate change and phenomena such as
water scarcity, the degradation of farm land and deadly
cycles of droughts and flash floods. The effects of
that are severely exacerbated by conflict, violence and
displacement across the region. It is critical to ensure
that the millions of people who are at risk of starvation
be able to access food. The international community
should support the work of local and regional partners
in the Horn of Africa to develop mechanisms that help
communities build resilience to mitigate the risks
of rising food insecurity. In Ethiopia in particular,
it is imperative to build on recent developments to
reinvigorate the indefinite humanitarian truce, which
was instrumental for the resumption of humanitarian aid.
Finally, on South Sudan, growing food insecurity
has resulted from the complex dynamics and challenges
the country is facing, including rising intercommunal
tensions, the impact of climate change and limited
infrastructure. Our collective efforts to address the
humanitarian needs of the people of South Sudan are
now more critical than ever.
On the broader impacts of food insecurity globally,
I would like to raise three issues.

S/PV.9133

First, we know that singular short-term approaches
will not be sufficient in addressing the impact of armed
conflict, rising food prices, stalled economic growth and
disruptions in global supply chains. Parties to conflict
must engage constructively to forge frameworks for
ongoing cooperation on issues such as humanitarian
access security challenges and food distribution.
Food insecurity is indeed part of a symptom of deeper
divides. The added benefit of that approach is that
cooperation between parties to address food security at
a technical level can actually help build the confidence
that is necessary to achieve broader political progress
on the issues underlying the conflict.
Secondly, we need to do more to alleviate the
impacts of the global food crisis today, exacerbated
by recent conflict. Ukraine and Russia accounted for
12 per cent of all calories traded globally, and some
26 countries relied on them for 50 per cent of their
grains. The United Arab Emirates, as a country that
imports the majority of our foodstuffs, understands the
vulnerabilities food importers are exposed to. To make
matters worse, the increase in fertilizer prices is putting
further pressure on food producers — increasing
costs, reducing yields and threatening future harvests.
Ukrainian grain and other foodstuffs must reach those
most in need, not just those able to pay. Likewise, as
was pointed out in the briefing we heard the at the
start of this meeting, fertilizers play a critical role in
ensuring future harvests, and Russian fertilizers must
be able to reach global markets to help ensure that
future agricultural production is not further imperilled.
Thirdly, the current food security crisis is a
telling example of how the impacts of climate change
can contribute to insecurity. Developing countries,
especially fragile States, are more exposed to
climate-induced natural disasters that, in turn, drive
down agricultural output. That is impacting the lives
and livelihoods of millions around the world. Yet
currently only $2 per capita of climate financing
reaches extremely fragile countries, 80 times less than
other developing countries that are also underserved.
We must prioritize investments in early-warning
systems, anticipatory action and agricultural resilience,
and we must increase the risk appetite of international
financial institutions.
In the Council, the United Arab Emirates has been
consistently advocating for taking more unconventional
drivers of conflict systematically into account — for
instance, by receiving regular updates on risk factors

22-5920611/23

S/PV.9133

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

in fragile settings. That, in turn, will help preventative
action by the Council to address the worsening security
and humanitarian situations of concern. Climate and
food security are closely intertwined, and both are key
to maintaining international peace and security. The
United Arab Emirates looks forward to working with
all the members of the Council and with all Member
States in order to ensure that food security is given the
global attention it deserves.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation is grateful for the briefings
made by Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths,
World Food Programme (WFP) Executive Director
David Beasley and Mr. Maximo Torero, from the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
As we heard, food security challenges are
unprecedented in our contemporary history. Conflict is
one of the main causes of hunger, even if it is not the
only one. According to the WFP, 345 million people in
82 countries face acute food insecurity, as compared
to 282 million at the beginning of the year; 50 million
people in 45 countries are on the brink of famine; and it
is estimated that as many as 60 million children could
experience severe malnutrition by the end of this year.
Those are stark figures that should spark collective
action to reverse the situation.
The white note provided by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs as an earlywarning element and in line with the mandates of the
Security Council is a useful tool to identify problems in
a timely manner and to take concrete actions to prevent
the risks of food insecurity and famine from increasing.
The precarious food situation in many countries
has also been exacerbated by the conflict in Ukraine.
In that context, we reiterate our deep appreciation for
the efforts made by the Secretary-General and Türkiye
towards the agreement reached, which has allowed
grain exports from Ukraine. That has contributed to
lowering food prices. Regrettably, placing more grain
on the markets has not translated into a reduction of
famine conditions in various parts of the world. In
that sense, as others noted, it is equally important for
Russian fertilizers and food products to be able to reach
global markets.
Ending hunger and malnutrition, addressing
humanitarian crises, preventing and resolving conflicts
are not separate tasks; they are distinct aspects of the
same challenge. It is no coincidence that in the five
12/23

15/09/2022

countries identified by the WFP as most at risk of
famine — Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Somalia, South Sudan
and Yemen — there are conflict situations. But those are
not the only countries suffering from hunger. Hunger is
even present among the most developed countries.
It is essential to attack the structural causes of food
insecurity and famine. That is why we join others in
calling on the parties in Ethiopia to put an end to the
hostilities in the north of that country.
In Yemen, we call for the truce conditions to be
maintained and expanded. In both cases, as well as in
Afghanistan, it is imperative that unrestricted and safe
humanitarian access be guaranteed.
In Somalia, we are witnessing one of the worst
droughts in decades, while the people of South Sudan
are victims of floods. We must build the resilience
necessary to cope with the adverse effects of climate
change, the other factor exacerbating food insecurity.
We must address food insecurity and famine in a
differentiated manner. Mexico therefore proposes the
following initial steps.
In order to address the structural causes of the risks
of famine, we must contribute to the quest for peaceful
and negotiated political solutions to armed conflict and
violence through all available means, starting with those
set out in the Charter of the United Nations. In order
to directly address food insecurity, we must encourage
increased local production, reduce the scandalous levels
of food waste, improve access to fertilizers, enhance
social protection systems for vulnerable people and
increase the functionality of fertilizer and seed supply
chains. It is unacceptable that in a world of material
overabundance and hyperconsumption, millions of
people face food insecurity or famine because of
our collective indifference and the profoundly unjust
distribution of income that remains endemic in so
many countries.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me begin by expressing
our deep appreciation to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the
Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Food
Programme for sharing their very important insights.
We listened with great concern to OCHA’s update
on food insecurity due to conflict and violence in
Ethiopia, north-eastern Nigeria, South Sudan and
Yemen. We are also alarmed by the levels of food
insecurity in Somalia and Afghanistan. The OCHA
22-59206

15/09/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

white note clearly points to conflict as a driver of food
insecurity and underlines the importance of the earlywarning mechanism foreseen in resolution 2417 (2018).
It is evident that the Council has a preventive role to
play in line with that resolution by breaking the cycle
of armed conflict and hunger and stepping up its efforts
to avert conflicts in the first place. The Council must
also speak out loudly and clearly against violations
of international humanitarian law and in support of
accountability, including in relation to the obstruction
of humanitarian assistance and the use of starvation as
a method of warfare.
One striking situation that demands the Council’s
attention is the conflict dynamic in the Horn of Africa.
Civilians in that region have experienced widespread
food insecurity due to conflict and violence for several
years, and now the renewed fighting in Tigray is having
serious and immediate consequences for the region.
The Council should urgently encourage and support
the good offices of the African Union and the United
Nations in working for an immediate ceasefire and the
start of talks.
We appreciate and support the general and contextspecific recommendations outlined in the OCHA
white note. We also want to highlight the gendered
impact of conflict-induced food insecurity, including
for malnourished women and children. Accordingly,
in response, women must play an active role in the
prevention of food insecurity and conflict as well as in
the design and implementation of peacebuilding efforts
and humanitarian responses.
Global food insecurity has been exacerbated by
Russia’s illegal war against Ukraine, with far-reaching
consequences for millions of people. Once again, we
commend the Secretary-General for his efforts in
launching the Black Sea Grain Initiative. We must make
sure that the most vulnerable benefit from it. The global
food crisis requires us to step up funding and scale
up our investments in food production and resilience,
both inside and outside conflict zones. We must also
respond in a way that reduces future risks by ensuring
better interaction between humanitarian, development
and peace efforts and addressing climate change as a
driver of further conflict. Accordingly, Norway has
increased its own funding and our new food-security
strategy focuses on small-scale food producers and
climate resilience.

S/PV.9133

Finally, we appreciate the clear recommendation
in the OCHA white note on the role of regional
organizations. We agree that we must strengthen
partnerships with the African Union and other regional
organizations as a vital part of our efforts to prevent
both conflict and food insecurity.
Mr. Ravindran (India): Let me thank the
delegations of Brazil and Ireland for convening
this meeting today. I am also grateful to UnderSecretary-General Griffiths, the Food and Agriculture
Organization’s Chief Economist, Mr. Torero, and
the World Food Programme’s Executive Director,
Mr. Beasley, for their statements.
The level of food insecurity has reached alarming
proportions. More than 140 million people are reeling
under conflict-induced hunger. More than 640,000
face catastrophic levels of food insecurity in parts
of South Sudan, Somalia, Yemen, Ethiopia and
elsewhere. Afghanistan and Sri Lanka, in India’s own
neighbourhood, have also been seriously affected
by the food-insecurity crisis. The global impact of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and
ongoing conflicts, including in Ukraine, have had an
adverse impact on the lives of ordinary people, with
spiralling energy and commodity prices and disruptions
to global logistical supply chains. Those effects have
been disproportionately felt by the countries of the
global South and are already derailing their efforts to
ensure food security and eradicate poverty in the runup to 2030.
A sudden spike in the global price of wheat and
other food grains has put our own food security
and those of our neighbours and other vulnerable
countries at risk. A number of low-income societies
are confronted today with the twin challenges of rising
costs and difficulty in accessing food grains. It is clear
that hoarding and speculation are at work. In order to
manage our own overall food security and support the
needs of neighbouring and other vulnerable developing
countries, we have put in place some measures regarding
the export of food grains. I want to make it clear that
those measures allow for export on an approval basis to
countries that request India’s support in meeting their
food-security demands. That policy ensures that we will
truly respond to those most in need. It is imperative that
we all adequately appreciate the importance of equity,
affordability and accessibility when it comes to food
grains. We have already seen how those principles were
disregarded in the case of COVID-19 vaccines, where

22-5920613/23

S/PV.9133

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

open markets became an argument for perpetuating
inequity and promoting discrimination. With foodinsecurity challenges rising to global proportions, the
steps we need to take are clear.
First, food and energy security are interlinked and
have emerged as pressing issues. We reiterate that the
international community needs to work collectively
to find common solutions through dialogue and
diplomacy. In that regard, we appreciate the efforts of
the Secretary-General to establish the Global Crisis
Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance in
connection with opening up the export of grains from
Ukraine via the Black Sea and facilitating the export of
Russian food and fertilizers.
Secondly, rapid humanitarian access to the people
in need in all areas affected by conflict and violence is
critical. At the same time, the United Nations guiding
principles on humanitarian assistance — humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence — are
paramount. Those measures should never be politicized.
Furthermore, we need to avoid linking humanitarian
and development assistance with progress in
political processes. At the same time, we have recently
also seen a disturbing trend in which humanitarian aid,
including much-needed fuel supplies for the World Food
Programme, has been looted. That is unacceptable.
Thirdly, the growing food grain shortages can be
addressed only by going beyond current constraints.
We welcome the recent decision by the World Trade
Organization to exempt the WFP’s purchases of food for
humanitarian assistance from food-export restrictions.
However, that is not enough. We need to go beyond that
to make a real difference and unshackle the limitations
on food exports.
Finally, armed conflict and terrorism, combined
with extreme weather, crop pests, volatile food
prices, exclusion and economic shocks, can devastate
any fragile economy, leading to food insecurity
and increased threats of famine. Capacity-building
support for countries facing those issues in designing,
implementing and monitoring policies and programmes
related to food is therefore extremely critical.
As for our own track record of helping our partners
in distress, even in the middle of the COVID-19
pandemic and ongoing conflicts, India has never
been found wanting. We have provided food aid in
the form of thousands of metric tons of wheat, rice,
pulses and lentils to several countries, including in
14/23

15/09/2022

our neighbourhood and Africa, to strengthen their
food security. In the past three months alone, India has
exported more than 1.8 million tons of wheat to our
nearest partners, including Afghanistan, Myanmar,
Yemen and the Sudan. India will continue to walk the
talk when it comes to assisting its partners in need.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We note the timely topic of today’s meeting,
and we thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Mr. Maximo
Torero and Mr. David Beasley for their opinions
and assessments.
The situation of civilians as a result of worsening
food security against the backdrop of numerous armed
conflicts throughout the world continues to be extremely
worrying. The causes of food crises in any country
need specific analysis without hasty generalizations.
Nevertheless, according to experts’ estimates, conflict
is now the main cause of acute malnutrition in a couple
of dozen States. The Secretary-General recently
warned of the risk of mass famine in five countries,
four of which have been on the agenda of the Security
Council for years. Unfortunately, today the subject of
food security is shamelessly being manipulated for
geopolitical ends. Western countries continue to blame
Russia for every problem, including the food crisis,
even as they acknowledge that it preceded the special
military operation in Ukraine. In the propaganda attack
on Russia, any argument that does not conform to the
West’s goal is declared disinformation or propaganda
while our opponents’ claims are termed facts. Let us
therefore look at the actual facts.
In May, at a Security Council meeting (see
S/PV.9036) and in the media, United Nations
representatives spoke about the importance of the grain
exports through the Black Sea from Ukraine, which they
portrayed as the world’s breadbasket. They noted that
the Black Sea region accounts for 30 per cent of world
wheat exports without mentioning the fact that Russia’s
share is about 25 per cent. They asserted that the main
problem was high food prices and that if the issue
surrounding the ports in Odesa remained unresolved,
millions of people would die, with “the poorest of the
poor” (ibid., p.4) throughout the world “on the brink
of starvation” (ibid., p.21). We in Russia understood
the seriousness of the situation and did not block the
export of Ukrainian grain through the humanitarian
corridor we opened. The real reasons for the grain
export issue are illustrated by the recent incident in
which a Romanian warship was blown up by a drifting
22-59206

15/09/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Ukrainian mine near Constanța. Russia, however, had
guaranteed that it would not exploit the situation for the
purposes of the special military operation. Türkiye and
the United Nations brokered the Istanbul agreements,
set up as a package, which I want to point out was the
idea of the initiators, not Russia.
What are we seeing now? Even before the conclusion
of the grain deal, wheat prices had fallen to their
December 2021 levels. After that, in the two months since
the Black Sea Grain Initiative launched, approximately
3 million tons of grain have been exported. The Food
Price Index of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations (FAO) has fallen for a fifth month
in a row. While it is still high, international prices
for food commodities had been steadily rising since
2020, long before the deterioration of the situation in
Ukraine. Does that mean that the previously stated goal
of lowering prices has been achieved? If we are to judge
by United Nations statements, it has not. International
prices have fallen, but that has not translated into lower
prices at the national level in the countries of the South.
So what is going on?
The geography of the shipments within the
framework of the Black Sea Grain Initiative shows
that almost half of all shipments go to high-income
countries, while only six shipments out of 136 — that
is, 4 per cent — with just over 250,000 tons of cargo
sent to the poorest countries experiencing a food crisis.
In comparison, 58 ships — that is, 42 per cent — with
a cargo of more than 1.2 million tons were destined
for European Union (EU) countries. More than half
of all the shipments are maize, and according to FAO
estimates, a significant percentage of this year’s
Ukrainian maize is not food grade. Most of the foodgrade wheat, amounting to millions of tons, was
exported from Ukraine in 2021. At the time there was
even a debate in Ukrainian media on possible foodsecurity risks to Ukraine itself. The data correspond
to Ukraine’s typical shipments of maize to Europe but
do not correlate with its statements about helping the
hungry in sub-Saharan Africa, where other crops are
consumed. Incidentally, at the beginning of September
we learned of an article in The Guardian about British
projects to help Africans raise edible insects. At one of
today’s events we heard that similar projects are also
being supported by the World Bank, which cited the
high cost of fertilizer. It is unlikely that such a cynical
approach will solve the problem.

S/PV.9133

In response, we hear that part of the grain that is
shipped to Europe will be re-exported to countries in
need. As far as we know, our Turkish colleagues have
continued those efforts, processing the grain before
re-shipping it. But so far we have heard nothing about the
re-export of grain by European Union countries other
than from EU diplomats in New York. I wonder how the
re-exports from Europe to those in need are being done.
Are they being sold on a commercial basis at market
prices? In that context, we learned unexpectedly from
a statement by our United Nations colleagues the day
before yesterday that the original purpose of the Black
Sea Initiative was to restore commercial shipments
from the region to customary buyers. But how does that
line up with the previous declarations about helping the
poorest of the poor? So far only two ships have reached
them through the World Food Programme (WFP), with
a third being prepared. The United Nations officials
say that shipments depend on donors’ contributions.
We would like to ascertain from the WFP Executive
Director why funds already available in the budgets
of its largest country programmes are not being used
for that purpose in Somalia, for example, where as we
understand from what Mr. Griffiths said, the chances of
avoiding famine are minimal.
According to the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development (UNCTAD), there is another
explanation for unaffordable food prices in the developing
world, and it is high inflation. Where did that come
from? We are once again pointed to the consequences
of the events in Ukraine, which demonstrably ignores
the effect of Western countries’ ill-conceived monetary
policies aimed at combating the coronavirus disease
crisis, when against a backdrop of disruptions to supply
chains, trillions of unsecured dollars, yen and euros
were poured into Western economies. The inflation
that could be expected to result from that spread to
other countries. And now the fact that Western central
banks are raising interest rates poses a new threat to
excessively indebted developing countries.
To return to the goal of resuming commercial
shipments and the Istanbul agreements package,
the latter, as we know, has a second part, which is a
memorandum of understanding between the Russian
Federation and the Secretariat on assisting Russian
food products and fertilizers in accessing world
markets. It can be found on the websites of the Russian
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and UNCTAD. So far,
there have been great difficulties in implementing that

22-5920615/23

S/PV.9133

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

15/09/2022

document because our deliveries are being hindered
by illegal unilateral sanctions. The repeated claims by
the EU and the United States that their sanctions are
not an obstacle to exports of food and fertilizers does
not correspond to reality. The restrictions complicate
banking transactions, including for banks that are
systemically important to Russia’s agriculture sector,
where accounts are simply being closed. Transportation
insurance rates have skyrocketed. As we understood
from a recent United Nations briefing, those rates have
been significantly reduced in relation to the the price
of grain from Ukraine, but the same cannot be said of
Russian goods.

physical food shortage. Our businesses are warning that
if the disruptions of Russian fertilizer exports do not
end — we are talking about 14 million tons of fertilizer
a year, which helps grow 100 million tons of crops — an
additional 500 million people around the world could
soon face hunger. I would therefore like to ask our
Western colleagues if that is what they are trying to
achieve. The sanctions on Belarusian fertilizer are also
exacerbating the situation. We would like to hear calls
on the leaders of Western countries about this from the
leadership of United Nations agencies, including the
WFP, at international meetings and in the media. We
hope to see the United Nations join in those efforts.

There are also problems emerging regarding
interactions with shipping operators. Our ships
have been denied access to European ports, which
are important transshipment points for the normal
functioning of supply chains. But the explanations
given to the business sector by the sanctioning
countries’ authorities often exacerbate the situation.
For example, a memo with clarifications from the
European Commission dated 10 August essentially
bans European shipping operators from transporting
Russian fertilizer to third countries — that is, in Africa,
Asia and Latin America — but allows them to ship to
EU States, which is certainly a fantastic help to poor
countries. That selfishness, cynicism and hypocrisy
from European Union officials is particularly telling.

The Western sanctions are also undermining
global food security in another way. Due to disruptions
in banking transactions, Russia has been unable to
safely transfer its voluntary contributions to the WFP
for several months. We are talking here about tens
of millions of dollars that among other things would
help countries facing the risk of mass famine. There is
a similar situation with the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, where projects supporting
the food industry in States in need, including Syria, are
also being disrupted.

The situation regarding Russian fertilizer is
alarming. In 2021, the global price of fertilizer reached
record levels, including as a result of the destabilization
of the markets due to ill-considered and forced energy
transition policies and non-competitive resistance to
Russian energy carriers. This year, with new sanctions
and supply chain disruptions, the situation is even worse.
The managers of private Russian fertilizer companies
are facing personal restrictions. Their products are
being blocked by the authorities in a number of European
ports to the tune of almost 300,000 tons worth tens of
millions of dollars. Our producers are prepared to send
those goods to developing countries free of charge, but
they are simply not being allowed to export them.
It is important that we acknowledge the severity of
the problem. According to the assessment of the head
of UNCTAD, if farmers do not get fertilizer in October
and November, they will use significantly less of it,
by approximately 20 per cent in Africa, for instance.
That will inevitably lead to reduced production volume
at the next harvest and already threaten represents a
16/23

For its part, Russia is seeking ways to support
global food security. Between May and August this
year alone, we were able to export 6.6 million tons
of grain, of which 6.3 million tons went to countries
in Asia, Africa and Latin America. By the end of the
year, we expect to ship 30 million tons of grain, and
we are prepared to increase that amount to 50 million
tons. Despite the obstacles, we have been able to send
7 million tons of fertilizer abroad, including 3 million
tons to countries of the global South. To get essential
goods to market, the Russian part of the grain export
deal must be implemented with real results. If not, a
selective approach to the Istanbul grain agreement
could torpedo it.
In conclusion, we would like to remind the Council
that in the context of resolution 2417 (2018), it would
be a good idea for the specialized agencies of the
United Nations and the Council to pay attention to the
situations in other countries as well. We would like to
hear a precise assessment from United Nations experts
of the situation in Syria, where the country was once not
only self-supporting in the provision of grain but also
exported millions of tons. Now, however, according to
the recent FAO/WFP report entitled Hunger Hotspots,
it is losing food produced in the major grain-producing
22-59206

15/09/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

regions in the north-east, which are de facto occupied
by the United States, and suffering from the impact
of Western sanctions on its own food security. It is
also important to consider the humanitarian impacts
of freezing the foreign assets of Afghanistan, where
under the threat of mass famine the people have been
resorting to extremes, including selling their own
organs and children.
We hope that all members of the Council and
observers will refrain from using the fight against
hunger in their geopolitical games and focus on the real
actions they can take to prevent hunger.
Mrs. Onanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): The
briefing we have just heard confirms the severity
of the global food crisis that the world is facing and
that is affecting countries in situations of conflict in
particular. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank Mr. Griffiths, Mr. Torero and Mr. Beasley for
their detailed briefings and revealing updates on the
issue of food insecurity in the countries in question.
It is particularly regrettable that the situation
affects vulnerable people, including children. We
are aware of the many factors driving that complex
situation, first and foremost the growing numbers of
worsening security crises and tensions. That is why we
must work harder than ever to put an end to conflicts
wherever they emerge and to reduce tensions, in order
to give peace and development agendas a chance. It is
essential to strengthen our efforts to resolve conflicts
and at the same time increase emergency humanitarian
assistance to meet food needs and respond to the
suffering of the people affected. The combined effect of
destructive conflicts, limited humanitarian assistance
and populations trapped by the effects of climate change
is a source of concern, as it could spark a large-scale
humanitarian crisis. The unprecedented situation in the
Horn of Africa reminds us that urgent action is needed.
We must take urgent action and invest in the long
term by addressing the root causes of the structural
deficiencies that many countries face, whether they are
shortcomings in national and international governance,
difficulties in implementing sustainable development
commitments or, more specifically, in addressing the
climate crisis. In that regard, we hope that the upcoming
twenty-seventh session of the Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change will be a critical opportunity to affirm
the international commitment to addressing those

S/PV.9133

combined threats and securing the necessary funding
for a response that is in line with the expectations
of humankind.
In conclusion, we reiterate our appreciation for the
conclusion and effective implementation of the grain
export agreement, while at the same time recalling the
scale of needs and expectations of the African continent
regarding an opportunity that African leaders helped to
make possible.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): I thank Brazil and Ireland for
convening today’s meeting. I also thank Mr. Griffiths,
Mr. Torero and Mr. Beasley for exposing the sad
realities of food insecurity and its connections with
conflict and violence.
In resolution 2417 (2018) of May 2018, the Council
recognized squarely how wars drive hunger, directly
and indirectly. Wars force people to flee their lands and
livelihoods, destroy livestock and agricultural products
and increase food prices in global markets. More than
four years later, the situation is worse than it was in
2018 — much worse. We are facing a looming food
catastrophe. The year 2022 is likely to set the record as
the most food-insecure year around the world. Millions
of people across the globe face acute food insecurity.
Areas such as northern Ethiopia, north-eastern Nigeria,
South Sudan and Yemen, are likely to be the hardest
hit, but they are just the tip of the iceberg. As a result of
conflict and violence, it is estimated that approximately
648,000 people will experience catastrophic levels
of food insecurity. Many other countries, such as
Afghanistan and Somalia, are facing alarming
situations. Globally, 276 million people are struggling
to find food. Some 49 million, in 43 countries, are
knocking on famine’s door.
Russia’s
aggression
against
Ukraine
is
compounding a growing humanitarian crisis, with
ramifications that constitute a global threat to peace
and security. Resolution 2417 (2018) sets out the basic
framework for addressing conflict-driven hunger and
its devastating impact on peace and security. Now more
than ever we need the Security Council to redouble its
efforts to address this global threat with the necessary
urgency. We must find the political will to use all the
tools available to eradicate this grave crisis and work to
abolish famine and hunger once and for all.
The World Food Programme, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

22-5920617/23

S/PV.9133

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

are facing growing challenges in the delivery of food
aid and basic commodities and in building resilience.
In that regard, we need to answer the following
three pressing questions. First, with increased food
insecurity as a consequence of conflict, would further
white notes help facilitate earlier action by the Council
in response to conflict-induced hunger? Secondly,
what other actions could the Council take to strengthen
anticipatory measures? Thirdly, how can we best ensure
accountability for instances of conflict-induced hunger
in violation of international humanitarian law?
In our opinion, humanitarian action and respect
for international humanitarian law can only mitigate
the effects of a conflict on food systems. Peaceful and
negotiated political solutions to armed conflicts and
violence are urgently needed. Early warning and early
action lead to prevention. Preventing conflict-induced
hunger requires the parties to the conflict to respect
international humanitarian law, especially when hunger
is used as a method of war.
There is also an urgent need to empower women and
young people in securing access to food and ensuring
their participation in policy and decision-making
processes. That requires an integrated response in
order to address the drivers of acute food insecurity
and sustain financing for humanitarian crises. Those
responsible for violations of international humanitarian
law must be held accountable. Independent, impartial,
full, prompt and effective investigations into alleged
serious violations and abuses of human rights and
international humanitarian law are equally important.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Ireland and Brazil for gathering us
here to discuss the pressing issues of conflict-induced
hunger. I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths, Executive Director Beasley and
Chief Economist Torero for their informative and very
sobering briefings. As many here have heard me say
since I arrived in New York, this issue is important.
Hunger caused by conflict has been the centrepiece of
our two Security Council presidencies since I arrived.
I therefore want Mr. Griffiths to know that I am deeply
appreciative of the white note his Office sent us on
conflict and hunger, because while there is a mandated
obligation to deliver those reports to the Council, we
cannot forget that there is also a moral obligation to tell
the world why people are being starved to death.
18/23

15/09/2022

White notes are a warning siren for the Council.
We must respond, because behind that sobering report
and the numbers we have heard today, this is about raw
humanity. We are talking about real people. We are
talking about children and mothers whose voices are
being silenced by hunger and violence. We are talking
about the difference between life and death. We cannot
accept what is reported in the white note as the way of
the world. We cannot fail to see our common humanity
in those who are suffering. The white note makes clear
that the scourge of hunger has not gone away since
resolution 2417 (2018) was adopted more than four
years ago. In fact it has only gotten worse.
There are many causes behind today’s global food
insecurity crisis. The coronavirus disease pandemic
has strained supply lines. Energy costs have made
it more expensive to produce and ship food. Rising
temperatures and severe drought and flooding have
destroyed crops and left fields fallow. But chief among
the causes of food insecurity are conflicts. In many
contexts, food is weaponized for war and intentionally
blocked or destroyed. That is cruel and dangerous, and
it demands our attention. In the case of Russia’s war in
Ukraine, the weaponization of food has had global ripple
effects. The war has exacerbated the crisis. Before the
war, Russia and Ukraine accounted for almost a quarter
of global grain exports. But now Ukraine’s once rolling
wheat fields have become battlefields, and the effects
on wheat, food, oil and fuel are being felt by all of us.
And if I may respond briefly to the litany of complaints
provided by our Russian colleague today, the answer
to all those questions is simple — end the war, end the
unprovoked attack on Ukraine, and that will get us out
of part of this situation.
We can clearly see how conflict is causing hunger
across the world. As the most recent report of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
highlights, four areas in particular are now projected
to face widespread and catastrophic levels of food
insecurity — Ethiopia, north-east Nigeria, Yemen and
South Sudan, countries where conflict and violence
has led directly to a food crisis. In Ethiopia, 20 million
people are facing food insecurity, many more than in
the current estimates we have heard. Farms have been
damaged and looted. Harvests in Tigray, for example,
produced half of their typical output last year, and
supply lines have been severely disrupted. We call on
the Government of Ethiopia, the Tigrayan authorities
and all the parties to allow the unhindered delivery of
22-59206

15/09/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

humanitarian relief. Humanitarian assistance should
not be used for military purposes but to save lives. And
we urge the parties to cease the fighting and to begin
talks under the auspices of the African Union as soon
as possible. Peace needs to be given a chance. Too many
people have died and too many more are suffering.
In north-eastern Nigeria, more than 4 million
people are projected to experience high levels of food
insecurity. The severity in some areas is the worst we
have seen in almost a decade. Farmers are worried about
being attacked and are abandoning their farms. That
means fewer farms and crops and more displacement
and suffering. We are particularly concerned about the
violence from non-State armed actors. Humanitarian
access is vital to keep the situation from spiralling.
In Yemen, the truce has brought some relief to
civilians, but it has not been enough to reverse one of
the world’s most desperate humanitarian crises. In fact,
the level of food insecurity in Yemen remains higher
than ever. More than 19 million people are facing
food insecurity, and that is likely to get worse without
humanitarian funding. We call on the international
community to join us in addressing the crisis. Donors
need to increase and expedite support. We need to
bolster the Republic of Yemen’s Government to stabilize
the economy and strengthen basic services.
In South Sudan, a country only 11 years old, more
than 60 per cent of the population is projected to face
crisis or worse levels of acute food insecurity — almost
8 million people, in a country that is rich in resources.
We call on the Government of South Sudan to issue
a decree mandating the free, unimpeded, unhindered
movement of humanitarian assistance and protection
for humanitarian workers. It is time for all the parties
to end the hostilities. The Government should hold the
perpetrators of violence accountable and help the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan and humanitarian
actors address the dire needs of civilians. And we
just heard from Mr. Griffiths that famine will happen
in Somalia. Those are just a handful of the countries
facing food insecurity. According to the World Food
Programme, as many as 50 million people in 45
countries are right on the edge of famine and risk being
tipped over without humanitarian support. We must
act. I was recently told that addressing famine is not
the responsibility of the Security Council. But I would
posit that the causes of famine and the consequences
of famine are our responsibility, particularly when

S/PV.9133

famines are driven by conflict and induce them. Which
is exactly why we have come together today.
For its part, the United States has provided more
than $5.7 billion in humanitarian assistance to foodsecurity operations since February. But we know we
cannot do this alone, and we know it is not enough.
That is why we brought together partners from around
the world to New York to craft a road map for global
food security, and 103 countries have now signed on to
a common picture of this crisis and a common agenda
for addressing it. Food security is one of our top three
priorities for the upcoming session of the General
Assembly. We will continue to use every diplomatic
tool in our arsenal to tackle the food-insecurity crisis
head on. And we call on every other country to do the
same. While the challenge can feel overwhelming, we
must remain focused, and we must stop famine before
it happens. We can and must stop these famines from
happening again.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by thanking
the delegations of Brazil and Ireland for requesting
the convening of this meeting. We also thank UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths, Chief Economist
Maximo Torero and World Food Programme Executive
Director David Beasley for their respective briefings.
And we have taken note of Mr. Griffiths’ white note
focusing on food insecurity caused by violent conflicts
in northern Ethiopia, north-eastern Nigeria, South
Sudan and Yemen.
We note with regret that notwithstanding the
best efforts made over the years to limit the negative
impact of violent conflicts on civilians and civilian
infrastructure, we continue to witness serious violations
of civilians’ rights and a high number of civilian
casualties in war-torn countries. In 2021, for instance,
the United Nations recorded at least 11,075 civilian
deaths in 12 armed conflicts. Besides the needless
loss of human lives and livelihoods, armed conflict
also contributes to dangerous food shortage situations,
which some combatants resort to and calibrate as a
weapon of war. The critical nature of the issue and the
hostile environments that are deliberately created by
parties to conflicts and armed combatants to impede
humanitarian access to civilian populations continue to
justify the Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution
2417 (2018), which highlighted the nexus between
armed conflict and conflict-induced food insecurity
and the threat of famine.

22-5920619/23

S/PV.9133

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Today’s meeting, coming on the back of the
Under-Secretary-General’s concerning white note,
underscores the urgency of the situation and the need
for prompt action. In addressing the challenges of food
insecurity faced by civilians in armed conflict, Ghana
believes that careful consideration should be given to
some of the following points.
First, as highlighted in the white note and repeated
in this Chamber by Mr. Griffiths, the peaceful
resolution of armed conflict and violence remains the
surest way of guaranteeing the safety and security of
civilians and averting the dangers of starvation and
famine that come with conflict. We therefore stress the
importance of prioritizing politics in conflict resolution
and management and note the need for the protection of
civilians, not only in terms of peace agreements and
ceasefires, but even in moments when humanitarian
pauses and truces may offer an opportunity to centre
the protection needs of the civilian populations.
Secondly, we believe that respect for global
conventions and treaties, including international
humanitarian law, should be reinforced to provide a
solid foundation for protecting civilians in situations of
armed conflict. States must renew their commitment
to the preservation and protection of principled
humanitarian action, including by encouraging both
State and non-State parties to conflicts to comply with
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
That includes prohibiting the starvation of civilian
populations as a weapon of war and the deliberate
targeting of their means of livelihood. In that regard,
we must also be unwavering in exacting accountability
for egregious violations of the laws of armed conflict.
Thirdly, parties to conflicts must be made to feel
the weight of accountability if they target humanitarian
workers or impede the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. In that regard, the risks to civilians and
humanitarian workers posed by misinformation,
disinformation and hate speech during armed conflicts
are also a driver that must be managed.
Fourthly, we encourage the strengthening of
support for regional arrangements to help sustain
efforts in the protection of civilians. They are the
proximate international actors in armed conflicts and
usually have a better understanding of the best way to
assist civilian populations before their situation gets
out of hand. Some regional organizations also have
a food-security architecture that should be strongly
20/23

15/09/2022

supported and tapped into in order to better manage
food insecurity during conflicts.
In conclusion, we believe that there is a need for
concerted efforts to address food insecurity in times
of armed conflict. Ghana therefore reaffirms its belief
that strong and genuine political will and commitment
on the part of Member States, with support from civilsociety organizations and other partners, is crucial
to enhancing the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and ensuring their right to food, even in
conflict situations.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Brazil
and Ireland for convening this meeting. Mr. Griffiths,
Mr. Torero and Mr. Beasley have painted a devastating
picture from the front line of conflicts and hunger, as
set out in the recent white note. We pay tribute to the
work of their teams on the ground, and we look forward
to the Secretary-General continuing to raise the alarm
on the impact of the devastating cycle of conflict and
hunger, in line with resolution 2417 (2018). We hope
all Member States can support him in that. We also
welcome the efforts of the United Nations to raise the
alarm on famine-risk contexts, including in the Horn
of Africa, and we are pleased to be co-hosting an event
next week to focus on that, alongside Italy, the United
States, Qatar and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. I would like to make three key
points in response to what we have heard today.
First, we call for all parties to conflict to abide
by international humanitarian law. That includes the
protection of humanitarian workers. It is a matter of
deep concern that in South Sudan and Yemen, where
millions of people are at risk of starvation, we continue
to see attacks on humanitarian actors. The parties to
conflict must also facilitate rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access, including by removing
bureaucratic impediments to aid. The United Kingdom
is deeply concerned about the fact that aid deliveries to
the Tigray region of northern Ethiopia have not been
possible since the resumption of conflict in August.
We call for immediate access for fuel, cash and food.
Violations of international humanitarian law must be
investigated, and impunity must end.
Secondly, we need concerted action to protect
food systems and promote resilience. In northeastern Nigeria, for example, objects indispensable
to the survival of civilians are being destroyed, and
the conflict there is preventing essential agricultural
22-59206

15/09/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

activity. Ordinary people need to be able to farm their
land in safety so that families can feed the 1.74 million
children who are now acutely malnourished. We also
have a responsibility to ensure that global food markets
are open so that the cost of feeding the hungry does not
increase. In that regard, let me reiterate the importance
of the continued implementation of the United Nationsbrokered Black Sea grain deal, which has contributed
to a 5.1 per cent decrease in global wheat prices.
Twenty-three thousand tons of Ukrainian wheat arrived
in Djibouti last month, some of which has already
entered Ethiopia. The World Food Programme said that
is enough to feed 1.5 million people on full rations for
a month. A further 30,000 tons of wheat will arrive this
month thanks to the deal.
I am sure that our briefers will respond to some
of the wilder claims from our Russian colleagues. For
example, we have been clear throughout that there
were no sanctions imposed on food and fertilizer. Over
50 per cent of wheat exported under the agreement went
to Africa, but as my American colleague said, none of
that would be needed if Russia ended its illegal war.
Thirdly, let us be clear that what is urgently needed
is an end to conflict and investment in sustainable,
durable peace. The United Kingdom is proud to be
a leading donor to the Organization’s humanitarian
appeals. We will continue to provide $3.5 billion in
humanitarian assistance over the next three years. But
more funding alone will not end starvation caused by
conflict or used as a weapon of war. We have the tools
to prevent human-made famine. What we need now is
the collective political will to use them.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Martin Griffiths,
David Beasley and Maximo Torero for their briefings.
I also welcome the participation of Ambassador
Maurizio Massari.
Given that we are discussing specific countries
whose people are suffering the distress of food
insecurity, we would ideally want to hear from the
States concerned in order to have a fuller picture of
the situation. After all, if practical solutions are the
outcome we seek, every useful insight shared today
will need to build on the efforts of those States and their
ability and willingness to work with the United Nations
and the international community.
We welcome the humanitarian briefings and the
briefers’ awareness that the emergencies are taking
place in a broader political, economic and environmental

S/PV.9133

context. That context is further complicated by the
fact that we are presently in the grip of a global food
and energy crisis whose causes extend far beyond the
national situation and include geopolitical, economic
and climate-change drivers.
Humanitarian organizations are undertaking heroic
efforts all over the world. They are short of the resources
they require, and the emergencies are growing by the
day. Our humanitarian colleagues should be supported
in their urgent calls for adequate funding and, indeed,
for rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access.
However, we should not focus entirely and exclusively
on the emergency responses to human-made conflicts.
We know that in most of the countries and regions most
affected by violent conflict, its causes include climate
change, development shortfalls and the consequent
poverty and inequality.
While food insecurity may be most acute in the
limited areas where violence is occurring, in most
conflict-afflicted countries it is a broader phenomenon.
We therefore urge the relevant States, regional bodies
and United Nations entities to bring a renewed and
resourced focus on Sustainable Development Goal 2,
which seeks zero-hunger by 2030. Their efforts should
be coordinated and collaborative in order to ensure that
they are conflict responsive.
Pursuing that target requires an immediate focus
on increasing agricultural productivity, particularly in
supporting access to affordable fertilizers and de-risking
investments in fertilizer production, particularly in
Africa. The push to broaden fertilizer production in
Africa will go hand in hand with a just energy transition
that allows countries to use their hydrocarbon resources
for economic development. Countries that strongly
advocate for humanitarian response should regard a just
energy transition in the global South as key to meeting
their humanitarian advocacy.
We also argue that this is the right time for the
Security Council to re-engage with its preventive
mandate, particularly in regard to the climate crisis in
the Sahel and the Horn of Africa, to mention only two of
the most-affected regions. There is sufficient evidence
that the climate crisis aggravates conflict and may even
be a direct driver. We urge the Council to heed the strong
call by countries of the region for initiatives that link
climate action with the Organization’s peacekeeping
and political missions.

22-5920621/23

S/PV.9133

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

15/09/2022

The Security Council must maintain its strong
support for humanitarian action while making progress
in meeting its mandate to protect civilians in situations
where international peace and security are threatened.
The best way to achieve our mandate is to make
stronger efforts to encourage, facilitate and enforce
political settlements that deliver ceasefires, dialogue,
reconciliation and post-conflict reconstruction. That
is practical work, first and foremost. The efforts we
undertake in the Council, particularly in the timing and
thrust of meetings, statements and resolutions, is most
effective when connected to ongoing efforts to mediate
and negotiate ceasefires and settlements.

can address the risk of famine and prevent the disastrous
effects of the war waged by Russia in Ukraine.

In situations where there is no peace to keep and
there are terrorist or militant groups present that are
a pervasive and devastating threat to civilians, the
Council must reconsider its continuing reluctance to
support United Nations financial support for regional
enforcement efforts. It should also further embrace
the work and recommendations of the Peacebuilding
Commission as it embraces the deployment of livelihood
support and development in preventing conflict.

The solidarity corridors set up by the European
Union have also made possible to extract more than
10 million tons of cereals from Ukraine since March,
thereby helping to lower prices and avoid a crisis
of anticipation.

The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I thank Martin Griffiths, David Beasley and
Maximo Torero for their briefings.
The year 2022 will mark a grim record for the
number of people in a situation of food insecurity due
to conflicts, the coronavirus disease pandemic and
climate change.
In countries that depend on imports for their food
needs, Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine has
tragic consequences. The figures bear that out. The
war is aggravating food insecurity and increasing the
risk of famine worldwide. In 2022 and 2023, 13 million
additional people may face undernourishment as a
result of the war.
Let us be clear, as recognized by the Council of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations in April, it is in fact war that worsens global
food insecurity and malnutrition. No sanctions are
aimed at the food sector. On the contrary, we are
fighting so that agricultural products do not in any way
become a weapon of war to serve geopolitical goals.
Only a multilateral, coordinated and inclusive approach
22/23

France fully supports the initiative launched by the
Secretary-General through the United Nations Global
Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance. It
recalls the joint responsibility of international partners
to ensure that the countries most at risk continue to
receive the necessary foodstuffs. In that respect, it is
essential that the agreements concluded in Istanbul
on 22 July continue to be implemented so that cereals
arrive via the Black Sea to those who need it most
urgently. It is also imperative that that mechanism be
renewed beyond its initial duration of four months.

In that same spirit, France, alongside the European
Union, launched the Food and Agriculture Resilience
Mission (FARM), in the framework of the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts and in coordination with other
international initiatives. FARM aims to support the
countries most affected by the global food crisis by
improving the transparency of agricultural markets,
promoting fair access food and agricultural products
at a reasonable price and by strengthening sustainable
local production in order to reduce dependencies.
The first results of this road map are the product of
an international cooperative effort. In that context, the
World Food Programme has set up a specific solidarity
mechanism to guarantee affordable supplies, and the
International Fund for Agricultural Development
will host a secretariat aimed at uniting donors around
high-impact projects impact for food security and
nutrition. We call on all actors to contribute to those
international efforts.
France is also mobilizing by increasing its
financial contribution for food security and nutrition,
which should exceed €706 million this year. It is also
doing so through its contributions to international
organizations, by supporting civil society-led projects
and through the operations of the French Development
Agency. The doubling of France’s financial support to
the World Food Programme this year and the funding
of the secretariat to be established by the International
Fund for Agricultural Development, which I referred
to earlier, also testify to that commitment and to
22-59206

15/09/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

our desire for solidarity with countries in highly
vulnerable situations.
Preventing famine and food crises requires that
all parties to conflicts respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law. Resolutions 2417
(2018) and 2573 (2021) must be fully implemented.
The protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure
is an absolute imperative. Humanitarian access must
be guaranteed.
In the longer term, the response to food insecurity
must include the transformation of our food systems
towards sustainability and resilience in order to address
the effects of climate change and biodiversity erosion,
as well as the challenge of human population growth.
The mobilization of donors to that end is essential.
Moreover, while conflict remains the primary
driver of food crises, we need to increase efforts to
find sustainable political solutions to conflicts. France
reaffirms its unwavering and continuous support in
that regard.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): I thank Brazil and Ireland for
calling for the convening of this timely meeting, as well
as the three briefers for their insightful and sobering
accounts. The state of global food insecurity is of great
concern to Italy. It is crucial that food security remain
at the top of the international agenda.
In the context of a pre-existing deteriorating
situation, the illegal Russian war against Ukraine
further jeopardized global food chains, exposing
the most vulnerable countries of the Global South to
even more dire consequences, especially in terms of
limited access to food and taking food price inflation
to record levels.
The dramatic situation in fragile areas such as
the Horn of Africa, particularly in Somalia, is deeply
disturbing. In that regard, I would like to thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths for his personal engagement and
his recent mission there. Along with the United States,
Qatar and the United Kingdom, and in collaboration
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian

S/PV.9133

Affairs, we will therefore host a high-level side event
on the humanitarian situation in the Horn of Africa
region during the General Assembly high-level week.
We hope that the event might help to raise awareness
about the alarming situation on the ground.
Against that bleak background, the key Black Sea
Grain Initiative, brokered thanks to the good offices
of the Secretary-General with the relevant parties, has
become a beacon of hope. We applaud the Initiative
and call on all parties involved to fully comply with
it. Time is of the essence. The European Union’s
solidarity lanes are also efficiently adding to efforts to
accelerate exports to the global South via much-needed
alternative routes.
Ensuring access to food, starting with those most
in need, is an international and moral obligation that we
must fulfil, including in line with resolution 2417 (2018).
As food security has been a long-standing priority for
Italy, we have increased our political, financial and
technical support to the United Nations, in particular
through, and in partnership with, its Rome-based
agencies. We call on all Member States to increase their
support as well. It is our mission, as Chair of the Group
of Friends of Food Security and Nutrition, to keep the
level of attention high and efforts proactive.
In order to avert the worst-case scenarios, a drastic
shift in attitude and commitment is needed. The current
cross-cutting crisis touches us all, and it therefore
requires a cross-cutting response from all of us. Those
challenges include maintaining open food chains,
the resilience of both value chains and food systems,
new investments for localization and a full transition
towards sustainable, climate-smart and resilient food
systems. Rural populations and local actors must also
be put back at the centre of those processes.
Food diplomacy is crucial to mitigate the effects
of the food crisis. At the same time, effective political
diplomacy is needed to prevent and resolve conflict.
We must build on both food diplomacy and political
diplomacy with great urgency in order to avert famine
and food insecurity globally. Italy stands ready to
actively engage in those efforts here in New York, in
Rome and on the front line where humanitarian crises
are unfolding.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

22-5920623/23
