_______________________ _______
248

General Assembly
- Fortietb Session
_:__

3. A/so expresses its appreciation to the Govemments
of Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for the cooperation which they have extended to the High Commissioner on matters conceming the welfare of these refugees;
4. Notes with appreciation the financia! and material
support provided for the student refugees by Member
States, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, other bodies of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations;
5. Requests the High Commissioner, in co-operation
with the Secretary-General, to continue to organize and
implement an etfective programme of educational and
other appropriate assistance for student refugees from
Namibia and South Africa who have been granted asylum
in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia;
6. Urges ali Member States and intergovemmental and
non-governmental organizations to continue contributing
generously to the assistance programme for student refugees, through financial support of the regular programmes
of the High Commissioner and of the projects and programmes, including unfunded projects, which were submitted to the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, 172 held at Gene va from 9 to 11
July 1984;
7. A/so urges ali Member States and ali intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to assist the
countries of asylum materially and otherwise to enable
them to continue to discharge their humanitarian obligations towards refugees;
8. Appeals to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Development Programme and ali other competent United Nations
bodies, as well as other intemational and non-govemmental organizations, to continue providing humanitarian
and development assistance so as to facilitate and expedite
the settlement of student refugees from South Africa who
have been granted asylum in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia;
9. Calls upon agencies and programmes of the United
Nations system to continue co-operating with the Secretary-General and the High Commissioner in the implementation of humanitarian programmes of assistance for
the student refugees in southem Africa;
10. Requests the High Commissioner, in co-operation
with the Secretary-General, to continue to keep the matter
under review, to apprise the Economic and Social Council,
at its second regular session of 1986, of the current status
ofthe programmes and to report to the General Assembly
at its forty-first session on the implementation ofthe present resolution.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/139. Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in El Salvador
The General Assembly,
Guided by the principies of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Universal Declaration ofHuman Rights, 6 the
Intematlonal Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 7 and
the humanitarian rules set out in the Geneva Conventions
of 12 August 1949 180 and Additional Protocols I and 11
thereto, 184
Aware that the Governments of ali Member States have
an obligation to promote and protect human rights and
184NJ21144, annexr, 1 and 11

··---·--·-------·---

fundamental freedoms and to carry out the responsibilities
they have undertaken under various international human
rights instruments.
Recalling that, in its resolutions 35/ 192 of 15 December
1980, 36/155 of 16 December 1981, 37/185 of 17 December 1982, 38/101 of 16 December 1983 and 39/119 of 14
December 1984, it expressed deep concem at the situation
of human rights in El Salvador,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolutions 32 (XXXVII) of 11 March 1981, 26 in which the
Commission decided to appoint a special representative
on the situation of human rights in El Salvador, 1982/28
of 11 March 1982, 27 1983/29 of 8 March 1983, 28 1984/52
of 14 March 1984 29 and 1985/35 of 13 March 1985, 3º
whereby the Commission extended the mandate of the
Special Representative for another year and requested him
to report, inter alía, to the General Assembly,
Noting that the Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights points out in his interim report 185
that, in the process of the democratic norrnalization of the
country, the question of respect for human rights is an
important part of the current policy of the Republic of El
Salvador, but that nevertheless a situation of generalized
warlike violence continues to exist, that the number of
attacks on life and the economic structure remains a cause
for concem, and that the number of política! prisoners and
abductions has increased,
Deeply concerned that in El Salvador, in addition to the
continuing armed conflict, the scarcely initiated dialogue
between the Govemment and the Frente Farabundo Martí
para la Liberación Nacional-Frente Democrático Revolucionario has been interrupted,
Considering that, while the armed conflict of a nonintemational character continues, the Government and the
insurgent forces are obliged to apply the mínimum standards of protection of human rights and of humanitarian
treatment set out in article 3 common to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, as well as Additional Protocol
11 thereto, to which the Republic of El Salvador is party,
Aware that a política! solution to the Salvadorian conflict may be thwarted if externa! forces, rather than assisting the resumption of the dialogue, contribute in any way
to the intensification or prolongation of the war,
Recognizing the value of dialogue as the best way to
achieve genuine national reconciliation and the importance ofthe fact that different sectors ofthe country favour
an overall negotiated political solution wt.ich would put an
end to the suffering of the Salvadorian people and stem the
tide of refugees and intemally displaced persons,
1. Commends the Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights for his interim report on the situation of human rights in El Salvador;
2. Recognizes with interest and emphasizes that it is
important that the Special Representative should have
mdicated in his interim report that the Government of El
Salvador is continuing its policy of attempting to improve
the situation of human rights;
3. Expresses, nevertheless, its deep concern at the fact
that serious and numerous violations ofhuman rights continue to take place in El Salvador owing above ali to nonfulfilment of the humanitarian rules of war and therefore
requests the Government of El Salvador and the insurgent
forces to adopt measures conducive to the humanization
of the conflict by observing scrupulously the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the Additional Protocols thereto,
and also recommends that the Special Representative
should, for the duration of the armed confiict, continue to
185 A/40'818. annn

observe and to inform the General Assembly and the
Commission on Human Rights of the extent to which the
contending parties are respecting those rules, particularly
as regards humanitarian treatment and respect for the civilian population, prisoners of war, those wounded in
combat, health personnel and military hospitals of either
party;
4. Reaffirms once again the right of the Salvadorian
people freely to determine their political, economic and
social future without interference from outside, through a
genuine democratic process, in which ali sectors of the
population participate freely and effectively;
5. Requests ali States to refrain from intervening in the
interna! situation in El Salvador and, instead of helping in
any way to prolong and intensify the war, to encourage the
continuation of the dialogue until a just and lasting peace
is achieved;
6. Deeply regrets the interruption ofthe dialogue initiated in October 1984 between the Government of El Salvador and the Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberación
Nacional-Frente Democrático Revolucionario and therefore calls upon these parties to renew their talks so that by
means of sincere, generous and open dialogue they may
achieve a negotiated comprehensive political solution
which will put an end to the armed conflict and contribute
to the institutionalization and strengthening of the democratic system based on the ful! exercise by ali Salvadorians
oftheir civil and political rights and their economic, social
and cultural rights;
7. Ca/Is upon the Government and the opposition
forces, as agreed at the meeting held at La Palma on 15
October 1984, 186 to establish as soon as possible appropriate mechanisms to study the plans and proposals submitted by both parties and to include ali sectors of national
life in the search for peace;
8. Views with concern that, as a consequence of the
prolonged armed conflict, the number of refugees and
internally displaced persons, who already constitute a considerable part of the Salvadorian population, continues to
increase and requests ali States to collaborate in the reception ofthe refugees and to support the autonomous organizations responsible for looking after internally displaced
persons in El Salvador;
9. Again reiterates its appeal to the Govemment of El
Salvador and to the opposition forces to co-operate fully
with the humanitarian organizations dedicated to alleviating the suffering of the ci vilian population, wherever these
organizations operate in the country, and to permit the
lnternational Committee of the Red Cross to continue to
evacuate those wounded and maimed by war to where
they can receive the medica! attention they need;
10. Deeply deplores the fact that the capacity of the
judicial system in El Salvador to investigate, prosecute and
punish violations ofhuman rights continues to be patently
unsatisfactory and therefore urges the competent authorities to continue and strengthen the process ofreform ofthe
Salvadorian judicial system, in order to punish speedily
and effectively those responsible for the serious human
rights violations which have been committed and are still
being committed in that country;
l l. Recommends the continuation and broadening of
the reforms necessary in El Salvador, including effective
application of agrarian reform, for the solution of the economic and social problems which are the basic cause ofthe
interna! conflict in that country;
l 2. Ca/Is upon the competent authorities in El Salvador to introduce changes in the laws and other measures
186 See A/39/636, annex, sect. 11.

that are incompatible with the provisions contained in the
intemational instruments binding on the Govemment of
El Salvador in respect of human rights;
13. Renews its appeal to the Government of El Sal vador. as well as to other parties concemed, to continue to
co-operate with the Special Representa ti ve of the Com •
mission on Human Rights;
14. Decides to keep under consideration, during its
forty-first session, the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in El Salvador, in order to examine
this situation anew in the light of additional elements pro·
vided by the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council, in the hope that there will he
improvement.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985
40/140.

Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Guatemala

The General Assembly,
Reiterating that the Governments of ali Member States
have an obligation to promete and protect human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Recal/ing its resolutions 371184 of 17 December 1982,
38/100 of 16 December 1983 and 39/120 of 14 December
1984.
Recalling a/so Commission on Human Rights resolution
1984/53 of 14 March 1984, 29 and taking note ofCommission resolution 1985/36 of 13 March 1985, 30 in which it
expressed its deep concern at the continuing serious and
systematic violations ofhuman rights in Guatemala and at
restrictive measures that limit the freedoms of the rural
and indigenous populations,
Mindful of resolution 1985/28 of 30 August 1985 of the
Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities, 181
Welcoming the general elections held on 3 November
1985 for President, Vice-President and representatives to
the national Congress and ofmunicipalities, with the participation of various política! parties,
Noting with satisfaction the set of provisions to safeguard human rights and fundamental freedoms contained
in the new Constitution, which, when fully complied with
by the new Govemment and ali others concemed, could
lead to a significant improvement in the situation of
human rights in Guatemala,
Alarmed at the continuation of politically motivatrd
violence, particularly killings and kidnappings, as well as
enforced and involuntary disappearances and the lack of
effective measures by the authorities in investigating such
practices,
Recognizing that the internal armed conflict of a nonintemational character which continues to exist in Guatemala stems from economic, social and política! factors of a
structural nature,
Expressing its concern at the widespread suffering
caused by disregard for the principies of international
humanitarian law applicable to that conflict,
Welcoming the co-operation ofthe Government ofGuatemala with the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights as well as the invitation by the Govemment to severa! international human rights organizations
to assess the situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
