TUIENTY-EIGJITH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

24 OCTOBER

1973

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1749)

. . . .. . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . . .

Page
1

Adoption

of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1010) . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

S/PV*1749

I

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND

FORTY-NINTH

MEETING

eld in New York on Wednesday,

24 October

1973, at 6 p.m.

President: Sir Laurence McJNTY RE (Australia).
F’resnzt: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1749)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
Representativeof the United Statesof America to
the United Nations addressedto the Presidentof
the Security Council (S/l 1010).
The meeting wascalled to order at 6.50 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agendflwasudopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Statesof America to the
United Nations addressedto the President of the
Security Council (S/11010)

3. The PRESIDENT: 1 wish to stressagainthat only one
seat remains available at the Council table for those
representativeswho have been or may hereafterbe invited,
at their rcqucst, to addressthe Council.Accordingly, it will
be necessaryto request represcntativcswho occupy that
seat to withdraw from it when they have concludedtheir
statements.
4. When I adjourned our last meeting I said that the
Council would remain ready at any time to meet immediately ascircumstancesmight demand.
5. Today I receivedan oral requestfrom the representative
of Egypt for the convening of an urgent meetingof the
Council. The representativeof Egypt later addressed
to me
a Ietter in the following terms:
“Upon instructions from my Government, I have the
honour to request an urgent meeting of the Security
Council to considerthe continuingviolations committed
by Israel of the cease-Aredecidedby the Security Council
in its resolutions 338 (1973) and 339 (1973) of 22 and
23 October 1973.”
6. The first nameinscribedon the list of speakersis that
of the representativeof Egypt, on whom I now cdl.

7. Mr. El-ZAYYAT (Egypt): Theseare dangerous
timesin
the history of our country and,indeed,in the history of the
Security Council. Dangeroustimeshave a way of dcvelop1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
ing quickly. I must confessthat this morning when we
taken at the 1743rd meeting, I proposenow, with the
askedfor the urgent conveningof the Councilwe intended
consent of the Council, to invite the representativesof
to discussthe breakdown of the cease-fireand Israel’s
Egypt, Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to take their
non-compliance with the resolution the Council adopted
places at the Council table in order to participate in the
only recentjy (resolution 338 (lY73)/ --that is the text
discussionwithout the right to vote.
sponsoredby the United Statesof America and the USSR.
But in the meantime J have contacted Cairo and I think
At the invitation of the President,Mr, M. H. El-Zayyat
that a better way of describingthe reasonfor my addressing
(Egypt), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. M. 2. Ismail
the Council now is to inform it that a new war, a new
(Syrian Arab Republic) took placesat the Counciltable.
aggression,has broken out in the Middle East, and at this
2. The PRESIDENT: In accordancewith further decisions moment-l a.m. Cairo time-is goingon.
taken at previousmeetings,I proposealso,with the consent
8. On the East Bank of the SuezCanal,in Egyptian Sinai,
of the Council, to invite the representativesof Nigeriaand
our forces are being attacked now with laser-guided
missiles
Saudi Arabia to participate in the discussionwithout the
and
American
Phantom
jet
aircraft.
At
the
same
time,
on
right to vote. I shallaskthem to take the placesreservedfor
them at the side of the Council chamber,on the under- the West Bank of the Canalall the sectorsarc the battlefield
of a new treacherouswar, preparedand begununder the
standing that they will be calledupon to take a placeat the
guise of the cease-fire suggestedto this Council by the
Council table when it is their turn to addressthe Council.
United States of America andthe USSRandadoptedby it.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. E. Ogbu (Nigeria) To be very precise,that appliesto ail the sectorsexcept the
and Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took the placesresewed north-and 1 hope I am not inviting an attack on the north,
for them at the sideof the Council Chamber.
beccuseit hasperhapsbeensparedby an oversight.

by virtue of the adoption of the resolutions.In regard10
the first part, we ask that al1membersof the CounciI da
their best to make surethat the observersare in their places
observingthe cease-fire,asit should have been and should
be on the lines when the cease-fi‘irctook effect on 22
October. This is still our request.As far asthe Secretariatis
concerned,we know that it hasthe authority and I amsure
it hasthe will andthe determination to sendtheseobservers
and more, but, since observers cannot really effect t[le
withdrawal of theseforcesto the placeswherethey were,it
is then our request that the two Powersthat brought thcsc
resolutionsto the Council, including the Power that called
on the Council to convene to begin with, should realty
interfere. I alluded to this yesterday. If it was not
10. The story of today is long but simple.At 4 o’clock understood, I say it now loudly and clearly. These two
this morning, New York time, it wasmy unpleasanttask to
super-Powers
have forces in the Mediterranean. I think the
call the Secretary-Generalat homeand to inform him that
reasonthey give to their taxpayers is that they are thereto
United Nations observershad not proceeded to their preservethe peace of the world. Well, the peace of the
destinations. At 5 o’clock I knew that in fact they had world is in danger,and we are calling upon them to make
begun moving but they had reported to their headquarters good their promisethat theseresolutions are going to take
in Cairo that they were being prevented by Israeli forces effect, by helping the observersof the United Nations and
from reaching their destinations.When WCcommunicated the United Nations itself to bring back the forces of the
to Cairo that somepatrols-sevenof them-had taken their
partiesto the conflict to wherethey were at the time when
places,they replied that only onehad reachedIsmailiaand, the cease-firetook effect on 22 October 1973. For this
with the full co-operationof the Egyptian authorities,had purposeour Presidenthas addressedletters directly to the
begun its work but the others were prevented by several Presidentof the United Statesand to ChairmanBrezhnevof
means,including a direct call from the Minister of War of
the Soviet Union asking them to send forces for this
Israel, advisingthem not to go becausethe fighting was purpose and has instructed me to call the CounciI into
going on and there were no cease-firelines and stating, sessionin order to hear this message.If paragraph1 of tile
“What are they going to do if the cease-firelines are resolution of 22 October is going to fall to pieces, other
non-existent? They had better wait until the Israelibattle
paragraphsare going to do so too, and we shall be exactly
is won and the new cease-firelinesare demarcated.”Then where we were, still facing the aggressionthat wasand the
they would perhapsbe welcometo comeand preservethe aggression
that is or is trying to be. We shall’be facing the
starus quo to be. If there wereany sense-andthere must
aggression
of 1967 and its aftermath and also facing this
have been sense-in the draft resolutionthe United States new aggression,
thesetreacherousattacks under the guiseor
and the Soviet Union presentedto this Councilon Sunday, a cease-firewhich have been taking place and are taking
a draft resolution composedof severalparts,one callingfor
place now with fresh soldiersand with fresh equiprnenta cease-fireon the spot, then what the Council meant and and it is no secret to us where this equipment is coming
what the authorsof the draft resolutionmeantwasthat the
from.
cease-fireon the spot must be preservedasit wasI2 hours
after the Council debate endedwith the adoption of the
12. As usual, I want to be brief and clear. If we do not
resolution-which, as I have said,would be 1252hours on
know where the forces were when the cease-fire took
22 October 1973. That is what we have acceptedin good effect, or should have taken effect, then perhaps some
faith. If that is what this Council, with great courtesy and explanation should be given to us about the flight of two
great confidence,hasacceptedin goodfaith, then this is the
United Statesaircraft over Egypt and Syria severaldays ago
meaning,and there cannot be any other meaning,of the
at the speedof Mach-3. They did not come asaggressors,
Council resolution of yesterday [339 (197311 askingthe
Obviously they came for reconnaissance,and they must
forces to go back to the placeswherethey were or should have recognized somethin’g, I think they can tell the
have stayed when the cease-firewent into effect according Councilwhere our forces were.
to the Council’sresolutionat the given hour on 22 October.
If the cease-fireand the perhapscandidbehaviourof Egypt
13. There must be someother means?f verification also.
in acceptingit with the confidenceit placedin the namesof
Weare ready to be wherewe were on 2? October, when the
the two States that submittedthe draft resolutionareto be Security Council resolution ordered a cease-fire to take
misused,if this newwar is to take placeandhave its effects effect so that a new procedurecould bj~‘undertaken to put
before Israel will agree and allow the United Nations an end to the war and to usher in a new era of peace.
observersto go there, theseare going to be post-mortem Without that, there is no hope for peacein the Middle East.
observerswho are going to go there to observeaggression
stayingin its place.
14. If we are askingfor forcesto intcrvcnc, it is becauseit
is obviousthat we cannot askthe United Nations observers
11. Becausewe still have confidence, we stated again to defy the military orctersof military ministersof war that
yesterday the double responsibility that emanatesfrom
they shouldstay where they were or where they are now. If
these two resolutions,the responsibilityof the authors of
WCare askingthe United States and the Soviet Union to
the resolutionsandthe responsibilityof the membersof the sendforces, it is becausethey are two Ilzrmanent mrmbers
Council which is indeedtheirs by virtue of the Charter and Of the Security Council and have a spwidl
responsibility.
9. We are fighting back. The people who heard me in the
early days of October answering the question on television
whether we were sure we were going to win the war and
were dismayed because I said, “I don’t care if we do”, must
now remember the reasons I gave for that answer. 1 said
that there comesa time in the life of a nation when it has
no option but to fight and sacrificethe cherishedblood of
its sonsand daughtersin order that their country cango on
living in dignity and freedom, regardless
of the outcome.It
is not a question of calculation. It is a question of
determination that, to repeat, we are going to live on our
feet and fight and die on our feet rather than live on our
knees.

2

They have the power of the veto, and with that power the
work of all the other members of the Security Council was
brought to nought when we tried to arrive at a peaceful
solution in June and July of this year.

21. Since yesterday I have been in constant touch with
General Siilasvuo and have followed step by step the efforts
he has been making in this connexion. I have also been in
contact with representatives of the parties concerned,
whose co-operation, as I indicated yesterday in my statement to the Council, is essential for the success of the
United Nations observation effort.

I5. I have just received a message by phone from Cairo
stating that the deputy head of the observers group,
Colonel Hogan, had told them at 1910 hours New York
time that the Israeli side has refused to allow the observers
to go to the middle sector of Sinai. The words used were,
“No, not for the time being”. Colonel Hogan has told our
Deputy Minister that he has contacted the zecretaryGeneral and given him that information. Perhaps the
Secretary-General will tell us what he knows about this
message from Colonel Hogan and any other messages on
this matter.

22. Immediately upon the adoption of the Security
Council resolution, I instructed General Siilasvuo to take
urgent action for its irdplementation. As 1 informed the
Council at the end of its meeting yesterday, General
Siilasvuo immediately instructed the Officer-in-Charge of
the Ismailia Control Centre to deploy as soon as possible
and as a first step, in co-operation with the Egyptian
authorities, three observation teams in the Suez Canal area.
As the Council may know it is the invariable practice for
security and other reasons that UNTSO patrols be accompanied by liaison officers of the army of the country
concerned. As soon as the required liaison officers were
made available by the Egyptian authorities, the United
Nations observer teams composed of seven patrols set off,
and as of 1030 hours GMT on 24 October the seven
observer patrols were on the move from Cairo toward the
estimated Egyptian forward positions. The latest news
received from General Siilasvuo is that four patrols had
reached locations about 35 kilometres west of Ismailia at
1315 hours GMT today. The other three patrols were in the
vicinity of their destinations by 1700 hours GMT, but had
to withdraw westward due to the intense exchange of tank
and artillery fire between Egyptian and Israel forces which
was in progress there.

16. To conclude: First, we not only are reporting to the
Security Council on the breakdown of the cease-fire and
the total breakdown, therefore, of all resolutions on the
cease-fire, but are also asking for a salvage operation
because we, at least, do not take lightly the reports
appearing in the press today that there have been 15,000
casualties in the Middle East so far--I am not giving
Egyptian estimates; I am giving American estimates as they
appeared in The New York Times today. We think that
those 15,000 people who have become casualties could
have done something better for their countries alive rather
than having been doomed to death and murdered by people
drunk with power, who think that this is the only politics
they can impose and this is the only action that will
succeed. It will not. Other power-drunk nations and regimes
of the past do not exist today. We therefore hope that the
Security Council resolution submitted by the United States
and the Soviet Union on 22 October will be salvaged by
those two States themselves or by any other action deemed
necessary by the Council.

23. General Sjilasvuo has also tried to dispatch observer
patrols from Rabah on the east of the Suez Canal. However,
in his discussions with the Israeli authorities, they initially
stated that United Nations military observers should not
proceed to the battle zone before there was an effective
cease-fire. In this connexion General Dayan requested
General Siilasvuo to convey to the Egyptian authorities a
proposal for a cease-fire to commence at 0500 hours GMT
on 24 October. This message was immediately passed by
General Siilasvuo to the Egyptian authorities in Cairo, who
accepted this cease-fire proposal. During the day of 24
October it was not possible to dispatch United Nations
observers to the forward positions from the Israel side.
However, after I myself and my collaborators at Headquarters had got in touch with the Israel Permanent
Representative and with General Siilasvuo in Jerusalem-by
telephone, of course-the
Permanent Representative of
Israel assured me that the Israeli forces would fully
co-operate with General Siilasvuo in regard to the deployment of observers.

17. Secondly, what is happening now is a new aggression. I
think that with more details the CounciI will be in a
position to judge better what I am alluding to as the
aggression of tonight. The battle is taking place in Sinai and
on the West Bank of the Suez Canal.
18. Before I conclude, however, I want to state that I am
speaking not only of the soldiers, who are willingly giving
their lives; I am speaking also about those civilians who are
being brutalIy attacked and chased away from their homes,
thus creating new problems which, of course, are welcome
to Israel, but which are welcome to us also, because it is on
the basis of the way all these problems are dealt with that
Egypt will finally be convinced of the possibility or
impossibility of having peace in the Middle East today.

24. The foregoing is the information we have received SO
far from General Siilasvuo. To sum up, on the Egyptian side
seven patrols have been dispatched towards the forward
defence localities. As I have stated, no United Nations
observers have been deployed on the Israeli side as yet.
Upon being informed of full Israeli co-operation, however,
General SiiIasvuo is now taking urgent measures to deploy
observers on the Israeli side. Of course, every effort will be
made by me, General Siilasvuo and the United Nations
observers to fulfil the responsibilities conferred upon US.

19. The PRESIDENT:
1 now call on the SecretaryGeneral, who wishes to make a statement.
20. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
As the Security
Council resumes its examination of the situation in the
Middle East, I should like to inform the Council briefly of
the action which 1 and General Siilasvuo, the Chief of Staff
of UNTSO, have taken for the implementation of resolution 339 (1973) adopted by the Council yesterday.
3

25. In the present conditions I must again emphasize that
in order for the United Nations observers effectively to
fulfil their task two conditions are essential: first, the
complete acceptance of the cease-fire by the parties and,
secondly, fuIl co-operation by them with the United
Nations observer operation.

Council has been called into session when, for the first time
since 6 Octpber, the fighting has died down and tranquility
has prevailed on the front during the last few hours. True,
in the course of this morning the Egyptian forces continued
to fire, even after 0700 hours local time, the hour set for
the cease-fire, and Israeli forces returned the fire, but that
has ended. An effort could now be made to ensure that the
cease-fire is effective and to put into execution all the
arrangements necessary for its supervision. This is the time
for quiet, serious contact, and not for a resumption of
sterile public polemics.

26. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Israel, upon whom I now calI.
27. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I am certain that not only I but
millions and millions of people around the world who
might have been listening to the, statement we have just
heard from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt were
reminded of the Arab proverb: “He struck me, and he
wept. He hit me, and then he preceded me and complained.”

32. What have been the developments since last night’s
meeting of the Security Council?
33. First, immediately after the adoption of Security
Council resolution 339 (1973), at about 0400 hours local
time, General Siilasvuo, Chief of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization
contacted Israel’s Defence
Minister and discussed with him the need for making
arrangements for the despatch of United Nations observers
to the cease-fire lines. The Defence Minister requested
General Siilasvuo to convey to Egypt our proposal that
0700 hours should be fixed as the time for the cease-fire,
General Siilasvuo promised to transmit Egypt’s reply in
about an hour’s time. It was also agreed that the Defence
Minister and the General would meet in Tel Aviv at
7 o’clock in the morning in order to determine the
appropriate arrangements for the deployment of the observers.

28. This Council chamber is accustomed to unfounded
charges being flung across it by the representatives of
Egypt. I should like, before I speak of today’s developments, to refer to one particular point which the Foreign
Minister of Egypt repeatedly makes in our meetings, and
that is the claim that the purpose of Egypt’s calling for the
convening of the Security Council last summer was to
contribute to progress towards peace. Now it is not clear to
me why Foreign Minister El-Zayyat should believe that the
Council members, or anyone in the world, should accept
that allegation when his own President makes nonsense of
these claims, just as his Government made nonsense of his
false charges in the course of the present debate concerning
an invented air raid on Cairo.

34. Secondly, later General Siilasvuo informed the Israeli
authorities of Egypt’s agreement to stop the fighting at
0700 hours.

29. On 14 June 1973 President Sadat stated in an
interview broadcast over the Libyan radio:

35. Thirdly, during the night the Egyptian forces continued to fire on the Israeli forces in various sectors of the
front. The Israeli forces returned the fire.

“What has been taken by force can be regained only by
force. This has been our belief even while taking
diplomatic action in the Security Council. This has been
our conviction during all stages and at all times. There is
no solution for the problem without a battle.”

36. Fourthly, the Israeli Army Chief of Staff instructed all
Israeli forces along the Suez Canal front to observe a
cease-fire as from 0700 hours local time this morning.
37. Fifthly, the meeting between the Defence Minister and
General Siilasvuo was held as scheduled, and at 8 o’clock
this morning the following communique was issued about
it:

30. A month later, on 16 July 1973, President Sadat
declared in an address to the Central Committee of his
ruling party, the Arab Socialist Union:
“I would like here to clarify a basic point which I
explained to the armed forces when I visited them last
June. We most certainly did not go to the Security
Council in anticipation of a peaceful solution. There is no
peaceful solution.”

“Israel’s Defence Minister received at his office General
Siilasvuo to discuss the arrangements for posting LJnited
Nations observers on the Egyptian front. Israel’s Defence
Minister suggested to General Siilasvuo to dispatch the
observers along the various routes leading from Cairo
towards Ismailia and Suez until they meet the advance
units of the Israeli defence forces at the localities given by
Israel’s Defence Minister to General Siilasvuo for the
placing of observation posts. General Siilasvuo asked for
time to study the situation.”

That statement was made while the Security Council was
still meeting, before the vote on any resolution. This was
not a retrospective evaluation of what Egypt had sought by
initiating the debate: it was a frank, unequivocal admission
that Egypt never searched for a peaceful solution at all, and
even less so in the Security Council.

38. Sixthly, in the meantime the Egyptian forces continued firing even after 0700 hours this morning. And at
0820 hours the following communiqul:: was issued by the
spokesman of the Israeli defence forces:

31. The Security Council was convened yesterday on
Egypt’s initiative, while fighting was going on, because the
Egyptian military forces had failed to comply with Security
Council resolution 338 (1973), kept on firing, and Israel was
reacting to the Egyptian attacks. Today the Security

“Until a few minutes before 0755 hours local time
exchanges of fire were still taking place at several points
4

,

along the front line with the Egyptian Third Army which
is surrounded at the southern sector.”

as stated by the Secretary-General, 0500 hours GMT, which
is 0700 hours Cairo time. Just before 0600 hours GMT,
0800 hours Cairo time, an attack by tanks, protected by
the air force, cm the Egyptian port of Adabiah, took place.
That attack succeeded, after inflicting the heaviest casualties on the inhabitants and gallant defenders of that port.
At the same time, after the same 0500 hours GMT agreed
to as the deadline for the cease-fire, a most concentrated
attack took place on the town of Suez. I make the point to
the representative of Israel that this latter attack has not
succeeded. The struggle is still going on. Mr. Dayan’s
objective has not yet been reached and therefore the
cease-fire has not yet taken place. Also, observers have not
yet been permitted to go because of the determination of
Israel that there be post-mortem cease-fire observers,
receiving the full co-operation of Israel to observe that its
conquest is safeguarded.

39. The Egyptian attacks continued and at 1500 hours the
Israel defence forces spokesman issued another communiquC which read:
“Contrary to the Egyptian announcement, transmitted
by General Siilasvuo, Chief of Staff of UNTSO, according
to which Egypt accepted the cease-fire as from 0700
hours this morning and had instructed its forces to act
accordingly, Egyptian forces continued their attacks in
the area of the Egyptian Third Army, apparently in order
to extricate the forces of the Third Army from the
encirclement in which they find themselves in the Suez
area. Within this context, the Egyptians employed during
the past hour massive aerial forces in support of their
ground forces. Fifteen Egyptian planes were shot down in
dogfights.”
40. At 1600 hours Israel filed the following
with UNTSO:

46. I just mentioned that Colonel Hogan had contacted
the Secretary-General; perhaps his message has not yet
arrived. It was 1910 hours New York time, which would be
0210 hours on 25 October Cairo time. In this message
Colonel Hogan has informed the Secretary-General of what
I have just told the Council-namely, that the Israeli side
has refused permission for the observers to go into the
middle sector of Sinai: ICNo, not for the time being” was
the Israeli reply. And this, I repeat, was 1910 hours New
York tjme, which means less than 35 minutes ago.

complaint

“AS of 0700 hours local time today, the Egyptian
forces are violating the cease-fire in the area of the
Suez-Cairo road and south of the Bitter Lakes, employing
tanks, artillery and aircraft.”
41. Here at United Nations Headquarters, I dispatched a
letter to the Secretary-General today.

47. We have been informed by Cairo that a parallel
message was sent to the Secretary-General by Colonel
Hogan and I would request the Secretary-General to
comment on this and also on what 1 have said-and he
certainly will agree with me and sustain this-namely, that
Mr. Dayan advised the observers not to proceed while the
firing was taking place and to stay “until Israel attains its
objective”, those are my words.

f The speaker read out the text of the letter, which was
subsequently issued as document S/11043./
42. At 1700 hours local time the following communique
was issued:
“During the afternoon hours, the firing on the Egyptian
front, in the Egyptian Third Army sector, has been
diminishing. There was no change in the lines and
positions in which our forces were located yesterday.
General Siilasvuo, Chief of Staff of UNTSO, announced
that a number of observer teams were about to leave
Cairo along the various routes leading towards the front.
However, no contact has yet been established between
these teams and our forces at the front line.”

48. But, speaking about those inhabitants of El-Adabiah, I
should perhaps put on record Israel’s violations of the laws
of war, its deliberate disrespect for the Fourth Geneva
Convention. Israel’s planes raided Port Said for 15 days,
killing about 200 civilians. The Governor of the city
reported on Monday, 22 October, that 140 planes had
taken part in the raids, in which many civilians had been
killed. But these are things we expect from aggressors,
people who build their policy on violence and apply it by
war and invasion.

43. In the meantime, all firing has stopped. We hope the
cease-fire will continue. A special officer has been appointed
to maintain liaison with General Siilasvuo regarding the
arrangements for the supervision of the cease-fire by the
United Nations military observers. I am authorized to
reiterate that we shall extend our full co-operation to
General Siilasvuo. These are the first hours of the effective
cease-fire. Let us strengthen it by responsible endeavours
and not weaken it by destructive acrimony. Now that the
guns have stopped firing, it is time also to stop shouting at
each other and begin to talk.
44. The PRESIDENT:
Egypt.

49. What we want the Security Council to do now is to
make people respect its resolutions. What we are asking
those who draft resolutions to do is to make their words,
and their guarantees indeed, felt. What we are asking is that
the cease-fire which has been ordered by this Council be
respected as of the time it was ordered and took effect and
not only after Israel’s designs have been carried out and
after it has used the cease-fire for these treacherous attacks.
50. I repeat, we should like to see these cease-fire
resolutions respected, We should like to see them opening
the door for a just peace. We hope all the Powers in the
Council, in accordance with their responsibilities, will make
it possible for the Council to see that its resolutions are
respected.

I now call on the representative of

45. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): The time accepted for a
cease-fire today, 24 October, New York time, was indeed,
5

51. Mr. ABDULLA (Sudan): I shall not go into the details
of this question, which has been very well sketched out by
Foreign Minister El-Zayyat. But I should like to draw the
attention of the Council LO certain attitudes of Israel and
certain ways it does things which are quite indicative of
what is happening today.
52. WC are all aware that the Israeli policy has for the last
seven years been based on the creation of facts. We know
that it has been happening in the occupied territories. We
even know it now, because all these attempts at breaches of
the cease-fire and at new aggressions are part and parcel of
this policy of creating facts and facing the Security Council
and the rest of the world with faits accomplis.
53. Another thing which we know about Israel is its
pattern of breaking cease-fires in order to create new
cease-fires; and after creating these cease-fires, they create a
continuous occupation. This the Council is very familiar
with. They did it in 1969. Repeatedly they have broken
cease-fires called for by this Council, and the Council has
had to look into it.
54. But, more than this, Israel, and cspccially the Zionist
policy, is based essentially on militarism. They are born
into kibbutzes, which are military camps, oriented militarily, and they are brought up to hate everything else. And
for that reason they are made to fight.

whole point is that we are entitled to suspect, and indeed to
be apprehensive, regarding whether there is really a genuine
attempt on the part of the two Powers who submitted this
resolution in order to arrive at the implementation of
resolution 338 (1973) in its totality. We did not even ask
about the details but took it at its face value and in
complete confidence. WC are still waiting for this resolution
to be implemented.
58. Right from the beginning when we were discussing
resolution 338 (1973) there were enough reasons to make
us very suspicious and very apprehensive by certain clear
indications which have been expressed by Mr. Tekoah
himself in the form of certain reservations. Those are well
known. He mentioned Bab el Mandab and Yemen. He
mentioned the guerrilla fighters in Lebanon. He mentioned
other things and, of course, these are all pretexts and
preparations for doing what is being done today. We even
noticed that in the statement of the representative of the
United States yesterday in saying that we agreed to the
cease-fire taking effect 12 hours after the adoption of
resolution 338 (1973) but we do this on principle. I am not
so sure. I hope I will be able to check these things. But at
the same time it was mentioned by him that the lines where
the armies stand 12 hours after the first resolution are not
known. I should not like to draw any conclusions, but it is
obvious.
59. Apart from these apprehensions, we come to the facts
of the matter. The second day after this Council decided on
an immediate cease-fire on the terms mentioned in the
resolution, that cease-fire was broken by Israel. Again the
next day Israel committed its aggression on Port El-Adabiah
on the western side of the Canal and on the town of Suez in
Egypt. It is always easy, for instance, to come and say,
“well, we didn’t know; Egypt started it” and so on. But
who would say that Moshe Dayan did not stop the
observers from going into the place ancl ascertaining by
themselves where the cease-fire ought to have been on the
day after our adoption of the resolution. Again, that is the
pretext and it is very obvious. We shall not be surprised if
tomorrow and the day after tomorrow we come to discuss
similar events to this on the part of Israel. That leads me to
the whole question: how far is this Council serious about
really implementing resolution 338 (1973)? That resolution is not just a question of putting in additional
observers-though that is important-or sending somebody
specially to ascertain the situatibn on the ground-which
is
also important--but more important and in order to avoid
these repeated aggressions by Israel, and in order to ensure
that this resolution will be implemented, the whole thing
has to be looked into again in its totality. But in doing that
we cannot absolve the two sponsoring Powers of their duty,
indeed the whole Council-and in particular the permanent
members -of its duty to give effect to these resolutions. We
know that they have the power and the ways to do it. But
at least we would like to be assured of their good faith to
do so. The Council could go further than this by invoking
Chapter VII of the Charter, but that is unnecessary for the
time being. My delegation thinks that it is very important
right now to condemn Israel for its latest aggression which
took place yesterday and considers that this Council should
immediately and seriously consider the implementation of
resolutions 338 (1973) and 339 (1973).

55. I was shocked the other day to read in the newsJ>aper
a statement by a prominent officer of Israel that the aim is
to continue this war despite the cease-fire in order to kill
the young non-commissioned officers of Egypt so that in
future they will not be able to fight again. “To kill the
young, all the young”: that is the aim, even after a
cease-fire. This is really a shocking attitude; but it is all part
and parcel of a child brought up in a military camp, taught,
oriented to hate and to kill because of hatred, And, as we
all know, the whole policy of the Israeli Government is
oriented towards f?gJzting, militarism, occupation, and passession of lands of other people. There are so many things
which we have noticed during the last 25 years, but I leave
it to Ambassador Baroody to tell you the rest of the story.
56. I think today we are very much concerned about the
application of these attitudes. This Council two days ago
adopted a draft resolution, submitted by two permanent
members, on a cease-fire and the immediate implernentation of resolution 242 (1967) and the starting of negotiations leading to a lasting and just peace. This Council has
expressed a lot of apprehensions about all this. But with
full confidence in the two permanent members which had
submitted this draft resolution the Council accepted it.
Even the very important details were not discussed on the
assumption that those two countries must have worked out
between them and between the conflicting parties certain
measures which would assure us in this Council that peace
was going to come to the Middle East.
57. Well, the facts which we see today do not bear that
out. We Jtnow that arms are still being airlifted to Israel.
And according to certain versions-I do not know ,if they
are true-they go even as far as the Egyptian Sinai, into El
Arish, so that they can feed these people on the West Bank.
I hope that this is a wrong journalistic version. But the
6

60. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): When barely two days ago
we were adopting resolution 338 (1973), the general
understanding among us was that the Council decision
rested on the essential premise that two things would
immediately take place: first, an immediate cease-fire in
place; and secondly, immediately after the cease-fire, the
implementation of resolution 242 (1967). At the same time
the two sponsors of the text of resolution 338 (1973), the
Soviet Union and the United States, in their statements
underlined that the basic goal of their action was to open a
way for “establishing a just and durable peace in the Middle
East” and they underlined the wider dangers of a prolonged
war. The representative of the United States, in his
statement on 21 October, said “And for our part, both the
United States and the Soviet Union are ready to make our
joint good offices available to the parties as a means to
facilitate. the negotiating process.” (1747th meeting,
para. 9.1

63. By undertaking their initiative in submitting the two
joint resolutions and having them adopted by this Council,
the two permanent members of the Security Council, the
United States and the USSR, have assumed a clear
responsibility that they would act to ensure implementation of the resolutions. We have quoted the statement on
their making their joint good offices available, It is known
that after this visit to Moscow, the United States Secretary
of State, Mr. Kissinger, went to Tel Aviv to secure, as we
were told, Israel’s observance of what was indicated as
agreed. In the communiquB from the presidency of Egypt,
stating President Sadat’s views and decision to accept
resolution 338 (1973), it is clearly stated inter aliu that:
“President Sadat has also studied carefully the proceedings of the debate which took place in the Security
Council and noted the following: that the draft resolution
tabled before the Council was submitted by both the
USSR and the USA, following intensive contacts at the
highest level between the two Powers assuming special
responsibility in the present international situation.”

61. Since the negotiating process was linked with the
immediate start of the implementation of resolution
242 (1967), and that in turn was linked to the immediate
cease-fire in place, we can legitimately ask ourselves now,
where are those good offices? What was meant by so
clearly envisaging them? It was indeed legitimate to
assume, as was generally assumed by this Council and by
the world at large, that the cease-fire will indeed be made to
hoid. Instead, we are now faced with a situation in which
Israel has been violating the cease-fire for two long days and
in fact is continuing to conduct large-scale military operations on the territories of Egypt, which is in reality a new
aggressive war against Egypt.

64. In the context of all this, the representative of Israel
stated here, as did his Government in Tel Aviv, that they
too have accepted resolution 338 (1973), but Israel violates
this resolution freely in practice.
65. No one is prepared to believe the proposition that the
United States is unable to persuade Israel to observe what
Israel itself said it would observe, knowing the extent to
which it is dependent on United States supplies. Consequently, one has to ask oneself what was the objective, the
purpose of the two resolutions we have adopted and, once
we have adopted them, what is really being achieved
through those two resolutions?
It must be clear to
everybody, and to the sponsors as well, that the cease-fire
will not take hold and the resolutions will not be
implemented while Israel is waging a further aggressive war.
Yet somehow Israel was and is able to treat those
resolutions as scraps of paper. One wonders why. One
wonders how. We have to put a stop to this state of affairs.
We have to make Israel comply immediately with the
provisions of the two resolutions and the two sponsorstwo permanent members of the Council-have a special
duty and a special obligation to do their share. We, this
Council, the world, want them to tell us what they are
doing in this direction.

62. The next stage was the adoption at the preceding
meeting of resolution 339 (1973) by which the Council
established the necessary machinery to supervise the observance of the cease-fire between Egyptian and Israeli forces
under the condition of their return to the positions held at
the moment the cease-fire was to have taken place in
conformity
with resolution 338 (1973). But, that was not
to be. We are back where we were yesterday before the
adoption of resolution 339 (1973) because Israel continues
brazenly to flout the directives of the Council. The Foreign
Minister of Egypt has just given us new evidence of Israel’s
refusal to stop violating the cease-fire. We recognize, as we
said in our statement yesterday, the repetition of Israel’s
tactics to utilize the other side’s willingness to respect the
solemn calls and decisions of the Council and to respond to
the expectations and the hopes of the whole world in
agreeing to the cessation of all firing, while they proceed
with
their military activities, the military activities by
Israeli armed forces which have as their only goal, that of
gaining military advantages by the continuation of fighting
to maintain its continuous aggression, military pressures, its
policy of trying to impose its will on other peoples by its
military diktut: all that with the known aim of spreading its
hold over other people’s territories through occupation and
annexation. It would be only ironic if it were not tragic
that, at precisely the moment when through the establishment of the cease-fire a way was to be opened for peaceful
settlement, Israel is permitted to continue its policies of
occupation,
which are the only cause of the war that is
taking place after both Egypt an,! Syria had decided-and
most formally advised this Council-to observe Security
Council resolutions 338 (1973) and 339 (1973).

66. But in insisting on underlining the special, grave and
willingly assumed responsibilities of the two sponsors which
fell within the framework of the United Nations through
their coming to the Council and acting partly through the
Council by proposing their resolution, in stressing their
special share of the collective responsibility we in no way
concede that it is the duty or the right of the two great
Powers, or of anyone else, unilaterally and alone to manage,
control and settle international problems. All international
problems always remain the collective concern of the whole
international community, of the United Nations, and they
can be solved in a just and lasting way only through the
collective action of the collective membership
of the world
Organization.
67. It is, among other things, for that reasonthat the
Yugoslav delegation shares the conviction of so many
7

of the Security Council concerning the cease-fire and the
termination of military activity.

around this table that the term “appropriate auspices”
mentioned in resolution 338 (1973) should and must mean
the Security Council-that
those auspices must be the
concern, the duty and the task of the United Nations as a
whole. That is why we particularly welcomed the fact that
resolution 339 (1973) filled a glaring gap which existed in
resolution 338 (1973) in this respect.

73. We have listened carefully to the statement of the
distinguished Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt,
Mr. El-Zayyat, who has adduced incontrovertible evidence
of new aggression by Israel against Egypt. This evidence
cannot but provoke the members of the Security Council to
indignation, displeasure and vigorous condemnation of
Israel as the aggressor. The Council is again witnessing the
fact that Israel, hiding behind the base falsehood that it
allegedly accepts the decisions of the Council concerning
the cease-fire, is in fact perfidiously continuing military
activity, using all types of troops and seizing parts of
Egyptian territory after the Council has adopled resolutions
concerning the cease-fire and the termination. of all military
activity. These aggressive actions by the Government of
Israel demonstrate brazen disdain for the decisions of the
Council and defiance of all the Members of the United
Nations and of the world at large. The entire responsibility
fo,r this rests with the war criminals of Tel Aviv. The troika
of Tel Aviv hawks-Prime Minister Golda Meir, Minister of
Defence Dayan and Minister for Foreign Affairs Eban-bear
direct responsibility for all these criminal and internationally punishable acts. There are international precc.
dents for this.

68. The Fourth Conference of Heads of State and Government of Non-Aligned Countries warned the world against
possible risk, against the danger of the affairs of the world
being monopolized by a select group of countries and
Powers. But at the same time we are insisting on the duty
of the permanent members of the Council to discharge their
particular responsibilities, especially the responsibilities of
those who, by their heavy involvement in the area, have
made themselves directly involved as major factors and who
have, by their solemn initiatives in this Council, manifested
their intention to play their part in obtaining the results
wanted by all of us, and all of us are ready to contribute
our share.
69. The cease-fire being only the first step linked to
immediate measures for the settlement of the Middle
Eastern crisis, we have to concentrate on obtaining it first,
and now. If the two sponsors are not willing or able, jointly
or separately, to come forward with any further concrete
specific proposals, then it is the collective duty of the
Security Council, of every one of its members, to do their
best to find appropriate means and instrumentalities to
cope with the situation created by Israel’s constant refusal
to respect resolutions 338 (1973) and 339 (1973). We can
perhaps reinforce yesterday’s decision by deciding that the
number of United Nations observers should be increased, or
that the Secretary-General should send his representative
into the field to see the situation on the ground and advise
us immediately of necessary measures to be taken to put
observers in place to observe the cease-fire. We can perhaps
consider the possibility of sending United Nations emergency forces to place themselves in the area in such a way
as to assure the implementation of paragraph 1 of resolution 338 (1973) and 339 (1973). We know that the
Secretary-General was informed long ago that some
Member States have standby forces which, by the decision
of the Security Council, can immediately be used as United
Nations emergency forces.

74. Israel’s violation of the Council resolutions concerning
the cease-fire are-as is now quite obvious to all-not an
accident, not a miscalculation, mistake or misunderstanding. On the contrary, it is a carefully thought out, criminally
perfidious imperialist provocation specially planned in
order to exploit the cease-fire and take over new positions
strategically advantageous to Israeli imperialism in the
Middle East and to establish a decisive preponderance of
forces in the region in favour of the aggressor.
75. The fact that the Security Council must meet in what
is virtually continuous emergency session and day after day
adopt decisions on one and the same issue, coming back
time and again to repeat its demands for the immediate
termination of military activity by Israel, can be explained
only by the depth of the cynicism and irresponsibility of an
aggressor who is thoughtlessly playing with the fate of the
peoples of the Middle East, including the fate of the Israeli
people. In recent days, even after the adoption of a decision
by the Council concerning the immediate cessation of all
firing and the termination of military activity in the Middle
East, the Israeli militarists-despite
Security Council resolutions 338 (1973) and 339 (1973), adopted on 22 and 23
October and with the eyes of the whole world upon
them-are underhandedly and perfidiously continuing their
armed incursion into Egyptian territory,
are bombing
peaceful communities and are raining napalm on the
territory of Arab countries.

70. In a word, the Security Council should not and must
not abdicate in this grave situation, and we all have to
combine our wisdom and determination to find the best
way for the Council to discharge its responsibilities.
71. Jf we do not take the action required, if Israeli
aggression is not stopped, if Israel is not made to respect
and observe our decision now, we shall not only be unable
to secure any cease-fire in the area, but the war will be
permitted to continue and spread wider, with most
ominous negative and unforeseeable consequences for
international relations and world peace and security.

76. We must ask whether the Security Council and the
United Nations as a whole are going to countenance this
cynical affront, this unprecedented international banditry?
HOW long will this flagrant perfidy and flouting of the
decisions of the Council continue? During the Second
World War the Fascist aggressors pursued aggressive policies
and practices and engaged in perfidy and criminal banditry
of this very ilk, flouting the fundamental and generally

72. Mr. MALJK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): The Security Council is convened again today in emergency session in connexion with
the continuing flagrant violation by Israel of the decisions
8

recognized rules of international law and the generally
accepted norms of international conduct.

84. In view of the most recentdevelopments
and the stage
which the situation hasnow reached,the Sovietdelegation
feels that the time has already passedwhen the Council
must content itself with adopting a decision on the
cease-fire.It is no longer sufficientjust to repeator reaffirm
resolutionsthat have alreadybeenadopted.

77. The Soviet Government and the entire Soviet people
indignantly protest against the brigandage of the Israeli
militarists
in the Middle East and the perfidy of the
Government in Tel Aviv and demand that Israel immediately cease firing and terminate all military activity
against the Arab States, and withdraw its troops to the
cease-fire lines of 22 October, in accordance with the two
Council resolutions.

85. Firm steps must be taken to put an end to the
aggressionand curb the Israeli bandits. The Security
Council is obliged to dischargeits clear duty under the
Charter and compel the unbridled aggressor
to respectthe
decisionsof the Council, the Charterof the Untied Nations
andthe wiI1 of the internationalcommunityof States.

78. In view of Israel’s continued aggression against the
Arab States, the Soviet Government has warned Tel Aviv of
the full gravity of its responsibility and the very dire
consequences which its aggression and its violation of the
Security Council’s decisions will entail. The Soviet delegation calls on the Council to take firm and immediate
action to ensure Israel’s compliance with the resolutions
adopted by it. We urgently appeal to the members of the
Council,
including those permanent memberswhich by
virtue of the specialobligation placed upon them by the
Charter to maintain peace and which by virtue of their
Special influence with Israel are able to makea significant
contribution towards a settlement in the Middle East, to
discharge their duty in a full responsiblemannerat this
critical moment in the history of the countries of the
Middle East.

86. The only possibleway of rectifying the situationand
directing the course of events in that region towards a
peacefulsettlement liesin compellingIsraelto comply with
the decisionsof the Security Council at once. And the
United States, asa permanentmemberof the Counciland a
sponsorof the two resolutions,should and must play a
decisiverole in this.
87. The delegation of the Soviet Union has carefully
listenedto the appealby the Ministerfor ForeignAffairs of
Egypt to the United States and the Soviet Union for the
urgent adoption of measures-includingeven the dispatch
of their own military contingents-necessary
to ensurethe
implementationof the Security Councilresolutionconcerning the cease-fire.

79. By acting as a sponsor of the draft resolutions
concerning fhe cease-fireand the settlementof the situation
in the Middle East on the basisof resolution 242 (1967),
the United States of America has assumeda great international responsibility and the obligation to guarantee
Israel’s compliancewith theseresolutions.
80. The representativeof Yugoslaviamadereferencein the
Security Council to the visit by Mr. Kissingerto Tel Aviv.
The United States cannot fail to realize that many things
are now being put to the test in the Middle East.The stakes
are high. The honour and dignity of the United Statesand
international trust in it and in the new United States
Secretary of State, Mr. Kissinger,are now being subjected
to searching scrutiny.
81. We hope-and we insist on this point-that the United
States will useevery meansat its disposalandwill bringits
weight to bear in order to check the adventuristsin Tel
Aviv, secure compliance with the Security Council resolutions and make real progresstowards establishinga just
peace in the Middle East.

88, In answerto this, I am empoweredto say that in the
light of the fact that Israel is brazenly disregardingthe
Security Council’s decision,this appealand the measure
proposedby Egypt are fully warranted and are in accord
with the Charter and the recentdecisionsof the Council.
89. The Soviet delegation further believesthat in the
present situation the Security Councilshouldconsiderthe
possibility of applying the provisionsof CharterVII of the
Charter and, on the basisof the provisionsof that Charter,
shouldadopt appropriate strict sanctionsagainstIsrael.
90. The Soviet delegation consjdersthat the time has
come also for the Council to adopt a decisioncallingupon
or appealingto all StatesMembersof the United Nationsto
sever diplomatic relations and all other tieswith Israelon
the grounds that it is an aggressor
State which constantly
violates the decisionsof the Security Council,the General
Assemblyand the United Nationsasa whole.

91. In conclusion,1 shouldlike to say a few wordsabout
the United Nations observers.I shouldlike to inform the
Council that, on instructions of my Government,I duly
82. No reasonableman in today’s world will believethat
notified the Secretary-Generalearly this morningthat, on
the United Statesof America ispowerlessin this matter.
the basisof information receivedfrom Cairo, the Security
83. The Soviet delegationconsidersit essentialto empha- Council decision concerning the immediate dispatch of
United Nations observersto supervisethe observances
of
size that the Security Council decision concerning the
cease-fire and the termination of military activity is only a the cease-firebetweenthe EgyptianandIsraeliarmedforces
first step, only the minimum that it hasbeen possibleto
wasnot being carried out.
achieve for ending the bloodshed, restraining aggression,
averting any further dangerousdeterioration in the situa- 92. As of 24 October, at 0900 hoursGMT, there wasnot a
tion and preventing the spreadof a military conflict which single observer in the cease-firearea, and it was reported
represents a seriousthreat to the causeof peacethat isnot
that the headquartersof the United Nationsobserversin
confined to the Middle East.
Jerusalem“does not showany signsof life”.
9

93. Such a state of affairs-such inaction and inertia-in
the implementation ‘of the Security Council’s decisions
concerning the immediate dispatch of observers to the
cease-fire line is intolerable.

Netherlands, Belgium, Italy, France, Norway, Denmark,
and a few representatives of other military alliances, such as
Australia and New Zealand. The rest are also from various
Western countries. There are no citizens of any of the
non-aligned countries or of the socialist countries among
the United Nations observers. That is the situation which 1
bring to the notice of the members of the Council.

94. On instructions of the Soviet Government, I appealed
to the Secretary-General for the adoption of urgent
measures. He told me that he had spent a sleepless night
working on this matter throughout the night in response to
an appeal received directly from Cairo and another from
the Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. El-Zayyat, in
New York.

102. I think the Security Council would be justified in
focusing its attention on this. People say that times have
changed. Indeed, they have. The aforementioned composition of the observer staff was probably selected when the
United Nations had only 51 Member States. Subsequently,
however, another 70 to 80 were added, and now there are
135. We are constantly fighting for equitabIe geographical
representation in the staff of the Secretariat where, as we
all know very well, representatives of Western countries
predominate. It is difficult for a representative of a socialist
country to make his way into the staff of the Secretariat.
Thus, if we are truly to follow the Charter, we shall have to
give some thought to equitable geographical distribution in
the matter of observers. If it becomes necessary to increase
the number of United Nations observers in the Middle East,
I believe that the socialist countries and the countries of the
third world, or the non-aligned countries as they are called,
will find a sufficient number of experienced, well-trained,
literate and competent persons among their citizens capable
of carrying out this important international mission, including officers with military training.

95. Action was taken, but the situation remains very
complex, delicate and tense.
96. We see from today’s discussion that Israel is disregarding the decision of the Security Council concerning the
dispatch of United Natians observers to the cease-tire line.
It is not allowing United Nations observers on its side of the
line. This is a most flagrant violation of the Council’s
decision. And no cynical statements by the representative of
Israel larded with references to Arab proverbs can cover up
this flagrant violation by Israel of the Security Council’s
decison both with regard to the cease-fire and with regard
to the refusal to let the United Nations observers go to the
cease-fire line.
97. We would point out to the Israeli representative that
this is a serious matter, a matter of war and peace-and not
only in the Middle East. And yet he is trying to cover up
the felonious policies of his Government by quoting Arab
proverbs. This shows that he has no serious and convincing
arguments.

103. I would put this proposal before the members of the
Council and would request those who are responsible for
selecting the members of the observer staff to take these
comments into consideration and to put into practical
effect, at long last, the principle of the Charter concerning
equitable geographical distribution.

98. He is trying to lead the Council astray and divert its
attention .

104. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Israel.

99. Inasmuch as the question of the United Nations
observers has arisen, I have inquired into the matter of the
composition of the observer staff. In our opinion, the
Security Council should know the composition of the
United Nations observer staff.

105. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I asked to speak in order to
exercise briefly my right of reply to an allegation made by
the Foreign Minister’ of Egypt. The statement of the
speaker who preceded me compels me, however, to refer
first of all to what he said.

100. Having carefully studied the official data of the
United Nations Secretariat concerning the members of the
United Nations observer staff already in the Middle East,
we cannot help but point out that they include only
representatives of the Western States. With all due respect
to the experience of their officers, their training and their
ability to carry out an international mission, I nevertheless
cannot agree with the one-sided selection of the United
Nations observers by the Secretariat of the United Nations.
They were, of course, recruited long before Mr. Waldheim
became Secretary-General. However, the fact remains that
the practice of such one-sided recruitment has been going
on for a long time.

106.’ I should like to put on record first that I was
inscribed on the list before the representative of the Soviet
Union. I should like to put on record that according to rule
27 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council:
“The President shall call upon representatives
order in which they signify their desire to speak.”

in the

107. However, the Soviet representative, faithful to what
he holds as principles of equality and democracy and
freedom of speech, pressured, warned and threatened, and
finally got what he wanted-to speak before me, to prevent
me from expressing my views at the time when I was to
do so.

101. Let us review the facts in this matter. Of the 212
United Nations observers who are in the Middle East, more
than hdf are the citizens of countries which belong to the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and to other Western
military alliances. This is a matter for regret and reflection.
They include citizens of the United States, Canada, the

108. What was his contribution to this debate? The usual
one-nothing but diatribe, nothing but malice and venom,
10

nothing but slander and abuse, nothing but distortion and
falsity. That is not new in the behaviour of the representative of the Soviet Union. It was only a fortnight ago that
it was he who, on the basis of a completely false report
allegjng the death of a number of Soviet diplomats in the
Soviet Embassy in Damascus, created in this Council an
atmosphere which was described by international media of
information as an atmosphere of a lynch mob.
109. He has repeated it again today, because, on the basis
of transparent falsifications and completely, unfounded
allegations, he has heaped once again calumny, hatred and
fanatical hostility on a State Member of the United Nations
and on its people, the Jewish people, simply because the
Foreign Minister of Egypt found it appropriate to come
before the Security Council and invent a lie about the
situation in the area. Simply because he claimed that a new
war has broken out in the last few hours, the representative
of the Soviet Union launched another of his aggressive
attacks against the fundamental rights of a small people, an
attack against truth, an attack against the Jewish people’s
right to live at peace, free from the threat of force, in
equality with other nations.
110. I have here a heap of telegrams dispatched from
Cairo by international news agencies sent out only a few
minutes ago speaking of continuing quiet, as I reported,
during the entire afternoon and evening and night of today.
Yet a false allegation, completely unsubstantiated, was
sufficient
for the representative of the Soviet Union to
come out once again with his customary assault, a
completely unfounded falsehood, regarding the arrangements concerning the deployment of United Nations
military observers to the front lines. A falsehood which
found no confirmation in the statement we heard from the
Secretary-General, was sufficient for him to demand steps
which he failed to demand, and which he failed even to
consider, when Egypt and Syria renewed their aggression
against Israel OG Judaism’s holiest of days, Yom Kippur, on
6 October. There was no Reed for any action or even
thought of action, not to speak of words calling for action,
at that time. It was the representative of the Soviet Union
who, in this very chamber at the first meeting of the
Security Council called on 8 October to discuss Egypt’s and
Syria’s
aggression, suggested that the Council had no
business to meet, that there was no reason to examine the
situation
at that time. When Soviet Frog missiles were
falling on Israeli villages and towns, there was no need for
any meeting, not to speak of any action on the part of the
Security Council. When murderous Katyushas were being
aimed at innocent Israeli civilians by Arab terrorists, there
was no word of concern or of grief, no suggestion that this
Organization should even take any interest in the situation.
11 I. When Soviet guns, Soviet tanks and Soviet planes
made it possible for Egypt and Syria to choose bloodshed
instead of peace, to shoot rather than talk, there was not
the slightest thought on the part of the representative who
preceded me that something should be done about the
situation, that perhaps tallcing is better than shooting, that
perhaps peace is better than war, that perhaps understanding is better than blood lust. It is only now, in the last
few days, when Israel has once again-for which time in its

history of independence: the fourth, fifth, sixth? succeeded in repelling the attack on its very existence; only
now, when the people of Israel can once again breathe with
a little more security and ease, that the representative of
the Soviet Union rushes to the Security Council to invoke
all the possible measures and all the possible Articles of the
Charter-the very same Articles which his Government, his
State, has been violating for years and years. Who is it that
preaches to us and to world public opinion about aggression? The conqueror, the violator of the rights of small
nations in Europe. Who is it that comes to give us counsel
on international law, on respect for the Charter of the
United Nations, on observance of United Nations resolutions? The representative of a Government whose Foreign
Minister once said about United Nations resolutions: “They
are only scraps of paper.“; the representative of a Government which has used its veto power more than 120 times in
order to prevent the adoption of resolutions in the Security
Council that would have contributed to international peace
and security; the representative of a Government which has
continuously, for years, ignored scores and scores of
resolutions of the General Assembly.
112. Is it surprising then, that when the world, and indeed
Member States, find themselves facing a spectacle of the
kind that we were confronted with a while ago, all the
enlightened world looks upon what is being said here,
especially by that representative and those who support hjs
views, with, shall we say, a measure of scepticism, if not of
condescension?
113. If the statement which we have just listened to, a
statement that was made in violation of the rules of
procedure, a statement that was insisted upon in flagrant
breach of the fundamental principles of the equality of
States Members of the United Nations, did contribute
anything at all, it was that it showed the true face of the
speaker, of his Government, of his Government’s policies;
the true face, not the mask of peace, not the mask of
d&ente, but the mask of hatred, of malice, of resort to
falskhood, of support for aggression; the true face of a
Government which followed such policies and actions
during the last few decades that had it not done so there
would by now been peace in the area and not war; the true
face of a Government which made possible the very
aggression of 6 October by Egypt and Syria, now under
discussion in the Security Council.
114. As I pointed out earlier, the Security Council is
accustomed to hearing baseless charges made by Egyptian
representatives. But human lives and consideration for
humanity are far too dear to be treated as mere propaganda
gimmicks. That is why I should like to refer to what we
heard from Egypt’s Foreign Minister regarding the Geneva
Convention. We have heard it here and we have heard it in
various Committees of the General Assembly.
115. I should like to put on record the following letter
which, on the instructions of my Government, I addressed
today to the Secretary-General; a letter which shows in its
true light the attitude of the Governments which decided to
try again, on 6 October, to deprive Israel of its right to exist
as a sovereign State, to deny the Jewish people its right to

life, to freedom, to equality with all nations. The letter
reads as follows:

123. We are askingthe United States of America to tell us
if there was really no intention on the part of the Israeli
forces to abide by the cease-fireof this Council 12 hours
after the resolutionwas adopted. Can they and the Israelis
engagethemselves,commit themselvesto ensurethat the
Israeliswill abide by the resolutionsand withdraw to their
lines? That is my question.

[The speaker read out the text of the letter, which was
subsequently circulated as document S/11042./
116. The PRESIDENT: I think I should say to the
representative of Israel, for the record, that I allowed the
representative of the Soviet Union to take the floor ahead
of him because my attention has been drawn to statements
made by former Presidents of the Council which lead me to
the view thal it has been the generally recognized practice
in the Council to accord to Council members priority in
speaking, if they wish to exercise it, over representatives
not members of the Council who have asked to participate
in discussions.

124. As for the innocent civiliansand the human aspects,
1
would like to say to the I.eadersof Israel that sometime
they will have to tell the peopleof Israelhow many people
were killed in this war, by their orders. When that number
exceedsthe thousands,then they can seethe blood on their
hands.
125. Mrs. JeanneMartin ClSSE (Guinea) (interpretation
j?om French): Earlier, when I asked to speak, I had the
intention of requesting,on behalf of the representativesof
the non-alignedmembersof the Security Council and in
accordancewith rule 33, a suspensionof the meeting,
However, I was later informed that the representativesof
the Soviet Union and Saudi Arabia insisted on speaking.
That being the case, I shall not press the motion for
suspension
that I wasgoingto propose.

117. The next speaker inscribed on the list is the
representative of Egypt, on whom I now call.
118. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): Charged with carrying out
these delaying tactics so as to protect as long as possible the
ongoing aggression by the military masters of Israel, its
representatives here indeed breathe easily, engaging in
insults-which it is my privilege to share with this Councilsuch as telling the Council to its face that iL has further
debaseditself.

126. I would askthat, after those two representativeshave
spoken,the meetingbe suspended
for one hour to allow the
non-alignednationsto hold consultations.

119. I am not going to reply to those insults. I do not
want to debasemyself.

127. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the representative of Saudi Arabia. I invite him to take a place at the
Counciltable.

120. The representative of Israel dares speak about
renewed aggressionon Yom Kippur, the Day of Repentance. What a joke in a name. For if they were really
repenting aggression,they should speakabout their own
aggression.
How dare they, how dare anyone,usethe word
“aggression”to describeEgyptiansfighting for Egypt’s land
on Egyptian territory, or Syrians fighting for Syria’sland
on Syrian territory? But I have not askedfor the floor to
say that.

128. I call on the representativeof the Soviet Union on a
point of order.
129. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translationfrom Russian):I had askedto speakon a point
of order; however, in view of the request made by our
colleague,Mrs. CissB,I shall with all due respect accedeto
her graciousrequest.I had intended to reply to somepoints
raisedby the representativeof Israel, who asusualhasbeen
resorting to the tactic of diverting the attention of the
Council from the essenceof the question at hand, but I
shallyield the floor and refrain from speaking to give an
opportunity and more time to the permanent and nonpermanentmembersof the Security Council in order to
permit immediate consultationson the matter which has
prompted their request for time to confer among themselves.

121. I amnot goingto speakabout the invincible Israel,or
the smallIsrael,or the smallinvincibleIsrael-or whateverit
is. This is a State with an army in occupation of our
territories; it has usurpedthe rights of all Palestinianand
Arab peoples.I want to put this brief questionand I want
an answer to it. If indeed there is no breachingof the
cease-fire,can the Israelirepresentativetell the Councilhere
that his Governmentis ready to go backto the lineswhere
its forces were at the time at which the cease-firetook
effect, 12 hoursafter the adoptionof the first resolutionof
the Council? If he canmake that commitmentbefore the
Council, I would like it to be heardand registered.If not,
this is really an admissionthat they areindeedin an action
gearedto try, through aggression,
to get asmuch territory
aspossiblebeforeit is their pleasureto ceasefire.

130. I would also askmy old friend AmbassadorBaroody
to follow my exampleso that the membersof the Council
on behalf of whom Mrs. Ciss&has spoken may have an
opportunity to consider the question that they wish to
discuss.Let us postpone our statements to the next
meeting.

122. I repeat again that it is our intention, still in good
faith, to abide by the Council’stwo resolutionson the
cease-fire. They are important, historical resolutions,
especiallythe first one. They engagethe responsibilityof
those in whosehandsthe attainmentof peacein the area
really lies. We are addressing
them. We arenot addressing
their clients.
12

131. The PRESIDENT: As I understand it, the representative of the Soviet Union has suggestedthat the representative of Guinea might proceedto make her motion for a
suspension
of the meeting for one hour to enableconsult*
tions to take place. Doesthe representativeof Guinea wish
to do that?

132. Mrs. Jeanne Martin CISSE (Guinea) (interpretation
frmn French): I would be extremely happy if the representative of Saudi Arabia would be good enough to comply
with the proposal of the representative of the Soviet Union,
namely, to follow his example. These are very grave times
and the members of the non-aligned countries would like to
contribute concretely to the work of the Council. It is for
this reason that I appeal to the representative of Saudi
Arabia to be good enough to agree to this suspension that
we ask for. It is a pressing appeal that I am addressing
to him.

141. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I thank my colleague
from Guinea for having graciously allowed me to speak
because had it not been for her generosity I would have had
to wait, not for an hour but maybe until midnight. I know
what an hour for consultations in the Council means;
sometimes it stretches to two hours and then they say, “We
are tired, let us have another meeting tomorrow.” Thank
you, Madam.
142. What a waste of time and effort to address ourselves
repeatedly to resolutions and texts that are subject to
multifarious interpretations.

133. The PRESIDENT: May I ask the representative of
Saudi Arabia if he is prepared to respond to the appeal
addressed to him by the representative of Guinea?

143. The essence of war is action. Bullets and bombs are
the language of war. In any conflict peace cannot be
achieved by resorting to oratory and rhetoric. Peace, like
war, demands action. Like most of the members of the
Council I am a layman in military matters. 1 am totally
ignorant of how cease-fire lines are established, Peace cries
for action. In such a conflict only the super-Powers can
initiate genuine action for peace.

134. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): May I through you,
Sir, address the representative of Guinea in regard to her
appeal for a suspension of one hour?
135. The PRESIDENT: I am inviting the representative of
Saudi Arabia to do just that.

144. Objectively speaking, suppose the two parties to the
conflict observed the cease-fire in letter and spirit. What
would happen next? Negotiations under the auspices of the
United Nations. What a waste of effort when such
negotiations are embarked upon. Why should we go to
ancient history? The unjust partition of Palestine 26 years
ago has been at the root of the whole trouble. Both
super-Powers made a great mistake in supporting the
partition of Palestine and recognizing the State of Israel.
Surely the super-Powers are human and err like anybody
else. We have repeatedly warned the Council that there will
be no peace so long as Israel is a foreign element in the
body social and body politic of the Arab world and so long
as there are Palestinians whose right of self-determination
has not been restituted. You are suggesting that negotiations should be initiated immediately after the cease-fire.
Have you forgotten how the late Stalin and the late Harry
Truman-the
same people-had decided between them to
partition Korea on ideological grounds? That was before
the United Nations was established.

136. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I appeal to the
representative of Guinea to give me 20 minutes before the
suspension
because, after all, I am not going to be
consulted-and
I am a party to this struggle. From the
beginning nobody has consulted me. So please let me
proceed; it will not be long. Every time I want to speak,
somebody or other asks me to postpone my speech. That is
not fair. Now, if she wants to make a motion, I will
see-but I will know how to act in the future. I will not
yield to anybody anymore. They come to me to yield my
place. For years I have done so. I have never asked anybody
to yield, So does she insist?
137. Ambassador Malik, I want to tell you, my dear
friend, do not feel nervous about what I am going to say;
maybe something will come out of it. It will spare you a lot
of trouble.
138. Well, may I speak? It is in the hands of the members
of the Council. Do you insist on the suspension? I did not
sleep much last night; it does not matter; I do not sleep
much. But it is important that I, as the representative of a
sovereign State who has been invited to participate in the
debate, be accorded this courtesy. I have been accorded a
lot of discourtesies, I must say, and I have swalloweci
them-after
all, people err.

145. The same thing happened in Vjet-Nam when France
finally withdrew
gracefully from that land. The two
super-Powers, not heeding General de Gaulle’s advice,
engrossed themselves in the imbroglio of Viet-Nam. The
intervention of external Powers in the internal affairs of
Korea and Viet-Nam brought untold suffering to millions
who were killed, maimed and rendered destitute. Negotiations went on-and here the emphasis is on negotiationsfor years and years while innocent people perished. And
unfortunately there is still no peace in the Far East. Why do
not the super-Powers depart from past practices and adopt
a new approach which may perhaps bring about peace in
the Middle East’?

139. Mrs, Jeanne Martin CISSE (Guinea) [interpretation
from Bench): I am sorry that the representative of Saudi
Arabia is taking this attitude regarding my appeal because a
little while ago I was very careful to consult him. I could
have omitted consulting him since my name was on the list
before his. Only I did have the courtesy to consult him and
to tell him that I was going to ask for a suspension of the
meeting. I employed courtesy to show him my good faith. I
do not insist. If the members of the Council are ready to
hear the representative of Saudi Arabia, I shall not press my
motion for suspension.
140. The PRESIDENT:
Saudi Arabia.

146. The silence of our colleague from the United States,
my good friend Mr. Scali, is ominous. He is a very articulate
person and 1 do not know why he keeps so silent. I see him
always scribbling with his pencil. Whatever may be said
about the alleged-I repeat, alleged-collusion between the
super-Powers, I must say in fairness to Ambassador Malik
that he has not kept us in the dark-especially yesterday

I call on the representative of
13

when he told us about the warning to Israel that the Soviet
Government had asked him lo transmit through the
Council. I asked him, “Suppose the LJnited States is forced
by its legislative bodies to pursue the Same policy of
commitment of Israel at any price, how can that warning be
implemented? “. I still have had no answer.

“The Foreign Ministry spokesman said the war in tire
Middle East was in fact a ‘successful test of Bonu’s
neutral and balanced foreign policy.’
“He gave no details about the discussion with Cash.
“A spokesman for the US Embassy in Bonn also declined
to give any comment on the issue.

147. Therefore, I ask the Council, and more so my Arab
colleagues from Egypt, Syria, the Sudan and other countries, not to have faith that negotiations will bring about a
just peace. For the United States is committed to Israel and
the United States does not seem to be free to act otherwise,
One has only to read in the papers about the Senators,
Congressmen and Governors-like Governor Nelson Rockcfeller, who is trying to prepare himself for the Presidency
now that Mr. Nixon is in trouble-to see that everyone
wants to jump on the band-wagon of Israel to get the
Jewish votes in this country.

“According to the Bremerhaven marine police, a third
Israeli freighter was on its way to the West German port,
Bremerhaven is the port facility for US supphes for the
American troops stationed in West Germany.
“The police said American military police had cordoneu
off the immediate area around the Narcis. They said that
contrary to usual practice, West German port authorities
had not been informed about the arrival of the Israeli
ships.”

148. It seems that what I said about West Germany, not in
secret but in the Council, carried some weight. I now want
to read out something which is really very serious and I
hope that my good friend Ambassador Scali will stop
writing and listen to me. 1 am not going to embarrass him
and ask him questions, but to state facts that have not been
fabricated by anyone.

149. I want to remind the representative of the Federal
Republic of Germany that inasmuch--is he there? He is
absent. He will get the warning. Inasmuch as Germany
would not like to incur the enmity of the Arab world, they
will undertake not to ship any weapons to Israel. During
the days of the late Adenauer and subsequently repeatedly
the Germans seemed to make sure that they would not
incur the disfavour of the Arab world. And what did the
United States do? Secretly they issued instructions to West
Germany to supply Israel with arms, which led to the
severing of diplomatic ties between Germany and many
other States. Recently they have undertaken to keep
neutral, and we warned them that if they sent American or
German arms to Israel, we would consider that a very
hostile act. If some Arab countries failed to sever, I, as a
pan-Arab, will declare them traitors and will declare the
Germans as being under the thumb of the United States.

“Bonn, October 24, Reuter”
and that is not a Middle East Agency, it is a British agency
and a respected agency“The West German Foreign Ministry tonight summoned
the U.S. Charge d’Affaires, Frank Cash, in connection
with the loading of Israeli ships with American military
equipment in the West German North Sea port of
Bremerhaven.

150. In deference to my colleague from Guinea, I hope
now that she understands why I asked her to be gracious
enough to give me the floor.

“A spokesman for the Foreign Minister confirmed
tonight that Cash”-

151. The United States, in spite of its declaring that it
wants a just peace, is resorting to its old methods of
supplying Israel clandestinely or openly with a stream of
arms. What have we done to you, United States? When I
say “we” I mean all the Arab world. What have we done to
you, United States, that we should be mistreated like that?
We opened our gates to you. Are you committed to Israel
because one of your past Presidents erred? Where is the
right of self-determination which you respected, which YOU
said you respected? You cannot ride two horses at the
same time.

meaning the Charge d’Affaires of the United States“was told by a senior Foreign Ministry official of West
Germany’s intention to maintain its ‘ne.utral position’ in
the Middle East conflict.
“According to West German marine authorities in
Bremerhaven the Israeli freighter Galila had been loaded
with U.S. tanks and other military vehicles yesterday and
was now on its way to Haifa.
“A second ship, the Narcis”-

“is in Bremerhaven and sails for Israel. with U.S. weapons
at 1 a.m. EDT tomorrow.

152. Thank you, Sir, for having been indulgent with me,
and again I thank the representative of Guinea. I ask you to
maintain at the proper time-maybe this evening, maybe
tomorrow-my
name on the list of speakers. I have no
bombs but I have words that are revealing and, after all, our
stock in trade here is words and not bombs,

“West Germany has repeatedly stressed its strict neutrality in the Middle East conflict and Chancellor Willy
Brandt has made it clear that the Germans wished a
peaceful settlement . , .” etc.

153. The PRESIDENT:
I have two more speakers
inscribed on my list. The first is the representative of the
Soviet Union, and I ask him whether he wishes to speak at
this time.

it does not say whether it is Israeli or under some other
flag-

14

154. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): As Mr. Malik said,
we yield in order to accelerate the suspension that Mme.
Cisd has requested.

the United States this is not a time in which involvement by
the great Powers, through the dispatch of their armed
forces, could be helpful in creating conditions of peace. Our
objective in the Middle East has not been to produce a
military confrontation but rather to encourage restraint and
caution on both sides.

1.55. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of the United States of America,
but I first give the floor to the representative of India on a
point of order.

162. The United States remains committed to Security
Council resolutions 338 (1973) and 339 (1973) in all their
parts. We believe that the parties, with the assistance of the
United Nations observers, can and will bring the fighting to
an end. For our part, I can state that we have been in active
and serious consultation with the Government of Israel to
impress upon it the urgency of absolute adherence to
Security Council cease-fire resolutions. We will continue to
make these representations as required.

156. Mr. SEN (India): I shall be very glad to hear the
representative of the United States, but since sp much time
has been wasted on procedure, I thought it right to point
out that Mme. Cisse had moved the suspension of this
meeting for an hour. Would that motion for suspension not
take precedence over all other qotions, Sir?
157. The PRESIDENT: In reply to the representative of
India, I would regard that motion for suspension of the
meeting as itself in suspense at the moment, and therefore I
give the floor to the representative of the United States.

163. We also agree, as I said yesterday, that the forces of
the parties should return to the positions they occupied
when the cease-fire became effective. Mr. Malik, I believe,
knows that we have exerted all our efforts to put the
cease-fire into effect, to translate it from a carefully
balanced appeal to a reality which will end the killing.

158. Mr, SCALI (United States of America): The Security
Council meets tonight for the third time in four days on a
note of increasing urgency. In spite of two Security Council
resolutions adopted without a dissenting vote, calling upon
the parties in the strongest terms to cease all fighting and to
terminate all military activity, military operations have
recurred in the zones of combat. As long as the fighting
goes on even intermittently the parties incur increasing
losses, the forces of hate and fear are strengthened, the
difficulties of attaining a lasting peace deepen and the task
of reconciliation becomes more difficult.

164. In keeping with the understanding that Secretary of
State Kissinger negotiated with Soviet leaders in Moscow, in
a spirit of friendship, as part of our effort to improve
relations on a broad front with the Soviet Union, we have
done our part to carry out, that agreement calmly and
without seeking to extract propaganda advantage. But this
cannot be done merely by snapping our fingers. In a highly
emotional state of affairs, in time of war, it is not easy.
165. As a matter of principle, the United States believes
today, as it made clear in my statement of 8 October
[1743rd meeting], that return to positions held before
hostilities broke out is the preferred means of opening the
way to genuine reconciliation. We will continue to support
this principle. But it can be applied only in the context of
agreement as to the geographical and physical facts. Until
actual cease-fire lines are demarcated and it becomes clear
where the opposing forces were stationed at a given
moment in time, there can be no agreed basis for firm truce
lines. This emphasizes still further the need for completing
the organization and placement of the truce supervision
force and for ensuring that the Council and the parties are
fully informed of the developments and the military
commanders of the two sides instructed in compelling
terms to stop the fighting.

159. Tonight this Council is convened at the request of
the delegation of Egypt. The Foreign Minister of Egypt has
suggested that the Security Council invite the Soviet Union
and the United States to send forces to the area to supervise
the implementation of the cease-fire on the part of Israel
ahd to assure its effectiveness. At the same time, the
Council is confronted by claims from the Israeli side that
Egyptian forces failed to abide by the cease-fire and are
accordingly responsible for the fact that hostilities have
recurred.
160. Let me say again, as I said yesterday, that it remains
impossible to determine the accuracy of these contradictory charges. Until the impartial observers of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) can
reach their posts in the areas of contact and can report to
the Chief of Staff of the Organization we will be unable to
assess with certainty these conflicting claims. Accordingly,
the United States believes that the Council has before it
two urgent tasks: first, it must’ impress upon the parties,
with renewed vigour, that each of them must comply
immediately and fully with the cease-fire resolutions that
we have adopted; and second, it should urge and encourage
the Secretary-General and the Chief of Staff of UNTSO to
move as promptly as possible to place additional observers
on the spot.

166. The PRESIDENT: There are no more names on the
list of speakers. I should like to ask the representative of
Guinea if she wishes to maintain her motion for suspension
of the meeting for one hour. I would comment only that
there would indeed be merit if a one-hour consultation
could result in the submission to the Council of a proposal
on which members could comment immediately. But it is
rather late and it seems quite possible that at the end of the
one-hour suspension we might fiid ourselves without any
specific proposal before us and with no representatives
wishing to speak tonight. In that case, it seems to me that I
‘should have to adjourn the meeting and set a time for our
next meeting-perhaps at 11 o’clock tomorrow morning, in
order to allow time for consultations to take place.

16 1. The Foreign Minister of Egypt has suggested that the
Council invite the Soviet Union and the United States to
send armed forces to the area of fighting in order to
supervise implementation of the cease-fire. In the view of
15

167. However, I am completely in the hands of the
representative of Guinea if she wishes to maintain her
motion for a suspension.

176. The first paragraph of the preamble to that draft
resolution recalls, as it must, resolutions 338 (1973) and
339 (1973) of 22 and 23 October 1973.

168. Mrs. Jeanne Martin CISSE (Guinea) (interpretation
f?om French): I should like to maintain my request so that
we can consult one another; I am sure that within one hour
the non-aligned members will be in a position to propose
something to the Council.

177. In the second paragraph of the preamble we note
with regret the reported repeated violations of the cease-fire
in non-compliance with resolutions 338 (1973) and
339 (1973).
178. In the third paragraph of the preamble we note with
concern from the Secretary-General’s report that the
United Nations observers have not yet been enabled to
place themselves on both sides of the cease-fire Iine.

169. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Guinea has
asked for a suspension of the meeting for one hour to
enable consultations to take place.
170. As there is no objection, the meeting is suspended.
The meeting was suspended at 9.40 p.m. and resumed at
12 midnight.

179. I think enough has been said on both sides on the
whole of this tragic situation, and I should like to spare the
Council the burden of a repetition of what has already been
saidandis amply documented.

171. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): On 22 October 1973,
the Council adopted resolution 338 (1973) which states:

180. The operative part of the draft resolution reads as
follows:

[The speaker read out the text of the resolution.]

[The speakerread auf the text of the operative part of
the draft resolutioncontainedin documentS/11046./

172. On 23 October 1973, the Council adopted resolution
339 (1973) which states:

181. I have already made reference to resolutions
338(1973) and 339 (1973). I should like to make only a
brief and passingreferenceto resolution 242 (1967), which,
in the view of my delegation-and I am sure on this I am
speakingfor all the sponsorsof this draft resolution-is the
crux or the key to the solution of the Middle Eastproblem.
Resolution338 (1973) calls upon the parties concernedto
start immediately after the cease-firethe implementation of
Security Council resolution 242 (1967). Now, the relevant
paragraphsof resolution 242 (1967), which should be
implementedunder resolution 338 (1973), are paragraphs1
and2.

[The speaker read out the operative part of the resolution.]
173. This evening the Council heard more evidence, and
indeed the Council has before it clear evidence, of a
complete breakdown in the cease-fire it ordered in resolution 338 (1973) and reinforced in resolution 339 (1973).
The fourth Middle East war is continuing, and it is a war on
a large scale; it is an unrelenting war, bringing with it death,
carnage and scourge to the people of the area.

182. Paragraphs3 and 4 of resolution 242 (1967) lay
down certain stepsto be taken by the Secretary-Generalto
ensure the fulfilment of the conditions set out in paragraphs 1 and 2. Now it is thoseprovisionsthat resolution
338 (1973) seeksto vindicate and implement.

174. When we voted for resolutions 338 (1973) and
339 (1973), we had hoped that the two super-Powers which
were the sponsors of the two draft resolutions would spare
no effort to stop the war; we had hoped that they would
use all their influence, and indeed all their power, to
vindicate peace and ensure the cease-fire called for by the
Council. But these hopes have been in vain, and there is
ample evidence that war is stiIl raging in the Middle East.

183. The sponsorsof this draft resolutionare not going to
pressfor a vote now, becausewe would like its provisions
to be discussed
freely and to have the widest consultations
on it. But we do hope that this will take place asspeedilyas
possibleto enable the Council to adopt this draft resolution, possiblylater this morning.

175. In the current tragic Middle East situation, we have
heard an appeal this evening from one of the parties to the
conflict. We have heard an appeal from the Foreign Minister
of the Arab Republic of Egypt for urgent action by this
Council, ancl especially by two powerful permanent
members of this Council, to stop the war. Egypt has asked
for action to preserve life and property of the parties to the
conflict in the Middle East. Indeed Egypt’s appeal goes
further than that. Egypt is appealing to this Council to help
roll back the clouds of a potential world-wide conflict now
hanging over our globe. This is the challenge this Council is
facing this evening, and this is the objective of a draft
resolution [S/l 2046] which I have the privilege of introducing on behalf of the delegations of India, Indonesia,
Guinea, Yugoslavia, Sudan, Peru and Panama and on behalf
of my own delegation.

184. Mrs. JeanneMartin CISSE (Guinea) (interpretation
fvom Rench): I shall be very brief sincemy colleaguefrom
Kenya has just very eloquently introduced the draft
resolution which the eight non-alignedmembersof the
Councilwantedto submit to the Council.
185. I am surethat the other membersof the Council will
understandthat, in accordancewith the desireof the two
Powersthat proposedtwo draft resolutions,on 21 and 23
October, which the Council adopted, we want to show the
Security Council’s concern that it dischargeits responsibilitiesregardingthe preservationof peaceand security.
16

that thev should go out asearlv asthev felt thev should
and could to the front lines from the Israeli-side,in
addition to their arrival alongthe front lines from the
Egyptian side. The Israeli authorities placed at the
disposalof General Siilasvuohelicoptersshouldhe feel
that this would hasten the arrival of the United Nations
military observers along the cease-firelines. General
Siilasvuo expressed his preference that the observers
should leave [this morning] in the early hours of 25
October by vehiclesof their own,”

186. In submitting this resolution, we have studied all
points of view, taking into account not only the concern
shown
by the non-aligned members but also the concern to
have all the members of the Council support a draft
resolution that would be realistic and that could be adopted
by the Council in the next few hours, That concern will be
evident to the members of the Council from reading the
text that we have submitted.

I

187. I am sure that, despite certain divergences of view
that might appear, the Council will adopt our draft
resolution. As our colleague from Kenya has just said so
eloquently, the members from the non-aligned countries
will not press for the immediate adoption of their draft
resolution. But we hope that later this morning, after broad
consultations, the Council will be able to adopt this text as
a whole, since we wanted it to be conciliatory, agreeable to
all the members of the Council. I am sure that the adoption
of our text will not encounter too much difficulty.
188. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

195. 1 think the experience of this meetingwill make
many, not only in this Council but thoseall overthe world
who are following our discussions,
ponderover the manner
in which evaluationsof situationsaresometimes
madehere,
the haste with which conclusionsare at timesreachedand
formulations arrived at. That undoubtedly appliesalsoto
the text submittedtoday to the SecurityCouncil.
196. The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representativeof
Empt.

I call on the representative of

197. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): Not in exerciseof my
right of reply but in defenceof the Secretary-General,
may
I be permitted to refer to the allegationjust made,that he
has refuted my allegation that the Israelisdid not allow the
observersto proceed. Banking on the short memoriesof
mankind should not go as far as banking on the short
memoriesof membersof the Council, especiallywhen we
have verbatim records.

189. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): This meeting of the Council
was convened by Egypt to hear two central charges. One
was “that a whole new war has broken out today in the
Middle East, that it is taking place, that it is continuing”.
Six and a half hours have now passed since that fantastic,
baseless allegation was made to the Council, Six and a half
hours have passed with not a single report from the area
confirming the statements,the claims,put forward by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt.

198. The SecretavGeneral said“in [GeneralSiilasvuo’s]
discussions
with the Israeli authorities,they initially stated
that United Nations Military Observersshouldnot proceed
to the battle zone before there wasan effective cease-fire.”

190. The second charge which was placed before the
Security Council was Israel’s alleged opposition to the
deployment of United Nationsmilitary observers.
191. The statement which we heard today from the
Secretary-General immediately refuted those allegations.I
denied them unequivocally, reiterating Israel’spolicy of full
co-operation with GeneralSiilasvuoand the United Nations
military observers.

199. I have never accusedthe Israelisof not wanting
observers.I have accused,and I do accuse,the Israelisof
wanting the observers to come after the Israelis have
finished their treacherousconquest.
200. With the full authority of my GovernmentI report to
the Council that the battle is goingon now, in the early
hours, in Egypt. Missiles,laser-guided
missiles,
and napalm
are right now being usedon our forcesand our citizens in
the town of Suez.

192. The latest itemsof newson this matter from the area
are the following two reports.
193. The first, from Reuter’s,statesthe following:
“Early this evening”-that is, while we were still hearing
the unfounded chargesregardingIsrael’sattitude-“the
first group of United Nations observersto leaveCairo to
supervise the cease-firehad reached Israel lines on the
West Bank near Guneifa, south-westof the Great Bitter
Lake. The’ first point of the cease-fireline wasestablished
between Israel and Egypt about 22 miles west of the
100.mile-long Suezwaterway.”
This took place, asI pointed out earlier, only a few hours
after the cease-firebecameeffective for the first time since
6 October.
194. The second report relates to a conversationwhich
took place in the eveningof 24 October betweenanIsraeli
liaison officer and GeneralSiilasvuo’sdeputy:

201. Mr, ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): I most reluctantly exercisemy right of reply in connexionwith the statementjust
made by the representative of Israel. If the aspersions
he
tried to cast on the draft resolutionjust introducedby my
delegation on behalf .of the sponsorswere meant to cast
doubts on the merits of the text, I shouldliketo inform him
that this was a draft conceivedin goodwill andcouchedin
the most sober language;andit wasnot meantto introduce
any further polemicsinto the debatein thisCouncil.It may
be that his allegation that there is a completecease-firein
the areais true. If that is so,well andgood.If not, it is the
responsibility of membersof this Councilto act in order to
stop war and prevent the killing of humanbeings.
202. The PRESIDENT: As no other representative
wishes
to speak, I now call upon the Secretary-General,who
wishesto make a statement.

“The suggestionmade by the Israeli authoritiesto the
headquartersof the United Nationsmilitary observerswas
17

203. The- SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have hesitated to
ask for the floor at this late hour. I feel, however, that I
should mention briefly to the Council the situation
concerning observation of the cease-fire in the Syrian
sector.
204. As the Council is aware, the United Nations military
observers in the Syrian cease-fire sector have continued to
report throughout the recent period of hostilities, and eight
observations posts are still operating in the area. On the
morning of 24 October, I discussed the cease-fire observation
in this sector both with the Deputy Foreign Minister
of Syria and with the Permanent Representative of Israel. I
also requested the Chief of Staff of UNTSO to contact the
military authorities on both sides concerning the possibility
of adjusting the existing observation arrangements to the
current situation. The Chief of Staff has formulated a plan
for this purpose which could be carried out quickly and
would not, for the moment at any rate, require additional
observers.
205. It is my understanding that the reaction of the Syrian
authorities to this plan is favourable and that the Israeli
authorities have undertaken to give their reaction by
tomorrow morning.
206. Should both parties concerned agree to this readjustment of the existing observation operation, I assume that
the Security Council would have no objection.

208. I have already informed the Council of the measures
immediately taken by me and by the Chief of Staff of ~
UNTSO, General Siilasvuo, to Implement resolution
339 (1973).
209. I wish to assure the representative of the Soviet
Union that there was no lack of activity either at UNTSO
lleadquarters
in Jerusalem or at United Nations Read.
quarters
in New York. As I stated in my report to the
Council earlier in this meeting, as soon as the necessary
Egyptian
liaison officers were available, United Nations
observation teams set off from Cairo.
210. Our difficulties in immediately setting up an ob%r.
vation system arose from the conflict situation in the area
and the fact that the cease-fire called for by the Security
Council was not being observed. It is extremely difficult ia
such a situation to station rapidly small groups of military
observers effectively to observe a cease-fire the geographical
framework of which has not been defined and is not known
and which is in any case is not practically in effect.
211. As I have reported, seven teams of observers are sow
attempting to establish a system which
can carry out
effectively the mandate of the Security Council from tile
Egyptian side, and a similar arrangement is being set up on
the Israeli side. The difficulties and dangers which these
observers face should not be underestimated. I hope,
however, to be able to report in the near future the
increasing effectiveness of the observation operation.

207. As I have the floor, I should like to refer briefly to a
point raised by the representative of the Soviet Union
earlier in this meeting.

The meeting rose on Thursday, 25 October, at I2.30 QJI.

i

Litha

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price: $U.S. 2.00

(or

equivalent

in other currencies)

73-82001-July

1979-%100

j
