A/63/PV.102

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

102nd plenary meeting
Friday, 31 July 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Agenda item 48 (continued)
Follow-up to and implementation of the
outcome of the 2002 International Conference
on Financing for Development and the
preparation of the 2008 Review Conference
Draft resolution (A/63/L.77)
The President (spoke in Spanish): We shall now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/63/L.77. I give
the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to inform
members that, in connection with draft resolution
A/63/L.77, entitled “Establishment of an ad hoc openended working group of the General Assembly to
follow up on the issues contained in the Outcome of
the Conference on the World Financial and Economic
Crisis and Its Impact on Development”, I wish to put
on record the following statement on financial
implications on behalf of the Secretary-General. This
oral statement is made in accordance with rule 153 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
In operative paragraphs 1 and 2 of the draft
resolution, the General Assembly would
“[Decide] to establish immediately an
ad hoc open-ended working group of the General
Assembly to follow up on the issues contained in
the Outcome of the Conference on the World

Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on
Development”; and
“[Request] the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Working Group to submit a report on the progress
of its work to the General Assembly before the
end of the sixty-fourth session.”
The establishment of the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Working Group of the General Assembly constitutes an
addition to the calendar of conferences and meetings
for 2009 and 2010. It is estimated that the Ad Hoc
Open-ended Working Group of the General Assembly
would meet until 13 September 2010 and would hold a
total of 16 meetings, with dates to be determined in
consultation with the Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management, using the conference
facilities and services allocated to the General
Assembly and its working groups. On the
understanding that the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working
Group cannot meet in parallel with the General
Assembly plenary, and that no two working groups of
the General Assembly can meet simultaneously, there
will be no additional resources requirement for meeting
services of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group of
the General Assembly.
As regards the documentation requirements of the
Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group of the General
Assembly, it is estimated that one pre-session
document comprising 17 pages and one post-session
document — the same as an in-session document —
also comprising 17 pages, will be required in the six
official languages. Since the Ad Hoc Open-ended

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-43500 (E)

*0943500*

A/63/PV.102

Working Group of the General Assembly is a new body
of the General Assembly, these documents constitute
additional requirements for the Department of General
Assembly and Conference Management, resulting in
additional resources requirements of $76,000: for the
17-page pre-session document, $38,000 in the
biennium 2008-2009; and for the 17-page post-session
document — the same as an in-session document —
$38,000 in the biennium 2010-2011. Every effort will
be made to absorb these additional requirements from
within the appropriation of Section 2, General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs
and conference management, in the respective
bienniums.
In summary, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.77, the establishment of the
Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group of the General
Assembly will give rise to additional requirements
totalling $76,000 under Section 2, General Assembly
and Economic and Social Council affairs and
conference management, of the programme budget for
the biennium 2008-2009 — $38,000 — and the
proposed programme budget for the biennium
2010-2011 — $38,000. Every effort will be made to
absorb these additional requirements in the respective
bienniums.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly will now take action on draft resolution
A/63/L.77, entitled “Establishment of an ad hoc openended working group of the General Assembly to
follow up on the issues contained in the Outcome of
the Conference on the World Financial and Economic
Crisis and Its Impact on Development”. May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/305).
Mr. Fries (Sweden): I thank the representative of
the Secretariat for the useful information that we just
received.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The following countries align
themselves with this statement: the candidate countries
Croatia, Iceland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Turkey, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, Serbia and the European Free Trade

2

Association country Norway, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia.
The European Union welcomes the establishment
of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group of the
General Assembly. We look forward to participating
constructively in its work under the two co-chairs to be
appointed from the membership. The follow-up to the
Outcome of the Conference on the Financial and
Economic Crisis is indeed an important task. The
United Nations must seize this opportunity to
contribute to ongoing international discussions and
processes on mitigating the effects of the current global
financial crisis and preventing new ones.
Before the Ad Hoc Working Group can start its
work in earnest, its mandate and working methods need
to be agreed upon. For instance, the scope of the
Working Group needs to be elaborated. We must avoid
overlaps with actions mandated by the Conference to
the Economic and Social Council and other parts of the
United Nations system.
The composition of the Working Group needs to
be specified. The European Union is of the opinion that
the participation in the Working Group should reflect
the participation in the Conference itself. Relevant
stakeholders should be part of the discussions in the
Working Group. The time frame of the Working Group,
and a possible sunset clause, should be considered. The
need for Secretariat support for the Working Group
should be determined, bearing in mind the need for
budgetary restraint.
The European Union is ready to engage in
discussions on these and other issues that need to be
settled to ensure the efficient and effective functioning
of the Working Group.
Finally, since the Working Group will carry out
the bulk of its work during the sixty-fourth session of
the General Assembly, it is important that the incoming
President be well informed of our deliberations on the
mandate of the Working Group.
Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): I have the honour to make
this intervention on behalf of the 14 States members of
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
CARICOM continues to attach great importance
to this process, which is critical to the overall effort to
address the global financial crisis, which has already
severely impacted — and has the potential to further
jeopardize — various sectors of our economies. The

09-43500

A/63/PV.102

fall in commodity exports, tourism revenues,
remittances and foreign investment and the
concomitant rise in unemployment have been so
dramatic that several CARICOM countries have been
forced to enter into, or are contemplating, a borrowing
relationship with the International Monetary Fund.
The recently concluded Conference on the World
Financial and Economic Crisis was, from our
perspective, not an end in itself but the beginning of a
process. Our countries are small island developing
States which have no voice in exclusive groupings, and
the United Nations represents the only forum for us to
engage on such issues of fundamental importance.
It is in this context that we welcome the adoption
of resolution 63/305, which establishes an Ad Hoc
Open-ended Working Group to follow up on the issues
contained in the Outcome of the Conference on the
World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on
Development (resolution 63/303, annex).
We are of the view that the Working Group
should seek to address the following issues: access to
concessionary financing and grant funding to small,
highly indebted vulnerable countries in response to the
crisis; re-evaluation of the criteria to measure the
economic sustainability of middle-income countries;
the provision of new and additional resources to assist
developing countries, in particular the most vulnerable
among us, to assist us to rebound from this crisis; the
need for a level playing field with respect to the
treatment of offshore jurisdictions and the
strengthening of the United Nations Committee of
Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters;
and the need for a comprehensive reform of the global
financial and economic system in keeping with current
realities.
We look forward to an expeditious process of
follow-up and implementation. You, Sir, can continue
to count on the unwavering support and constructive
engagement of CARICOM in this regard.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the adoption
of resolution 63/305 on the establishment of an Ad Hoc
Open-ended Working Group of the General Assembly
to follow up on the issues contained in the Outcome
document of the Conference on the World Financial
and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development
(resolution 63/303, annex). I am confident that all
States members of the Non-Aligned Movement as well

09-43500

as all members of the Joint Coordinating Committee
(JCC) feel comfortable with the adoption by consensus
of this resolution and look forward to discussing the
scope and modalities of the Working Group in order to
facilitate its work and to the substantive discussions
thereafter, in order to submit the required report to the
General Assembly on the progress made before the end
of the sixty-fourth session.
I would like to emphasize that the establishment
of the Working Group represents a follow-up to what
was agreed on in the Outcome of the Conference and
that it will strengthen the ability of the United Nations
in undertaking its responsibilities through addressing
the crisis in all its operational and structural aspects.
These efforts should be coordinated between both
developed and developing countries and in a manner
that complements international efforts in other forums,
such as the Group of 20, whose membership should be
expanded to include more developing countries,
especially African countries.
Moreover, we look forward to increased
coordination between the activities of the Group of
Eight and the United Nations, as well as other groups,
mechanisms and international and regional financial
and economic institutions. We fully trust that
increasing such coordination will result in the
mitigation of the crisis and its impact in the short term
and will prevent its future recurrence.
Previously, during the Conference, we stressed
that the international response to the crisis needs to be
focused on generating more financial resources in the
global economy in the interest of developing countries
through providing resources, in full implementation of
standing development commitments and in accordance
with the outcomes of major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic and social
fields, the most recent of which was the Doha
Conference on Financing for Development. There is
also a need to provide new and additional resources
that will contribute to assisting developing countries in
addressing the negative impacts of the crisis.
We have also called for exploring new
frameworks to provide credit in a more predictable,
flexible and conditionality-free manner, as well as for
reaching a conclusion to the Doha Development Round
in a manner that contributes to providing a strong boost
to the exports of developing countries and puts an end

3

A/63/PV.102

to increased forms of protectionism as one of the
responses to the crisis.
We consider it imperative to conduct a
comprehensive review of the governance structures of
the international financial institutions, particularly the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. This
would aim at making their decision-making processes
reflective of the role of developing countries in
steering the global economy and putting an end to the
macroeconomic policies that are advocated by these
institutions, particularly with regard to conditionalities
and policy space, while contributing to enhancing the
capacities of developing countries in counter-cyclical
policies. There is also a need to revitalize the existing
agreements between the United Nations and those
institutions, with a view to achieving our common
development goals.
We further note the importance of determining
the means through which we will bridge the expected
development financing gap due to the current crisis,
and of ensuring that the economic stimulus packages of
the advanced industrial States do not lead to new
protectionist policies and increased imbalances in the
international trade system.
Finally, Mr. President, the JCC stands ready to
engage actively under your leadership in enhancing the
role of the General Assembly in addressing all issues
related to the financial and economic crisis. We trust in
your ability and the ability of the President-elect of the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session to lead our
work to complete success.
Mrs. Osman (Sudan): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. We are happy
to see the General Assembly formally decide on setting
up the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group to follow
up on the issues contained in the Outcome of the
Conference on the World Financial and Economic
Crisis and Its Impact on Development.
The Working Group, as decided in the Outcome,
will follow up on the issues discussed at the
Conference on the World Financial and Economic
Crisis. We look forward to the early appointment of the
co-chairs so as to facilitate the commencement of the
work of the Ad Hoc Working Group as soon as
possible.
Mr. President, we look forward to working with
you and our partners in a constructive spirit and a

4

creative manner to address, through the Ad Hoc
Working Group, the whole range of issues addressed in
the Outcome.
Mr. Normandin (Canada): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of Canada, Australia and New Zealand
(CANZ). We welcome the establishment of the
Working Group in pursuance of resolution 63/305,
which we just adopted. The CANZ countries very
much look forward to engaging constructively in the
Working Group. Along with others in this Hall we
anticipate a process engaging all Member States and
led by Member States, with the help of facilitators.
Above all, of course, we look forward to addressing the
important substantive issue at stake: the impact of the
financial and economic crisis on development.
But before doing so the first item of business of
the Working Group will be to define and agree on the
modalities of the Group, such as the scope and
organization of work, working methods, composition,
timelines and so on. Once again, the CANZ countries
very much look forward to working with all Member
States in this important undertaking.
Mr. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines): Saint Vincent and the Grenadines of
course aligns itself fully and enthusiastically with the
statements made on behalf of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), the Non-Aligned Movement
and the Group of 77 and China, and has very little to
add other than to say that we welcome the adoption of
resolution 63/305 and the formation of the Ad Hoc
Open-ended Working Group.
Members will recall that the participation of
CARICOM heads of Government at the Conference far
exceeded the proportional and actual representation of
other regions and subregions at the highest level. The
high level of participation by CARICOM was
indicative of the importance we place on the financial
and economic crisis and the role of the United Nations
in helping to address the crisis.
None of us are members of either the Group of
Eight (G-8) or the Group of 20 (G-20), and the only
way in which we can build upon and complement the
ongoing work of the G-8 and the G-20 is through the
United Nations and the mechanism contemplated by
this resolution. We do not share the experiences of
some developed countries, which now may see an end,
or a bottoming out or the beginning of the end of the
financial crisis. In many substantive ways, for Saint

09-43500

A/63/PV.102

Vincent and the Grenadines the crisis is just beginning.
We think it is critical that we remain engaged in
substantive matters on the crisis.
The reason for this intervention is to state simply
that the contours and mandates and scope of the
Working Group are well delineated by the Outcome
document itself, which was adopted by consensus as
the annex to resolution 63/303. Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines believes there is no need to unduly delay
ourselves orchestrating the dance of procedural angels
on the head of a pin. We believe that the substance of
the document is very clear, and we have had working
groups before. The urgency of the crisis makes it
imperative that we get on with the substantive work as
soon as possible and not delay ourselves, as we are
wont to do, with procedural niceties.
From the perspective of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, a number of aspects of the document are
of importance to us in a national context, and we would
like to highlight some of them. One would be the
elimination
of
unwarranted
pro-cyclical
conditionalities, in particular from the International
Monetary Fund (IMF), that would affect the flexibility
to pursue the counter-cyclical measures employed in
developed countries. We can find this in paragraphs 17
and 18 of the Outcome. Special considerations for the
challenges of middle-income countries and small island
developing States and their specific needs are found in
paragraph 4 of the document. The need to mobilize an
adequate share of any additional short- and long-term
resources to be made available to developing countries,
and the scaling up of development finance to
developing countries are called for in paragraphs 10,
14, 22 and 31 of the document. The need for
development partners to meet their official
development assistance commitments can be found in
paragraph 28 of the text. The need for measures to
mitigate the effects of the crisis on the indebtedness of

09-43500

developing States and to avoid a new debt crisis can be
found in paragraph 33 of the document. The need for
equal, consistent and non-discriminatory treatment of
all tax jurisdictions and financial centres and the
strengthening of the role of the United Nations
Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in
Tax Matters can be found in paragraphs 38 and 56 (c)
of the document. And of course the ongoing need for
further meaningful, far-reaching and substantive
reforms of the global financial and economic system
and architecture, which of course is set forth
throughout the document, as we are all well aware.
The President: Today is an important day, in a
very practical sense. I thank all Member States for
establishing by consensus the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Working Group — a technical and practical necessity.
The language of resolution 63/305 is that of Member
States, since it reproduces the language of paragraph
54 of the Outcome of the Conference (resolution
63/303, annex), which was negotiated by Member
States. It simply responds to what the Outcome of the
Conference had asked Member States to do. At high
levels, during the Conference, the call was given for
the General Assembly to continue to address this issue
since the world financial and economic crisis continues
to have a negative impact on both the developed and
the developing worlds.
As I mentioned in my first letter on the subject, we
shall soon announce the names of the two co-chairs —
one from the North and one from the South — who
together with the members of the General Assembly
will determine the details of the work of the Group.
(spoke in Spanish)
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 48.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

5
