General Aa■embI,--Tbirtieth Se■■ion

58

(b) Tamg-- the necessary steps, in co-operation
with the organizations of the United Nations system,
to provide the same kind of intersectoral presentation
on a system-wide basis;
7. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
examine the implementation of the relevant resolutions
pertaining to economic co-operation among developing countries in order to improve the co-ordination of
efforts by the United Nations system and with a view
to making such examination coincide with the review
and appraisal of the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution.
2432niplenary meeting
9 December 1975

3459 (XXX). Report of th.e Trade and
Development Board49
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964,

•"

Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New lnternational Economic Order, and 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling also Trade and Development Board decision 113 (XIV) of 13 September 1974, by which it
decided to convene the fourth session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development at Nairobi,110
Recalling further its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 197 5 on developmemt and international
economic co-operation, in which Member States agreed
that an important aim of the fo111rth session of the
, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
in addition to work in progress elsewhere, should be to
reach decisions on specific issues, in particular on the
improvement of market structures in the field of raw
materials and commodities of export interest to the developing countties,
Afjirming the importance of the fourth session of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in the negotiation and the implementation of
concrete proposals, particularly on the questions relating to trade in commodities and manufactures, monetary and financial issues and the transfer of technology
emerging from the sixth and seventh special sessions
of the General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3216 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974, whereby it accepted with appreciation the
invitation of the Government of Kenya to hold the
fourth session of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development at Nairobi from 3 to 28 May
1976,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of
the Trade and Development Board on its sixth special
session, on the second part of its fourteenth session
and on its fifteenth session;51
G See also p. 142, ítem 55.

110 See Offecial Records of the General .Assembly, Twenty-

ninth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/9615/Rev.1), annex l.
111 Jbid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/10015/
Rev.1).

2. Endorses the consensus of the Trade and Development Board on the provisional agenda for the fourth
session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, 112 as well as the arrangements for the
organization of the work of the session;
3. Decides, in addition to the arrangements mentioned in paragraph 2 above, that the languages of the
fourth session of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development shall be those used in the
General Assembly and its Main Committees;
4. Urges ali Member States to take appropriate
steps with a view to ensuring satisfactory results from
the fourth session of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development through adequate preparation at the national, regional and interregional levels
and through the full utilization of the permanent machinery of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, which should facilitate negotiations
on the agenda items of the fourth session;
.
5. Urges ali Member States to ensure that such negotiations are action-oriented, so that the decisions
arrived at by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its fourth session can be promptly
and effectively implemented.
2436th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
1

3460 (XXX). United Nations Speclal Fund
The General Assembly,
Recalling section X of its resolution 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974 containing the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order,
Recognizing that the present economic situation of
a large number of developing countries, in particular
the most seriously affected among them, requires even
greater efforts on the part of the international community to help them overcome the effects of the economic crisis that had called for the establishment of
the United Nations Special Fund,
Recalling its resolution 3356 (XXIX) of 18 December 1974, in particular paragraph 1, article I, thereof,
Bearing in mind that a number of countries have
expressed their willingness to contribute to 'the United
Nations Special Fund provided that it generates adequate funding,
Considering that, with the agreement reached unanimously at its seventh special session whereby developed
countries, and developing countries in a position to do
so, were urged to make adequate contributions to the
United Nations Special Fund with a view to an early
implementation of a programme of lending, preferably
in 1976, the prospects for the beginning of the operations of the Fund have been significantly improved,
1. Takes note of the report of the Board of Governors of the United Nations Special Fund on the work
of its :first session ;118
2. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
President of the Board of Governors114 on his contacts
with various potential contributors to the United Nations
Special Fund and with economic groupings and requests
him to continue these efforts;
112 Jbid., part four, annex 11.

118Jbid., Supplement No. 21 (A/10021).
Thirtieth Session, Second Committee, 1665th meeting, paras. 1-8.
54 lbid.,
