United Nations

S/PV.6302

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6302nd meeting
Tuesday, 27 April 2010, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Takasu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Long Zhou
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Salam
Mr. Puente
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2010/173)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-33085 (E)

*1033085*

S/PV.6302

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2010/173)
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Margot
Wallström, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
It is so decided.
I invite Ms. Wallström to take a seat at the
Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special Adviser of the SecretaryGeneral on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women.
It is so decided.
I invite Ms. Mayanja to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2010/173, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Women and peace and security.
At this meeting the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Margot Wallström and Ms. Rachel
Mayanja. I now give the floor to Ms. Wallström.
Ms. Wallström: First of all, I would like to thank
you, Sir, and the Permanent Mission of Japan for this
opportunity to address the Security Council as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.

2

Why should this body, which debates matters of
war and peace, debate the security of women? I am
honoured to add my voice to the Council’s
groundbreaking consideration of that question. I will
also share a frank assessment of the gaps in our efforts
to address sexual violence, the challenges I observed
on my visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and how my vision and five-point agenda aim to
respond. I would like to leave the Council with two
forward-looking
recommendations:
that
sexual
violence be given continuous consideration and that
prevention be made a top priority.
From the Trojan War to the nuclear age, rape has
existed in symbiotic relationship with armed conflict.
And yet, it is a relationship we are just beginning to
understand. History has perpetuated the ancient myth
of “arms and the man”, prioritizing the plight of
soldiers on the front lines while relegating women to
the sidelines.
This Council, however, has helped redefine the
relationship between rape and war and, more broadly,
between women and peace and security. Resolution
1820 (2008) was a historic response to a heinous
reality. It was a response commensurate with the
understanding that conflict-related sexual violence is
collective violence aimed at destroying not only
people, but their sense of being a people.
The complementary efforts of other United
Nations bodies to advance gender equality,
development and justice are crucial, and I look forward
to working with them as a bridge to the broader United
Nations membership. Yet our approach to rape in
places where peace and order prevail no more equips
us to address systematic rape as a war strategy than our
approach to murder prepares us for genocide. In terms
of their intent, extent and impact, the crimes are
incomparable.
In the wake of the Second World War, the United
Nations Charter was adopted to “save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war”, which “has
brought untold sorrow”. But still, the scourge of rape
continues, and its sorrows are largely left untold.
Succeeding generations continue to be born of rape at
gunpoint and stigmatized as the stepchildren of war.
Governments and armed groups that tolerate sexual
terror make a mockery of the United Nations Charter
and this Council’s action to enforce it. Those who
employ sexual violence to punish, humiliate, terrorize

10-33085

S/PV.6302

or displace commit crimes against the victims and
crimes against humanity.
Sexual violence creates and perpetuates an
atmosphere of insecurity. This leads to a drastic decline
in the number of girls able to safely attend school and
the number of women able to access water points,
marketplaces and polling booths. As a biological
weapon, it increases the disease burden on a
community, including HIV and AIDS. It uproots and
fractures families, dissolving community bonds by
turning victims into outcasts. The psychological scars
remain beneath the surface of a society and, like any
explosive remnant of war, make peace less possible.
Far from being a niche issue, sexual violence is
part of a larger pattern. The changing nature of conflict
is characterized by an increased civilian-combatant
interface, which has seen the targeting of populations
and the placing of women and girls at ever greater risk.
Rule by rape is used by political and military leaders to
achieve political, military and economic ends.
Politically motivated rape is a disturbing trend
witnessed in the wake of Kenya’s contested elections
and, more recently, in broad daylight on the streets of
Guinea. Such crimes create a security crisis that
demands a security response.
So what is the response of the United Nations
system, and what is missing?
The United Nations system is generating
proposals for effective monitoring and reporting to
identify and plug gaps, measured against performance
benchmarks. I would like to say a few words about
these critical gaps, to which my vision is intended to
respond.
First, the knowledge base on which we act has
been impaired by analytical gaps. Perhaps the most
insidious is the notion that rape is an inevitable byproduct of war. Sexual violence and its extreme
consequences are not intrinsic to conflict and
displacement. Rather, there is a sense that rape leaves
perpetrators without blood on their hands and that it
can be put down to biological need or the fog of war.
So we must be clear — mass rape is no more natural,
inevitable or acceptable than mass murder. Research
reveals variations in the use of war rape and situations
in which it is rare, so we know it is not a necessary
corollary of conflict. The United Nations has
traditionally analysed sexual violence through a
gender, reproductive-health and development lens,

10-33085

which means that security factors and actors are often
overlooked. But wartime sexual violence is a crime
that can be commanded, condoned or condemned. I am
convinced that once we better understand these
dynamics, prevention will be within our power.
However, a range of factors inhibit survivors
from coming forward to report: lack of services,
shame, low rights-awareness and high security risk. To
inform interventions, we need data that captures trends,
early warning indicators and patterns of attack. While
we cannot expect accurate bookkeeping on the
battlefield,
inadequate
information-sharing
and
coordination has meant that sexual violence data
remain fragmented and anecdotal. Nonetheless, I
would argue that from the way sexual violence spans
history, the burden of proof in wartime should be on
those who suggest that rape is not rampant. When law
and order collapses, dealing with rape should be
automatically included in contingency plans.
A related gap is accountability: the need to put
names to war’s most complex horrors. History does not
repeat itself; people repeat history. I therefore welcome
the expansion of the list of shame of groups that recruit
child soldiers to include groups credibly suspected of
patterns of sexual violence. The Secretary-General’s
second report on resolution 1820 (2008), to be
compiled by my office and presented at the end of the
year, will propose listing criteria aligned with those
developed by the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. We cannot arbitrarily cut off concern for rape
victims at age 18. My vision includes tracking the
security dimensions of sexual violence by making use
of women’s protection advisers as a counterpart in the
field.
Another gap is in the routine inclusion of sexual
violence — against boys and men as well as against
women and girls — as part of the protection of
civilians. Ad hoc methods have been employed, such as
the “firewood patrols” in Darfur, but we need to
systematize such efforts. In June I will launch, together
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the United Nations Development Fund for Women, an
analytical inventory of peacekeeping practice to
address conflict-related sexual violence. That
document will capture promising practice and elements
of an effective response.

3

S/PV.6302

To see these protection challenges first-hand, I
recently visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
a vast and remarkable nation, where I met resilient and
dynamic women. Yet this story is eclipsed by the
horror story that Congo remains the rape capital of the
world. This mars its image and potential for economic
growth. While the Congo’s mothers, daughters and
sisters walk in shame, their rapists walk free. Victims
are doubly victimized by this injustice. Yet Congo has
a robust legal framework and a declaration on zero
tolerance. It also has a comprehensive strategy on
combating sexual violence, owned jointly by the
Government and the United Nations system. The laws
must be implemented and the strategy operationalized.
Political leadership is needed right across the spectrum,
from the President, the National Assembly and
provincial governors to religious and community
leaders.
Sexual violence remains a dominant, even
escalating, feature of the conflict. The refrain I heard
from women across the Kivus was, “If only it were not
for the war”. Recent reports suggest that 60 per cent of
victims surveyed in the Kivus had been gang-raped by
armed men. More than half of these assaults took place
within the supposed safety of the family home, at
night, often in the presence of the victim’s husband and
children. I heard evidence that four out of five women
seeking care from health centres claim to have been
raped by men in uniform. The core of this problem is
impunity, which is the rule, rather than the exception.
Rape victims receive no justice and no reparations. In
South Kivu province, there are just 54 magistrates,
only two of them women.
The Congolese people deserve a credible army
that can defend and protect them. The uniform should
symbolize a service that women can run to, not run
from. It should not represent a patchwork of militias,
stitched together without a screening process. The
headquarters of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo bears a sign that reads: “La
discipline est la mère des armées”. But discipline must
be backed with concrete measures to replace makeshift
tents with barracks, improvised attire with uniforms
and an implicit license to live off rural populations
with a reliable payment chain.
Similarly, the Police Nationale Congolaise lacks
practical means to respond to sexual violence. In a
context where rape is described as an epidemic, the
Women and Child Protection Unit in Goma shares one

4

motorbike to use to apprehend suspects. Violent
criminals ride on the back of the bike as they are taken
to the small shed that serves as a holding station.
Nonetheless, I was inspired by the dedication of
members of the police, judicial and hospital staff,
non-governmental organizations and local authorities. I
am also pleased to report progress in the practice of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on the ground. One
example is its market-route patrols. At first, very few
women followed the patrols, but over time, more and
more began to take advantage of these escorts. The
improved sense of safety has led to improved trade,
which has contributed to economic development.
My findings from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo coupled with the aforementioned gaps analysis
reaffirm the five-point priority agenda that I have
outlined for my mandate, namely: ending impunity;
empowering women; mobilizing political leadership;
increasing recognition of rape as a tactic and
consequence of conflict; and ensuring a more coherent
response from the United Nations system.
First, the reign of impunity must end. This is a
critical part of the broader mandate of the Security
Council to shepherd situations from might to right,
from rule of war to rule of law and from bullets to
ballots. If women continue to suffer sexual violence, it
is not because the law is inadequate to protect them,
but because it is inadequately enforced. I will work
with Governments to explore options for drawing upon
the technical expertise of a team of experts on the rule
of law, as mandated by the Council’s resolution 1888
(2009).
Secondly, we are not just protecting women from
violence, but empowering them to become agents of
change. A ceasefire is not synonymous with peace for
women, if the shooting ceases but rapes continue
unchecked.
The third point is to mobilize political leadership.
Resolutions are not ends in themselves, but tools in the
hands of political leaders. I intend to rally States and
United Nations and regional bodies to own this agenda
and to feel accountable for its success. I will also
mobilize non-traditional stakeholders, as sexual
violence is not just a women’s issue.
The fourth point is to increase recognition of rape
as a tactic and consequence of conflict. Those who

10-33085

S/PV.6302

tolerate sexual terror should be on notice that they do
so in defiance of the Security Council, with its power
to enact enforcement measures. Resolution 1807
(2008), which imposes a travel ban and freezes assets
of individuals in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
who commit serious violations of international law,
including sexual violence, is a powerful example of
effective Council action.
The fifth point, coordination, is critical to avoid
gaps and overlaps in United Nations activities. I will
work through the inter-agency network, United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, which has
provided strategic support in five integrated mission
settings: the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Liberia, the Sudan — in Darfur — Chad and Côte
d’Ivoire, helping agencies rise above institutional
mandates to deliver as one. It is encouraging that the
Security Council has amplified the call for
comprehensive strategies to combat sexual violence in
its mandate renewals for Côte d’Ivoire and the Sudan.
The final theme responds to the most urgent
gap — that is, prevention. The terms of the debate have
shifted from reacting to sexual violence as to any other
tragedy, to preventing sexual violence as if it were any
other threat. This means both helping the victims and
helping to ensure that there are no more victims.
My Office will prepare an early warning matrix
of risk factors to sound the alarm from the ground up. I
look forward to working with a military liaison officer
who can interface with force commanders, ministries
of defence and armed groups to identify patterns of
violence.
Our current knowledge comes mainly from the
survivors. For too long, it has been considered
unpalatable to inquire into the motivations of
perpetrators and non-State actors, as if doing so would
legitimize their conduct. Understanding perpetrators is
the missing piece of the puzzle.
There has been much focus on command
responsibility. That is warranted, but we should not
ignore the importance of peer liability. Peer pressure is
a powerful influence in armed groups, and in the
inverted moral universe of war, violence becomes a
virtue and rape a rite of passage. In the words of a
former combatant pleading guilty to charges of
repeated rape before the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia,

10-33085

“our wrongs were so terrible that we clung to
them and tried to justify them. I tried to be proud
of my actions and to think they were the actions
of a successful soldier”.
I recommend pioneering a peer education model on
sexual violence prevention.
Going on the offensive against sexual violence
will require the Council’s continuous consideration.
Bold language in thematic resolutions must not be lost
in translation when it comes to country-level action.
The well-framed mandates of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo have made a real difference, and I applaud
the efforts made during the Council’s most recent
mission to the Congo in May 2009 to ensure that the
five army officers blacklisted for sexual violence were
brought to justice.
States bear the primary responsibility for
protecting their citizens from violence. I see my role as
helping to build the capacity of Governments to meet
their obligations. Women have no rights if those who
violate their rights go unpunished. I am haunted by
what I heard in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo — that women are still not safe, under their
own roofs and in their own beds, when night falls. Our
aim must be to uphold international law so that women,
even in the war-torn corners of our world, can sleep
under the cover of justice.
The President: I thank Ms. Wallström for her
important briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mayanja.
Ms. Mayanja: It is an honour for me to introduce
the report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2010/173). May I begin by
expressing my deep gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
giving me this opportunity to address the Council on
the report before it, which presents for the Council’s
consideration a set of indicators for use at the global
level to track the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Your presidency of the Council this month has
been instrumental in allowing us to conclude, in a
timely manner, the preparations needed to convene this
meeting of the Council.
I would also like to express my gratitude to the
Permanent Mission of Austria for its relentless support
of the indicator development process and for working
closely with the Technical Working Group on Global

5

S/PV.6302

Indicators, including funding parts of the long process
of consultation that resulted in the report before the
Council today.
I also join in warmly welcoming Ms. Margot
Wallström, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Sexual Violence in Conflict. The
Inter-Agency Network on Women and Gender Equality,
which I chair, and I personally look forward to working
closely with her to advance the rights of women and
their contribution to peace and security.
The report before the Council responds to the
Security Council’s request, in October 2009, that the
Secretary-General submit, within six months, for
consideration a set of indicators for use at the global
level to track implementation of its resolution 1325
(2000), which could serve as a common basis for
reporting by relevant United Nations entities, other
international and regional organizations and Member
States on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
in 2010 and beyond.
Before I introduce the indicators presented in the
report, allow me to talk about the process that led to its
preparation. That process is significant because it is an
indication of the commitment of a broad range of
stakeholders to finding a way to better monitor
progress in implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
The report is the culmination of a long and
comprehensive process involving a broad range of
stakeholders, including Member States, United Nations
entities, civil society and technical and substantive
specialists. In response to the Security Council’s
request, the Inter-Agency Task Force on Women and
Peace and Security established the Technical Working
Group on Global Indicators to define and outline the
requested set of indicators. The Working Group, which
was made up of representatives of United Nations
entities and led and coordinated by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, initiated a
comprehensive process of information-gathering on
indicators used across the United Nations system and
by national Governments and other organizations.
The results of the mapping exercise yielded more
than 2,500 indicators that were reported to be in use or
were referenced in various documents that the Working
Group examined. They constitute the raw material for
generating the indicators contained in the report before
the Council today. They were subjected to a
collaborative
review
process,
including
by

6

representatives of civil society, technical experts,
United Nations entities and Member States, with a
view to reducing them to the most specific,
measurable, achievable, relevant and time-bound
measures. The result was a shortlist that was reviewed
further through consultations with members of this
Council, civil society, the principal United Nations
entities and other stakeholders. The final list of
indicators included in the report reflects the outcome of
those extensive consultations.
Despite the breadth and scope of the
consultations, I am pleased that the Secretariat has
succeeded in meeting the short deadline for the
production of the report. That is itself a sign of the
commitment of the Secretary-General to moving ahead
with more effective monitoring of resolution 1325
(2000), especially as we approach the tenth anniversary
of its adoption in October.
Now, let me turn to the indicators presented in the
report. The selected indicators, 26 in all, are presented
in tables 1 to 4 of the report and are briefly explained
in the text. The indicators cover a broad range of
substantive issues relating to women and peace and
security. They are organized into four main groups,
coinciding with the areas covered in the System-Wide
Action Plan for measuring progress in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). Those four areas are
prevention, participation, protection, and relief and
recovery. Within those groups, indicators range from
those aimed at assessing the situation of women and
girls and the degree to which gender considerations are
mainstreamed in peace processes to those that seek to
determine the resource availability and institutional
capacity for addressing peace and security issues.
The report acknowledges that the 26 indicators
that were selected are at different stages of availability
and technical development. That is recognized in the
report through the assignment of feasibility indicators
A to F, with indicator A requiring the shortest and least
effort to assemble and use and F requiring the greatest.
A testing and piloting phase will therefore be required
for most of the indicators before they can become fully
operational.
What is the purpose of the pilot and testing? Such
an approach would allow the proposed indicators to be
assessed for feasibility and effectiveness of data
collection and also permit the establishment of a
baseline for those indicators for which no data are

10-33085

S/PV.6302

currently available. The pilot phase would also be an
opportunity to work with Member States, United
Nations country teams, civil society organizations and
other stakeholders to cement ownership of the process
and the outcomes. It is expected that the length of the
pilot phase would vary for each group of indicators,
extending in some cases from two to five years.
In terms of applicability of the indicators, the
report before the Council notes that while most of the
indicators have been proposed for countries or areas
affected by conflict, it would be important in applying
the indicators to be guided by the specific nature of
each conflict situation. It is also important to note that
the issues addressed in resolution 1325 (2000) are also
relevant to contexts that have not experienced armed
conflict. Applicable indicators among those presented
in the report can be used in those contexts as well, to
serve as early warning indicators.
In its conclusions, the report recommends that the
Council urge the United Nations system to engage
relevant organizations and parties that have technical
expertise in data collection and analysis to populate
these indicators in the shortest possible time, so that
the data can be available for use by all stakeholders,
including Member States. United Nations country
teams, One United Nations pilot countries and
integrated missions would be instrumental in testing
and piloting indicators at the national level. In this
regard, the Council may wish to urge Member States,
in parallel with United Nations efforts, to volunteer to
pilot the indicators, in order to ensure that they are
relevant to specific country situations and to establish
best practices in data collection and analysis.
The report also recommends that the Council use
the indicators presented in this report as the basis for
establishing a system for assessing its own progress in
monitoring the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
For his part, the Secretary-General reaffirms his
commitment to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and to the related resolutions 1820 (2008), 1882
(2009), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1894 (2009).
Through the appointment of his Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, he has demonstrated
his determination to address the persistent scourge of
violence against women, including sexual violence, to
lead by example and to strive to empower women and

10-33085

girls to play a meaningful role in peace and security,
including in situations of armed conflict.
The Secretary-General remains committed to
strengthening the United Nations capacity to fully
implement resolution 1325 (2000). He himself has
been witness to and deeply troubled by the effects of
violence, abuse and other blatant violations of the
rights of women and girls in countries affected by
conflict, and he remains unflinchingly committed to
this cause.
We all look forward to accelerating the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the hope
that, 10 years from now, we can talk about full
implementation with real, measurable changes on the
ground.
The President: I thank Ms. Mayanja for her
comprehensive briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council that wish to make statements.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Mr. President, for scheduling today’s
debate. I offer a warm welcome to Ms. Wallström and
Ms. Mayanja and thank them for their helpful and
forceful briefings this morning.
The United Kingdom believes that the Council
must continue to give issues on women, peace and
security sustained attention. As Ms. Wallström said,
this is not a women’s issue. It is a peace and security
issue.
We have spoken many times in the Council
Chamber about the devastating and disproportionate
effect that conflict has on women and girls. The impact
is all the more debilitating because it most affects the
very people we rely on to rebuild a society and to
deliver lasting peace and long-term stability.
Last year, the Council adopted two important
resolutions on this agenda item to address the
continued threat from sexual violence in conflict and to
ensure that women’s participation, including in peace
processes, achieves the status it deserves. At that time,
many Council members emphasized that more needed
to be done to implement resolution 1325 (2000), the
landmark resolution that 10 years ago raised women’s
empowerment as a crucial issue for international peace
and security.

7

S/PV.6302

In the second of those two debates in October of
last year, Ms. Inés Alberdi, Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women,
committed to answering the Council’s challenge for
indicators to measure progress, saying:
“It is time for us all to count the numbers of
women at the peace table, the numbers of women
raped in war, the numbers of internally displaced
women who never recover their property, the
numbers of women defenders of human rights
killed for speaking out.” (S/PV.6196, p. 7)
Thanks to her efforts, and in particular the efforts of
Ms. Mayanja and her team over the past six months,
we now have some impressive analysis — a list of
26 indicators to build on, to strengthen and to examine
before the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) in October. I congratulate her
on this thorough report (S/2010/173).
In October, the United Kingdom hopes that the
Council will be in a position, drawing upon views from
across the United Nations membership, to endorse
indicators against which we can set goals, measure
progress and adjust our efforts to ensure that we make
good on the ambitions of those who drafted and those
who supported resolution 1325 (2000).
We need to know where we start from in order to
assess the progress we want to make. Where we
succeed, we should examine why. Where our efforts
are found wanting, we should direct more time and
resources deliberately to empower women to support
post-conflict recovery. Of course, some things are
difficult to measure and difficult to quantify, but that is
no excuse. It is a challenge that we need to overcome.
We should build up our indicators and refine them
based on experience.
I want to make two other points on this important
agenda item. First, I want to express the United
Kingdom’s support for the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict. In only
a few short weeks, Ms. Wallström has already raised
the level of attention that we pay to women, peace and
security issues, and we hope that this trend will
continue. Related to that, we fully support the creation
of the composite gender entity as the best option for
strengthening the capacity, accountability and
effectiveness of the United Nations system in gender
equality and the empowerment of women, including
the issue of women, peace and security.

8

The United Kingdom sincerely hopes that the
10-year anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) is one
that will be remembered as a milestone in the
implementation of this item, setting the tone for the
next decade, with women, peace and security as an
ongoing priority for all Member States.
We support today’s draft presidential statement.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you,
Sir, for bringing the Council together to discuss an
issue that is critically important to the United States,
and indeed to all nations. I also want to thank the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Margot Wallström, and Special Adviser on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, Rachel Mayanja,
for their very helpful briefings.
Through a series of resolutions spanning the past
decade, this Council has consistently called on all
parties to armed conflicts to respect women’s rights.
This body has also called on those parties to do more in
the areas of conflict prevention, peace negotiations and
post-conflict reconstruction efforts. The Council has
also trained attention on the clear link between
international peace and security and the use of sexual
violence as a tool of war against civilians.
The human cost is all too real. Armed conflict
continues to have a devastating impact on women and
girls, leaving them wounded, traumatized, sexually
assaulted, socially and economically marginalized or
without political power. Member States must renew
their commitment to resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009) and intensify their efforts to
implement their provisions.
We are encouraged by the momentum that has
grown considerably in the past few months,
particularly in three areas: the appointment of Special
Representative Wallström and her work beginning to
assemble a team of well qualified staff; the formulation
of a team of experts; and the immediate attention that
the Special Representative has given to the grave crisis
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
My Government is committed to supporting
Special Representative Wallström’s work as she brings
her Office up to full operational strength. In particular,
we will look forward to the inclusion of a military
expert within Special Representative Wallström’s
Office. This expert will help address ways that armed
forces can prevent and halt sexual and gender-based

10-33085

S/PV.6302

violence during conflict, support strategies to convince
military leaders from all sides of a conflict to prevent
their forces from committing rape and help United
Nations military leaders to develop effective strategies
to prevent rape during armed conflict. We are eager to
work with Special Representative Wallström and the
team of experts to ensure a coordinated approach to
addressing a series of critical issues, ending the cycle
of impunity, helping national authorities strengthen the
rule of law, particularly in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, providing assistance to victims and creating
a framework to help prevent emerging or recurring
outbreaks of violence or to provide early warning if
they cannot be staved off.
In particular, I would like to note how pleased my
Government is that Special Representative Wallström
has begun her work by dealing immediately with the
grave and worsening situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. But far more needs to be done
to develop frameworks and initiatives for addressing
sexual violence issues overall, even as attention must
be focused on specific countries and regions where
atrocities are being committed as we speak.
As we recognize the progress being made, we
also remain focused on the challenges that lie ahead,
including ending endemic sexual and gender-based
violence, linking our current efforts with successful
strategies for peacekeeping missions such as those in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Liberia,
building an enduring team of experts that can work
throughout the United Nations system and halting the
sexual and gender-based violence that often continues
even after a conflict subsides.
Let me say a few words about steps to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), as called for by resolution
1889 (2009). The Secretary-General’s most recent
report (S/2010/173) is an important step. The work of
the United Nations Technical Working Group on
Global Indicators, under the auspices of Special
Adviser Mayanja, has resulted in draft indicators to
measure the implementation of 1325 (2000) and related
resolutions. This report can serve as a basis for further
much-needed consultations to ensure that the indicators
are conceptually correct and measure qualitative
metrics and not just quantitative data, and to ensure
that these indicators can be realistically implemented.
We hope that the Council will move forward soon on a
final set of indicators to allow the United Nations to
start putting them into practice.

10-33085

The United Nations plays critical roles in
promoting women’s empowerment, deepening their
involvement in political processes and working to end
sexual violence in conflict zones. We support
advancing the broad set of women’s issues through the
United Nations system, including through the
establishment of a robust, efficient and effective entity
to advance women’s issues and women’s rights.
Almost a decade after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the need to increase women’s
participation in peace processes and to combat sexual
violence in conflict zones has not abated. Women and
girls whose lives and futures are on the line cannot
wait, so we look forward to a commemorative meeting
of the Security Council in October to mark the
resolutions tenth anniversary and to renew our
commitment to a world no longer blighted by impunity,
assault, discrimination and the use of rape as a weapon
of war.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): First of all, I would
like to thank the Japanese presidency for organizing
this very important debate on a core subject of our
work. I would like to welcome Ms. Margot Wallström,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, to her first briefing to the
Security Council and to thank her for her very
important presentation, which clearly shows her strong
personal commitment. We are encouraged by how
quickly she and her Office have become operational
and by the information that she has given us on her
recent visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I would also like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Rachel Mayanja for her presentation here
today, for her strong commitment to the issues we are
discussing today and for the important report
(S/2010/173) she has introduced to the Council today
on the set of indicators for tracking the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). I would
like to thank Ms. Mayanja for her kind words regarding
the events that we were pleased to co-host with her and
the United Nations Development Fund for Women
during the consultation process. She can rest assured
that we will continue to fully support her efforts. By
the way, we were also encouraged by the broad support
this work received both from Member States and
within the United Nations system, and we hope to see
further progress in October, when the Security Council
will hopefully endorse a comprehensive set of

9

S/PV.6302

indicators following a broad consultation process in the
weeks and months ahead.
We were pleased to see that this consultation
process has thus far been able to build on existing
indicators and that it has included all relevant
stakeholders. Let me underline our understanding that
these indicators are a comprehensive set reflecting all
relevant aspects under the body of resolutions
following resolution 1325 (2000).
We expect that the Secretary-General’s report on
the indicators will reflect the results and input from
upcoming inclusive consultations. We are looking
forward to the report being submitted to the Security
Council for its consideration in time for the meeting to
mark the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) in
October 2010.
We thank Japan for its very fruitful efforts in
finding agreement on the draft presidential statement
before the Council today. Austria believes that this
presidential statement provides a good starting point
for the Council’s further work, and we fully support the
draft statement.
The meetings in recent days have also provided
us with an excellent opportunity to start a process of
thinking about what United Nations Member States,
and the members of the Security Council in particular,
want to achieve as an outcome of a review of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). There seems to be
wide agreement among United Nations Member States
that a merely ceremonial gathering of the Council
would be a lost opportunity for women around the
globe, as well as for the Council, and that the Security
Council should rather seize the opportunity to renew its
commitment to the issue of women and peace and
security and strive for concrete results, in particular
with a view to strengthening accountability for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Part of a success in October will clearly be due to
the fact that we will bring together representatives of
the United Nations system, the Advisory Panel and
Member States to discuss the way forward and the
ongoing planning process. We know that a lot of
activities are already under way. We think it will be
crucial to carry out the preparations for the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) with a maximum
of transparency and cooperation, including, of course,
the important role that civil society can play in this
matter.

10

We are grateful to Uganda in particular for having
decided to make this issue a priority of its presidency
of the Council during the anniversary month of
October. We will be ready to support our Ugandan
friends in the efforts to make this an important and
meaningful exercise. Let me also thank the SecretaryGeneral,
the
Deputy
Secretary-General
and
Ms. Mayanja for their commitment towards making the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) a
beneficial opportunity for women around the globe.
Austria fully supported the establishment of the
position of a Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Resolution
1888 (2009) has placed a number of tools at the
disposal of the Special Representative, such as teams
of experts. We would be keen to hear more about the
Special Representative’s plans in future discussions on
implementing this resolution.
I would like to concentrate on a number of
practical proposals for how the Security Council could
further improve its action on this important matter.
With the expansion of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism in resolution 1882 (2009) to
situations where parties to armed conflict engage in
rape and other sexual violence against children,
coordination between the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict is crucial.
More consistent and comprehensive reporting on
sexual violence in the Secretary-General’s countryspecific reports would enable the Council to address
the protection of civilians, in particular women and
children, from sexual violence in a more systematic
manner. To that end, the Council should include
specific reporting requirements in resolutions
establishing or renewing mandates.
In many conflict situations, perpetrators who
systematically commit serious violations against
women and girls still go largely unpunished.
Allegations of sexual violence need to be thoroughly
investigated and perpetrators need to be brought to
account, including not only through prosecution but
also through the screening of armed and security
forces. Victims of sexual violence need to receive
assistance and adequate forms of reparation.

10-33085

S/PV.6302

This situation demands further action by the
Security Council to strengthen the rule of law and to
end impunity. Where necessary, the Council should
consider appropriate measures to encourage and ensure
the accountability of those responsible for widespread
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law, including through the imposition of targeted
measures as reaffirmed in resolution 1894 (2009), the
establishment of commissions of inquiry and referrals
to the International Criminal Court. Sanctions regimes
need to include designation criteria pertaining to acts
of rape and other forms of sexual violence. Sanctions
committees need to receive relevant information to that
end, including through exchanges with other subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council.
We would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for briefing us
on the situation in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Council has already shown
strong commitment to the very problematic situation
there when it comes to violence against women. We
hope that this message will be repeated when the
Council undertakes its next visit to the region in the
coming weeks. As I have said, the upcoming visit of
the Security Council will be an important opportunity.
We appreciate the best practices developed by the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to date,
such as joint protection teams, infrastructure support
and providing patrols for women on their way to
market.
We are in full agreement with the assessment of
the Special Representative that sustainable and
comprehensive security sector reform is a prerequisite
to fulfilling MONUC’s priority task of protecting
civilians, in particular women and children. Reform of
the judiciary, the military and the police in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is still in the early
stages. But that is also an area where the European
Union is trying to be helpful and providing support.
My delegation wishes the Special Representative
success and all the best in her future work. We hope to
be able to welcome her to the Council on a regular
basis.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would first like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Margot Wallström and Special Adviser Rachel Mayanja
for their extensive and thought-provoking briefings. I

10-33085

also wish to congratulate Ms. Wallström on her
appointment as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
to reiterate our support for her mandate.
Rape and sexual violence continue to be the most
unfortunate consequences of conflict. We should do
everything possible to counter that scourge.
Undoubtedly, the appointment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the introduction of new
mechanisms by resolution 1888 (2009) constitute a
sound basis for the United Nations to pursue its efforts
to combat the threat against women and girls in
conflict situations. Indeed, impunity should end,
women must be empowered in a broader sense, our
political leadership should be mobilized and awareness
must be raised. Finally, we must ensure a more
coherent response from the United Nations system.
Having heard Ms. Wallström’s remarks, our
conviction is even stronger that there is an urgent need
to boost the efforts of the United Nations membership
to fully implement resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888
(2009). Today’s meeting not only allows us to take
stock of developments on this important subject; it also
sends the message to the international community at
large that this issue is high on the agenda of the
Council and that we are determined to follow through
on our commitments. I would therefore once again like
to thank the Japanese presidency for organizing this
timely meeting.
Although the momentum gained with the
adoption of resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) is
promising, and despite the renewed commitment of all
stakeholders ahead of the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of landmark resolution 1325 (2000), there
remain formidable challenges before the goals
contained in those resolutions are fully realized,
including those of resolution 1820 (2008). Indeed, as
Special Representative Wallström pointed out, there is
still a lot more to do if we are to be able to claim that
women in conflict situations enjoy the safety and
prosperity they need to fully participate in
peacebuilding efforts in their societies. The gaps
mentioned by Ms. Wallström are particularly worrying.
We strongly support the five-point agenda she has
outlined.
In that regard, we highly appreciate the recent
work of the Secretariat, under the auspices of

11

S/PV.6302

Ms. Mayanja’s Office, to develop indicators to track
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We
believe that those indicators will be extremely useful in
helping the United Nations and Member States to
assess the status of the resolution’s implementation and
to determine the actions needed to overcome
challenges thereto.
In the months ahead, as we continue to further
develop those indicators, the need to collect necessary
data, find the right balance between quantitative and
qualitative indicators and take into account the special
circumstances of each conflict will be important issues
to be dealt with. To that end, the continuation of
consultations with the wider United Nations
membership will certainly help us to reach consensus
on an agreed set of indicators, and thus ensure a sense
of broad ownership that will strengthen and facilitate
implementation. In that respect, we believe that the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) will
provide an excellent opportunity to further galvanize
this process in the right direction.
Before I conclude, I would like to touch upon two
specific points in the context of the resolutions on
women, peace and security that I believe call for
particular attention. The first pertains to the parallel
work taking place in the context of resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009). As we see it, both resolutions
are designed to advance the broader goals on women,
peace and security reflected in resolution 1325 (2000).
We therefore believe that the work on both fronts
should be considered integral parts of the same whole.
We look forward to having the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General support that approach. After
all, our efforts to address sexual violence will be most
effective if a holistic approach is adopted and the
issues of participation, protection and prevention are
addressed comprehensively.
The second point I would like to make relates to
the need to increase awareness in the wider
international community about the four resolutions that
the Council has adopted on women, peace and security
issues. To that end, we believe that we should make
better use of the role that parliamentarians could play
in advancing the goals of those resolutions. Indeed, it
is rather unfortunate that the implementation of such
important resolutions is left to foreign or defence
ministries alone. We must therefore enlarge ownership
of those resolutions and engage parliamentarians in this
endeavour.

12

The months ahead in the run-up to the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) will provide
ample opportunity to translate words into deeds in
order to ensure the basic human rights of women all
around the world. Turkey is fully committed to that
goal. I would like once again to reiterate here our
continued support for the implementation of all the
Council’s resolutions on women, peace and security.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at
the outset to thank you, Sir, for having convened this
meeting. We take this opportunity to welcome
Ms. Margot Wallström, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
to thank her for her comprehensive briefing on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
for having indicated the priority areas for action. We
look forward to continued cooperation with her.
We also welcome Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, and commend her for her
briefing. Moreover, we commend the General
Assembly for its efforts towards the establishment of
the Secretariat’s composite entity on gender issues.
There is no doubt that resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent
resolutions
on
women,
including
resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009), provide a
robust framework for protecting women in conflict
situations and for ensuring that women’s voices are
heard during the peaceful settlement of disputes and in
peacebuilding. But words are being translated into
action at a slow pace. We agree with Ms. Wallström
that there remains a wide gap between the legal
framework, which has reached an advanced stage, and
the practical impact of those laws on women in conflict
situations. We support her efforts to close that gap.
In that regard, we should view resolutions 1888
(2009) and 1889 (2009) in a comprehensive, integrated
manner. Women cannot be empowered when they are
under the threat of physical or psychological violence.
Hence, combating sexual violence must be part of
efforts to involve women in all stages of peacemaking
and peacebuilding. Today, the changing nature of
conflict and the increased number of civil wars make
women and girls more frequent targets. Here, I recall
what Ms. Wallström said about sexual violence being a
feature of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; that is true of most modern-day conflicts.

10-33085

S/PV.6302

When women are victims of sexual violence, they
suffer physical and psychological trauma, as well as
social isolation. Sexual violence leads to the collapse
of families and communities, and it erodes women’s
ability to contribute to peace and security. In most
cases, the perpetrators of these crimes enjoy impunity,
thus encouraging the commission of more such crimes.
Countries in conflict situations and those emerging
from conflict should be supported in their efforts to
strengthen their legal and security institutions to enable
them to prosecute the perpetrators of these crimes and
provide justice for victims. Here, I note that resolution
1888 (2009) calls for the establishment of a team of
experts to, with the consent of the host Governments
concerned, assist national authorities to strengthen the
rule of law. We welcome the constructive role that such
a team can play in building the capacity of countries in
conflict situations and of those emerging from conflict,
enabling them to bring to justice the perpetrators of
crimes of sexual violence.
We look forward to the proposals to be submitted
by the Secretary-General in a forthcoming report with
respect to monitoring acts of sexual violence. I stress
the importance of States providing assistance
programmes for victims of sexual violence.

process to ensure that peace agreements and
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes include elements focusing specifically on
women and girls.
In parallel, we must improve the social and
economic status of women, either through the
provisions of peace agreements or through practical
measures on the ground. These would include
promoting women’s education as a basis for
empowering women; providing health care services
and professional and vocational training; creating
income-generating activities; and ensuring the right to
land and property ownership. In addition to national
efforts, there should be intensified action by United
Nations entities and all other international and regional
organizations, with a view to ensuring the participation
of women in peacebuilding and the maintenance of
peace.
In conclusion, we thank the Secretary-General for
acting to implement the relevant resolutions and we
hail the efforts of his Special Representative. We
support the draft presidential statement that the
Council will endorse today.
Mrs.
Ogwu
(Nigeria):
I
would
like,
Mr. President, to extend the gratitude of the Nigerian
delegation to you for having convened this crucially
important meeting on women and peace and security. I
add my voice to those who have expressed appreciation
to Ms. Margot Wallström for her presence in the
Chamber and for her very, very inspiring briefing. We
recognize the important role of her mandate in
protecting women and girls in conflict areas, and
Nigeria fully supports and associates itself with her
work.

We commend the Secretary-General for his
efforts to develop a set of indicators, as outlined in his
recent report (S/2010/173), pursuant to resolution 1889
(2009). We look forward to agreement on a set of
indicators on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), with emphasis on both quantitative and
qualitative dimensions. The indicators must take
account of the specific characteristics of each
community and the nature and root causes of each
conflict. In that way, we can monitor the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), guide
reform efforts and implement programmes to protect
women and enhance their role in the maintenance of
peace and security.

Of course, our gratitude goes also to Ms. Rachel
Mayanja, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women. She has
been on the front lines, and we appreciate her efforts.

Despite the international community’s increased
awareness that the maintenance of peace and security
requires measures to ensure women’s needs and
participation in peace negotiations, the level of such
participation remains low. This leads to the
marginalization of half of society from the process of
designing a peacebuilding framework in post-conflict
States. That is the half that pays the true price of war,
in pain and silence. We must guarantee the
participation of women at all stages of the peace

Today’s deliberations reaffirm the great
importance that we collectively attach to the impact of
conflict on women and to the role that women should
play in helping to prevent and resolve conflicts. We are
concerned that, in spite of resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008), which became beacons of hope for
millions of women and young girls, crimes of rape and
sexual violence persist. However, we share a sense of
optimism that, given our collective will, especially in
the Security Council, we can bring an end to impunity

10-33085

13

S/PV.6302

and to this crime against humanity. For countries like
my own, which are actively involved in peacekeeping
efforts in our subregion and around the world, there is
no better time than now to make the best efforts to
achieve the realization of resolution 1325 (2000).
Nigeria is one of the four Member States to pilot a
gender and peacekeeping framework, and we consider
that effort a vital part of the global commitment to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). The corollary of
that commitment is a greater role for women in
peacebuilding and conflict prevention, and the
reduction of large-scale violations of women’s rights in
armed conflicts.
The work of both the Security Council and the
Secretary-General in detailing and delineating the steps
to be taken towards the full actualization of the goals
contained in resolution 1325 (2000) and the Beijing
Platform for Action to prevent violence against women
is highly appreciated. Nevertheless, the slow pace of
progress towards the fulfilment of the objectives of
those two instruments continues to give us cause for
concern.
With this in mind, Nigeria welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/173), which, in
proposing indicators against which best practices can
be measured, addresses the issue of women and peace
and security with a greater degree of clarity. In framing
the indicators around the pillars of prevention,
participation, protection and relief and recovery, the
report appropriately places the role and experience of
women front and centre in the work of the United
Nations on peace and security. Broad consultations
with key actors to develop these indicators are
absolutely necessary during the pilot phase.
The recommendations for the pilot programme
are cogent. However, we consider the task of building
consensus, backed by reliable funding commitments, of
utmost importance. A collective undertaking from the
international community to share knowledge and
expertise to facilitate the pilot phase and the
subsequent implementation of the proposed framework
are also very critical. With these commitments in place,
the objectives of resolution 1325 (2000) would
ultimately constitute the bedrock of the United Nations
peacekeeping and conflict-prevention procedures.
The progress of the pilot programme should be
included in subsequent reports by the SecretaryGeneral on a themed basis in order for monitoring and

14

accountability measures to be both meaningful and
effective. In addition, the Secretary-General should
identify and report on what further resources are
necessary. This is to ensure the efficient execution of
the enormous task of coordinating inputs from all
parties concerned.
In conclusion, Nigeria supports
presidential statement before us today.

the

draft

Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I should like to thank
Ms. Margot Wallström, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Assistant Secretary-General and
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, for the high
quality of their briefings.
The report of the Secretary-General on women
and peace and security (S/2010/173) gives us some
important indicators to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Their application by the
international community should make it possible to
better evaluate the progress achieved as well as to
identify the difficulties that continue to impede the full
participation of women in peace processes. My
delegation welcomes the work under way to develop
indicators on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1882 (2009), 1888 (2009),
1889 (2009) and 1894 (2009).
The report of the Secretary-General gives us
further insight into the overall regime for the
protection of women in conflict situations, which is
based around two aims: promoting the role of women
in peace processes and the prevention of conflict, and
putting an end to the use of sexual violence as a
weapon of war.
My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General
that, 10 years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), little progress has been achieved in its
implementation. The lack of specific indicators has
long been an obstacle to the evaluation of progress in
this area. We therefore welcome the indicators set out
in the current report and hope that they will fill this
gap.
To make these indicators operational, there is a
need, especially in this initial phase, to strengthen
cooperation among Member States, United Nations
entities, regional institutions and civil society

10-33085

S/PV.6302

organizations. The collection of reliable data, however,
may be difficult for a number of countries, especially
those in crisis situations or armed conflict. Particular
support therefore needs to be given to those countries.

of its action, and, in this regard, we welcome the
cooperation that has already been established with the
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy.

The four thematic areas covered by these
indicators are most relevant and should make it
possible to monitor the progress achieved in the areas
of prevention, participation, protection and relief. The
effective implementation of these indicators should not
be an aim in itself, but rather an additional instrument
to combat the marginalization of women in the various
phases of conflict resolution, from prevention and
mediation to post-conflict peacebuilding activities.

Focus needs to be placed on the prevention of
sexual violence, in particular to ensure that such
violence does not become a systematic tactic of
warfare. In this regard, the Council should continue its
efforts to systematically integrate the approach
recommended in its resolutions on women and peace
and security into operational mandates and to persuade
the parties to conflicts to incorporate this perspective
into their peace processes.

To conclude, I should like once again to
underscore the great importance that my delegation
attaches to the genuine involvement of women in peace
processes. Their participation in peace processes
requires gender equality to become a reality in each
society. In Gabon, for example, the Ministry of
Defence is led by a woman. Likewise, many women
hold positions of responsibility in almost all of the
branches of the military. In that way, these women
contribute to the search for solutions to the security
issues in Gabon.

We thank the Special Representative for what she
has told us about her recent visit to the Congo. This
information will help us in preparing for the Council’s
upcoming visit to that country, in mid-May. And we
will, of course, continue to advocate with the
Congolese authorities for the five perpetrators of
sexual violence in the situation that was brought to
their attention to be brought to justice. Some trials
have begun, but are proceeding too slowly. The fight
against sexual violence and impunity remains a priority
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My country welcomes the appointment of
Ms. Margot Wallström as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
welcomes the five-point plan that she has presented.
We also support the draft presidential statement that
will be adopted at the conclusion of this debate.

There is a long list of other tragic situations, and
unfortunately it is far from exhaustive. We are
reminded of that by the violence against women from
ethnic minorities in Nepal and Burma, and by the
sexual violence prevalent in former conflicts zones in
Côte d’Ivoire and in Guinea and Kenya. In addressing
these situations, the specific measures for the
implementation of resolution 1888 (2009) — including
the rapid deployment of experts to the field and
advisers for the protection of women in peacekeeping
operations — should have a positive impact. However,
Ms. Wallström has a huge task ahead of her. She can
count on France to help her to fulfil it and to continue
to firmly support her work.

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this meeting of the Council on
women and peace and security. France welcomes the
appointment of Ms. Margot Wallström as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and we thank her for her frank
appraisal of how to improve the effectiveness of the
United Nations system in this area. We commend the
very promising first steps she has taken in her mission.
We support her recommendations. It is necessary
for the Council, in complement to actions being carried
out by other organs, agencies, funds and programmes
of the United Nations to advance women, to continue
to take into account the situation of women in
conflicts, in the light of its effects on the maintenance
of international peace and security. In parallel, the
United Nations system should strengthen the coherence

10-33085

I should also like to thank Ms. Mayanja for her
statement and to commend the outstanding work of her
Department in providing the Council with indicators in
monitoring implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The presidential statement to be adopted at the
end of this meeting is a technical one and will launch a
phase of consultation between the Secretariat and the
Council that should lead to the adoption in October of
a coherent set of indicators proposed by the SecretaryGeneral in accordance with the targets set in resolution

15

S/PV.6302

1889 (2009). I shall not list every indicator, since we
are all familiar with them.

1325 (2000), which remains the key benchmark in
protecting women and ensuring their rights in conflict.

I should simply like to welcome the fact that
women and girls are being taken into account in
demobilization and reintegration programmes. France
attaches particular importance to this issue because
women and girls are often left out of demobilization
and reintegration programmes, which are aimed
exclusively at armed combatants. One of the key
contributions of the principles and commitments
agreed in Paris in 2007, in partnership with UNICEF, is
precisely that they allow us better to take that
dimension into account.

We commend the timely issuance of the report of
the Secretary-General contained in document
S/2010/173, and thank Ms. Mayanja for her briefing.
The indicators proposed will allow us effectively to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) and to better
understand the tasks required of the international
community in protecting the rights of women in
conflict and evaluate progress to that end. We also
believe that the indicators referred to the in the
Secretary-General’s
report
require
careful
consideration, which will certainly take some time, and
further substantial development. It is critical that
further work on the indicators be completely
transparent because, ultimately, their importance
extends far beyond the exclusive interest of members
of the Security Council.

In conclusion, I recall that France supports the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that a ministerial
meeting be convened at United Nations Headquarters
on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) in October in order to assess
progress made in the past decade and to open new
prospects.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we thank the Japanese
presidency for having convened today’s meeting. We
also congratulate Ms. Margot Wallström on her
appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We
are prepared to cooperate with her in fulfilment of her
mandate.
We believe that the efforts of the Special
Representative should aim first and foremost at
supporting those countries that suffer most acutely
from the problem of sexual violence in armed conflict.
At the same time, close cooperation with the Security
Council and Member States is very important. It is also
important that we not duplicate the efforts of other
bodies and mechanisms of the United Nations system
on gender issues. We are convinced that such an
approach will contribute to the effective protection of
the rights of women in armed conflict.
The fight against sexual violence is part and
parcel of a comprehensive set of measures on conflict
resolution and post-conflict reconstruction. We are
convinced that the question of women and peace and
security should not be reduced exclusively to the issue
of sexual violence, to the total exclusion of other forms
of violence against women in conflict. That is the
balanced approach taken in the drafting of resolution

16

We hope that, in the framework of the preparation
of the Secretary-General’s October report, work on the
indicators will continue. At the same time, the wish
expressed in the draft presidential statement — for the
development of new indicators that have been the
subject of broad discussion, and the inclusion in that
document of a programme of work containing roles and
responsibilities vis-à-vis the indicators within the
United Nations system — will be taken into account in
that regard.
In conclusion, we wish to reaffirm our conviction
that we can ensure the rights and protection of women
in armed conflict only through the joint efforts of all
stakeholders. Resolution 1325 (2000), the tenth
anniversary of which we shall celebrate in October,
remains the main benchmark in that regard.
Mr. Vukašinović (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
should like to begin by thanking Ms. Rachel Mayanja,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, and Ms. Margot
Wallström, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for their
informative briefings.
Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), the
provisions of which have been incorporated into my
country’s gender action plan. Furthermore, we
emphasize the importance of the full involvement of
women in all efforts for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security, early peacebuilding

10-33085

S/PV.6302

and post-conflict planning, as well as the need to
enhance their role in decision-making processes.
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the report of
the
Secretary-General
(S/2010/173)
and
the
recommendations contained therein. We also take
positive note of the work of the Technical Working
Group on Global Indicators. We consider that the
proposed set of indicators presents a solid basis for
future work in terms of technical development and
establishing baselines. We are of the view that this
work should be intensified in the coming period.
Taking into account the specific nature of gendersensitive indicators, we stress the need for all
quantitative indicators to be accompanied by
qualitative commentary and analysis in order to reflect
a country-specific situation or context. We are also of
the opinion that a clear distinction ought to be made
between the indicators for which data will be collected
by the United Nations system and those for which data
will be collected by Member States. To that end,
Member States should not be overburdened with
additional responsibilities for data collection, and
comprehensive insight into implementation, tracked by
indicators, will be provided.
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the idea that
this process should be transparent and pursued in
consultation with relevant stakeholders in order to
include their views on this particular issue. We believe
that the next report of the Secretary-General should
give substantial input with regard to what the agenda,
roles and responsibilities of the United Nations system
and other actors should be in developing an intensified,
efficient and more successful implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) at the global level.
Finally, we should like to reiterate that the set of
indicators is critical not only to the effective
identification of gaps in tracking progress in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and to
parallel ongoing work regarding resolution 1888
(2009), but also to their efficient monitoring and
evaluation. Therefore, it is of key importance that the
commemoration of the tenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) not only mark the progress and
achievements made so far, but also assess the
challenges that have not yet been met, as well as how
achievements and progress will be tracked and
measured in time.

10-33085

Mr. Long Zhou (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, let me express my appreciation to the
delegation of Japan for taking the initiative to organize
today’s briefing. I also thank Ms. Wallström, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Mayanja, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, for their briefings.
Resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and
security, adopted by the Council 10 years ago, was a
landmark document that laid the foundation for
international cooperation on women, peace and
security. Since that time, the Council has followed up
with many actions for its implementation and Member
States have adopted relevant implementation measures,
as required by the resolution. The concepts of gender
equality, women’s empowerment and the prevention
and suppression of sexual violence have taken hold,
and efforts on those issues have produced remarkable
results.
Much work remains to be accomplished before
the international community will be able to achieve the
various targets set by resolution 1325 (2000). To that
end, relevant agencies and organs should work
synergistically and within their respective mandates to
maximize the strength of the entire United Nations
system.
The Security Council should focus on preventing
and reducing incidents of armed conflict, thereby
decreasing the root causes of women’s suffering. As
the party bearing the primary responsibility for the
protection of its women, the country concerned should
not only take account of the special needs and concerns
of women during and after an armed conflict, but also
focus on their full participation in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and relevant decisionmaking. The international community and donors
should provide financial and technical assistance to the
capacity-building efforts of the countries concerned.
Sexual violence is among the major problems
facing women in armed conflict in certain countries
and regions. China welcomes the Secretary-General’s
appointment of Ms. Wallström as his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
supports her in fulfilling her mandate. We hope that the
Special Representative will enhance communication
and cooperation with the countries concerned, and
provide them with constructive help in addressing the

17

S/PV.6302

problem of sexual violence in armed conflict. China
also expects to see greater coordination and enhanced
efficiency in United Nations efforts to combat sexual
violence and protect women in armed conflict.
China welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2010/173) submitted pursuant to resolution
1889 (2009), which contains a set of indicators to track
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). My country
appreciates the tremendous amount of work carried out
by the Secretariat and hopes that it will continue to
improve the indicators. Resolution 1325 (2000) covers
a broad range of areas from the protection of the rights
and interests of women to the promotion of women’s
participation in the prevention and settlement of
conflicts. In some areas, it is difficult to quantify the
progress made, a factor that should be fully taken into
account when formulating and improving the
indicators.
Moreover, since countries experience differing
situations according to their level of development and
historical and cultural traditions, the indicators should
be feasible and applicable so that countries will be able
to apply them in accordance with their specific
conditions. We hope that the Secretariat will give full
consideration to the views of all parties concerned,
especially those of Member States, and build on the
collective wisdom of all States in formulating a set of
indicators that will provide useful reference to Member
States in their implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I join
other speakers in thanking you, Sir, and your
delegation for having organized this Council meeting
at a timely moment, when we are about to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security. I
also thank Ms. Margot Wallström for her briefing and
congratulate her on her appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and for the commitment she has
shown to implementing her mandate in her brief
tenure. I also thank Ms. Rachel Mayanja for her
briefing on the set of indicators that will undoubtedly
make it easier to monitor implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and other relevant Security Council
resolutions. I thank the multidisciplinary team for its
work in developing the indicators, especially the
United Nations Development Fund for Women for its
technical work.

18

Mexico considers it key that all parties to a
conflict have an obligation to respect and enforce
international humanitarian law. My country also
believes that international human rights law must be
fully respected in order to protect women and girls, as
well as internally displaced and refugee women, during
and after conflicts. From that perspective, we
acknowledge the fundamental role played by women in
all phases of armed conflict. Women are relevant actors
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and as
engines of reconstruction. Despite the fact that women
and children are the principal victims of violence, they
have the strength and the courage to be agents of
change in their communities and to promote national
reconciliation. Women are part of the solution to the
structural problems of conflicts and yet, because they
lack effective tools and mechanisms to guarantee their
participation, ongoing inequalities perpetuate spirals of
violence and delay the resolution of conflicts.
Fifteen years after the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action addressed the issue of women in
armed conflict as a priority area, and 10 years after the
Security Council launched a broad agenda in favour of
women, the facts indicate that progress has been
unsatisfactory and that, in some cases, alarming
reversals have been observed.
The tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) should be an opportunity to
strengthen the agenda of women, peace and security.
The Security Council took a step in that direction by
requesting the Secretary-General to submit a set of
indicators that would track progress in the
implementation of this agenda. In the coming months,
the Council should redouble its efforts to clearly define
an improved way for the United Nations to track the
role of women in conflict situations and to help States
to devise measures with a gender perspective in the
areas of prevention, participation, protection and
recovery and to strengthen their regulatory and
institutional frameworks.
To that end, it will be essential to work in
coordination with the various agencies responsible for
this issue and to maintain broad dialogue with United
Nations Member States and other relevant actors, such
as women’s organizations and civil society, in seeking
the Council’s support in October. The indicators should
serve as a tool to enable countries to assess their own
progress. The cooperation of the States concerned is
therefore essential.

10-33085

S/PV.6302

My country supports the set of indicators and the
recommendations presented in the report (S/2010/173).
We are ready to examine in depth the technical,
operational and financial aspects necessary for their
speedy implementation. The indicators are a valuable
instrument for planning and decision-making and can
also be used as a diagnostic tool and a road map. We
agree with the Secretary-General that, in order to have
a full assessment of the situation, the indicators must
be clearly linked and mutually reinforcing. Thus, if any
one aspect is left out, there is a danger that only some
of the challenges and problems affecting women will
be apparent.
While some indicators have been designed for
countries or regions affected by armed conflict, my
country believes they correspond to a comprehensive
and multidimensional focus on security that includes
the gender perspective as one of its main aspects. They
can therefore be used as a guide for all States if
considered from a perspective of prevention and shared
responsibility.
In short, it seems to us that the indicators will be
useful to the wider work of the United Nations for the
empowerment of women and gender equality. The
establishment of the new gender entity will boost the
United Nations institutional capacity to attain those
goals.
The women and girls who daily suffer the
violence unleashed by armed conflicts cannot wait
another 10 years. The decisions that we adopt today to
protect the rights of women and to ensure their
participation will be the best investment towards
achieving a future of peace and stability.
I conclude by expressing my delegation’s support
for the draft presidential statement facilitated by the
delegation of Japan.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I would like to welcome
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Wallström, to the
Council and congratulate her on her appointment. My
delegation would like to thank her for her briefing, and
I wish to reiterate Uganda’s support for her mandate, as
outlined in resolution 1888 (2009).
I also welcome the timely submission of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/173), and in
that regard, would like to thank the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and

10-33085

Advancement of Women, Ms. Mayanja, for her briefing
on that highly technical report. We also thank
Ms. Mayanja for her dedication and positive response
to invitations to carry out technical briefings for
various regional groups to facilitate their deeper
understanding of the report. We congratulate her for
successfully managing the work of the Inter-Agency
Network on Women and Gender Equality, particularly
the activities of the Task Force on Women and Peace
and Security, which resulted in the report.
Resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-up
resolution 1889 (2009) are considered by Uganda’s
Government to be landmark resolutions not only
because of our strong belief in the important role that
women play during and after conflict, but also because,
from experience, we recognize women’s undeniably
positive role in conflict prevention and mediation
processes.
We appreciate the substance of the report
presented today. While we have heard that the
indicators contained in the report will require further
technical and baseline development before they can
become operational, we are of the view that the initial
identification of a set of best indicators to track the
progress of resolution 1325 (2000) is in itself a major
milestone. For the Secretary-General to have come up
with such a manageable number of 26 from the initial
2,500 indicators is, indeed, commendable.
The implementation of resolutions is a common
challenge for a number of Member States. At regular
intervals, we will have to ask ourselves whether there
have been positive results from such implementation
and what they are. The existence of a set of best
indicators creates a tangible path that United Nations
Member States can follow in monitoring their
performance.
We have been informed that the set of indicators
contained in the current report of the Secretary-General
was compiled through consultations with the wider
United Nations membership. Uganda finds such
consultation and partnership to be not only positive,
but also crucial because, in our experience, we have
found that the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) is integral to and supplements other policies,
plans and programmes on gender equality and women’s
empowerment.
In that regard, we strongly encourage the
Secretary-General to continue to consult with the

19

S/PV.6302

Security Council, as well as with the broader United
Nations, in order to come up with a further refined set
of indicators that are acceptable to and well understood
by those who will need to use them. In future, we
would also like to see them used at the global level to
track the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We look forward to receiving a comprehensive
set of indicators in the Secretary-General’s next report
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), to be
submitted to the Security Council in October.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this briefing. We welcome Special
Representative Margot Wallström and Assistant
Secretary-General Rachel Mayanja, and thank them
greatly for their important presentations.
In almost 10 years since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), the international community
has come a long way. We have come to understand
more fully the implications of armed conflict for
women and have also become more aware of their
specific needs and roles in maintaining or restoring
peace and security. Through resolution 1820 (2008),
we have recognized the gravity of sexual violence in
armed conflicts and have enhanced our action against
it.
Resolution 1325 (2000) deals with women as
agents of peace. Such a role comprises many facets,
ranging from conflict prevention to post-conflict
peacebuilding. I would like to briefly touch upon two
such facets.
The first regards institutions. In post-conflict
scenarios, where institutions are rebuilt and gradually
consolidated, there is often a window of opportunity to
surmount
historical
gender
inequalities
or
insensitivities. It is precisely when the distribution of
power and roles within a society is being redrawn after
the trauma of war that efforts must be made to ensure
that the concerns and needs of women are duly
contemplated. That is especially applicable to such
processes as constitutional, political and educational
reforms.
The second aspect that I wish to stress relates to
the economic empowerment of women in post-conflict
situations, which is as important as institutional
empowerment. The participation of women in efforts to
rehabilitate and reactivate the economy is of particular
relevance. Given the fundamental role played by

20

women in key economic sectors, particularly in
agriculture, the impact of development projects can be
enhanced if such projects are focused on women.
Resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) took us
further in our endeavours regarding women, peace and
security, as they helped us to translate a wider
awareness of challenges and opportunities into
effective action. Among the decisions taken by the
Security Council in those resolutions, two are
particularly relevant due to their potential implications
in the mid- and long terms. The first is the request to
the Secretary-General to submit a set of indicators to
track the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The development of indicators is meant to allow for
more rigorous and results-oriented interventions.
We appreciate the hard work that has gone into
the report before us today. We look forward to the
consultative process that will follow and give all
stakeholders the opportunity to contribute to the further
development of the proposed indicators. In that effort,
we should consider the importance of focusing on
qualitative rather than quantitative ways of measuring
progress and of ensuring flexibility as challenges
facing each country are different and should be
recognized and treated as such. It would be important
to guard against putting additional reporting burdens
on developing States, especially those emerging from
conflict. Collecting and aggregating data and preparing
reports can be challenging tasks. Instead of being a
mechanism for academic analysis, the indicators must
support countries in their practical efforts to improve
the situation of women in post-conflict situations.
The second important decision of the Security
Council in 2009 regarding women, peace and security
was the establishment of the post of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. It provides the United Nations
system with an authoritative voice empowered to
provide coherent and strategic leadership in the fight
against sexual violence in conflict. It fills a void in
helping different parts of the system to work more
closely and effectively together.
We welcome Ms. Wallström’s appointment to the
position. We support her two forward-looking
recommendations of continuous attention and of
making prevention a top priority. We also support her
five-point agenda, as it proposes a balanced set of
measures focused both on the past and on the future, on

10-33085

S/PV.6302

accountability and on cooperation, on the perpetrators
and on command responsibilities, and adds the very
welcome focus on peer liability.
We commend Mrs. Wallström’s initiative to visit
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We encourage
and support increased efforts at cooperation with the
Congolese Government in addressing capacity-building
and other needs in the fight against sexual violence. We
also appreciate the measures that have been taken by
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to improve
women’s security on the ground.
In concluding, let me also thank the Japanese
delegation for preparing the draft presidential
statement before us, which we fully support.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Japan.
I join previous speakers and my colleagues in
thanking Special Representative Margot Wallström and
Special Adviser Rachel Mayanja for their very helpful
briefings.
First of all, I would like to congratulate
Ms. Wallström on her appointment as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and to express Japan’s full
support as she fulfils her heavy responsibilities. Japan
attaches great importance to her mandate to provide
coherent and strategic leadership and advocacy efforts
on this important issue. We wish the Special
Representative to focus particularly on activities
related to the impact on women and girls on the
ground.
Therefore,
we
highly
appreciate
Ms. Wallström’s first visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where she not only met high-level
officials, but also heard the voices of survivors of
sexual violence. However, it is important that her visit
be followed up by necessary measures, including a
possible deployment of a team of experts to strengthen
capacity for ending impunity in the country.
Secondly, we support the five-point priority
agenda set by Ms. Wallström. The protection of women
should go hand in hand with empowering them, which
is a concept emphasized in the human security
approach that Japan has been advocating. We hope that
the Special Representative will place a high priority on
women’s empowerment by focusing on the needs of

10-33085

individuals and communities in order to enhance their
resilience and preventive capacity.
Thirdly, it is important to address the gap that
exists in the United Nations system in monitoring and
reporting on sexual violence. We look forward to the
Secretary-General’s specific proposal in this regard.
Performance benchmarks should be developed, taking
into account ongoing processes, such as global
indicators in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), as well as the listing of criteria for parties that
have committed sexual violence against children.
Japan also welcomes Ms. Mayanja’s briefing and
timely submission of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2010/173) on the set of indicators for
tracking implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We
highly commend Ms. Mayanja’s leadership and the
work of the Technical Working Group. I would like to
make three brief points on the indicators.
First, we appreciate the efforts of the Secretariat
to develop a comprehensive set of indicators that cover
all areas of resolution 1325 (2000). The 26 indicators
in four areas proposed in the report are interrelated.
Some of the indicators can be implemented without
much delay, but some others require two to five years,
we understand, for technical development reasons
before becoming operational. Therefore, it is important
for the Secretary-General to set out a so-called road
map for making each indicator operational, in
consultation with relevant stakeholders.
Secondly, the Security Council should mobilize
political will on the occasion of the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) to approve a
comprehensive set of indicators on that occasion.
Thereafter, the Security Council would request the use
of indicators in country and thematic reports and invite
Member States to use indicators in their efforts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000).
Lastly, there is synergy here. Indicators were
requested by resolution 1889 (2009) at last year’s
Council debate on the specific needs of women and
girls in armed conflict and post-conflict situations (see
S/PV.6196). Therefore, we believe that the indicators
will serve for early warning in peacebuilding activities
to prevent the recurrence of conflict, and thereby
contribute to the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

21

S/PV.6302

I resume my functions as the President of the
Security Council.
After consultations among members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the
appointment of Margot Wallström as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and reiterates its
support of her mandate as outlined in resolution
1888 (2009).
“The Security Council welcomes the timely
submission of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/173) requested in resolution 1889 (2009)
and takes note of both the indicators and the
recommendations contained in the report.
“The Security Council notes that indicators
contained in the report would need technical and
conceptual development before they could
become operational.
“The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to consult with the
Security Council, taking into account views
expressed by other relevant stakeholders,
including
the
broader
United
Nations
membership, taking into account the need to
further develop indicators contained in his report
(S/2010/173), and the parallel ongoing work
regarding resolution 1888 (2009), in order to
include a comprehensive set of indicators in his
next report on the implementation of resolution

22

1325 (2000) to be submitted to the Security
Council in October 2010, as well as a programme
of work containing roles and responsibilities visà-vis the indicators within the United Nations
system and a time frame to render the indicators
operational.
“The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to ensure that all
country reports to the Security Council provide
information on the impact of situations of armed
conflict on women and girls, their particular
needs in post-conflict situations and obstacles to
attaining those needs.
“The Security Council expresses its
intention to take action on a comprehensive set of
indicators on the occasion of the tenth
anniversary of its resolution 1325 (2000) in
October 2010, for use at the global level to track
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
“The Security Council reiterates its desire to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of its
resolution 1325 (2000).”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/8.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

10-33085
