A /71/PV.24

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

24th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 5 October 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Balé (Congo),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 p.m.
Agenda item 109 (continued)
Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
Organization (A/71/1)
Mr. Pisarevich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): We are
grateful to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (A/71/1) on the work of the Organization over the
past year.
We have turned yet another important page in the
history of the United Nations, as we have adopted a
new Agenda for Sustainable Development for the next
15 years. Much remains to be done in order to ensure
that the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals is more successful than that of the Millennium
Development Goals. In that regard, we agree with the
Secretary-General’s opinion that, in order to achieve
the Goals by 2030, priority must be given to preventing
and ending new and ongoing conflicts. In that context,
an important role falls to preventive diplomacy
and mediation.
A milestone last year was marked by the signing of
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, in accordance
with which States committed to laudable goals, which
will contribute to building a healthier, safer and
more prosperous future for us all. Indeed, much has
been achieved during the reporting period. However,
we should not forget that we have been compelled to

16-30880 (E)

undertake many of our activities because of shortsighted policies in the past and the failure to resolve
issues in a timely matter, such as, for example, the
recent massive displacement of refugees and migrants.
Numerous negative events taking place today could
have been avoided had the world been more stable
and predictable.
Against the background of a number of important
resolutions adopted by the United Nations, it must,
unfortunately, be noted that the Organization has
increasingly neglected the spirit of unity when initiatives
are imposed on States that have been supported by
only a few countries. That has consequently led to the
violation of the provisions enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and a complete disregard for the
sovereign rights of States. We are increasingly witness
to unilateral interpretations of existing international
law and codes of ethics. Unfortunately, the unilateral
and non-transparent promotion of confrontational
ideas has become characteristic of the Secretariat. The
impartiality of the Secretariat is of critical importance
if we wish to preserve the unity of the States Members
of the United Nations.
In summing up the work of the United Nations over
the past year, we must address vital internal matters
relating to the Organization. It is no secret that, with
regard to Headquarters and the organization of work
and the logistics of the United Nations, the Secretariat
is not always on the same page as Member States. The
Secretariat has established many bureaucratic internal
rules that often create obstacles to carrying out the work
of the United Nations. Furthermore, very frequently,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1630880*

A/71/PV.24

interaction takes place on a transactional basis: the
Secretariat furnishes Member States services for which
they have already paid through the salaries paid to
Secretariat staff. We believe that additional funding of
the United Nations is something that should be done
only on a voluntary basis.
We believe that it is important to ensure that the
Secretariat publish The Journal of the United Nations
in all six official languages throughout any given
session of the General Assembly. The issue is not one
of purely technical importance. First and foremost, it is
a matter of respecting the tradition of multilingualism
in the Organization. In that regard, we would also like
to direct the attention of the General Assembly to the
role of translation and interpretation as a profession, art
and tool for building trust and understanding among
peoples. As a gesture of the importance that we attribute
to that subject, we suggest establishing an international
day for translation and interpretation.
Today more than ever, we need to learn how to work
in partnership. Any action or innovation on the part of
the Secretariat that affects the working conditions of
the Missions of Member States at Headquarters needs
to be coordinated with Member States. We believe that
looking for effective forms of cooperation between
the Secretariat and Member States must become a
priority for the next Secretary-General. But we are even
more concerned by the trend leading to the excessive
bureaucratization of our work as Member States. Given
the complexity and breadth of the United Nations,
carrying out our work would not be possible without a
minimum number of rules. However, real-time action
carried out by the Organization for the benefit of the
well-being of countries and peoples should not be
held hostage to formal and bureaucratic procedures,
especially when development depends upon it.
Belarus and many other countries have therefore
been viewing with concern the fact that at the onset of
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, our joint plan of action is already being
held hostage by routine and pro forma approaches.
Instead of practically implementing the ideas in
the Agenda, we are now engrossed in optimizing,
synchronizing and compiling reports and resolutions.
We will therefore not only fail to achieve the sustainable
and equitable development of peoples and countries,
but will also risk worsening the image of the United
Nations as a bureaucratic mechanism far removed from
the needs of the world’s population.
2/16

19/10/2016

Of course, the Organization alone cannot solve
issues involving sustainable development for national
Governments. But the United Nations must be the
global coordinating centre for dealing with questions
of development. Belarus has already spoken in favour
of ensuring that the United Nations become a focal
coordinating centre, gathering resources in expert
assistance, financing, technology and the means of
implementation. For those countries truly in need
of support in the implementation of the Agenda for
Sustainable Development, that will be much more
important than the formal approaches to work following
the usual bureaucratic methods.
We also believe that the United Nations system
needs to be better adapted to meeting the differing needs
of countries in line with their national priorities. More
than anyone else, national Governments know their
countries’ problems. The United Nations development
system should therefore not decide a priori the question
of what needs to be done. The development system
must help States answer the question of how to achieve
various results. Unfortunately, there is no universal
formula for achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals, because countries have different needs and
different ways of achieving them. We therefore expect
the United Nations to concentrate more on unique
approaches and problem-solving by taking into
account the specific characteristics and peculiarities of
each country.
We believe that the United Nations must finally
pay more attention to middle-income countries. Two
thirds of all the poor people in the world live in those
countries, which also account for a significant number
of young people, who are highly vulnerable to external
economic challenges. Any change in the world economy
runs the risk of undermining all those countries’ efforts
aimed at achieving sustainable development.
What is key to successfully overcoming current
problems is to ensure that we prioritize the activities of
the United Nations. Strengthening the United Nations
does not imply only the internal reorganization of the
Secretariat. It must involve pursuing the kind of United
Nations policy that strives to reinstate the authority of
the Organization and ensure that the world is helped
through its decisions.
In conclusion, I would like to express my appreciation
to Mr. Ban Ki-moon for his work as Secretary-General.
We hope that the next Secretary-General will maintain
16-30880

19/10/2016

the positive traditions of the United Nations and
continue guiding the United Nations family in a spirit
of cooperation, mutual respect, healthy rationalism and
real progress.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report (A/71/1) on the work of the
Organization, which provides a comprehensive account
of the activities of the United Nations over the past
year, as well as its accomplishments, and identifies
challenges for the next year.
The founding fathers of the United Nations
acknowledged the indivisibility of peace and security,
on the one hand, and economic and social development,
on the other — the immutable reality that there can
be no peace without development and no development
without peace. Last year, we made much progress
towards the achievement of one of those pillars by
collectively endorsing the transformative new 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. That and the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change marked significant
and historic milestones. We are now entering the
implementation phase. Together, we must deliver on the
pledges that were made. We will be judged, after all,
not by our intentions but by our actions.
Can we similarly be optimistic about our quest to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war?
Turmoil in the Middle East; conflicts raging from
Syria, Libya and Yemen to Afghanistan; tensions in and
around Europe; the continued plight of people living
under foreign occupation in Kashmir and Palestine;
the unprecedented scale of suffering caused by human
dislocation; the growing threat of violent extremism;
the spread of intolerance and xenophobia; and the real
threat to peace and security in my own neighbourhood
are all indications not of what we have achieved, but
of what still remains to be done in a world that is more
fragile, yet more polarized. We have to ask ourselves,
then, whether we have been able to live up to the
promise and expectations generated by the Charter of
the United Nations. Have we been able to move towards
a fairer and more equitable and peaceful world, based
on law and justice? After all, it is only by implementing
the Charter in both letter and spirit that we can create a
world free of conflict, where really no one is left behind.
Pakistan believes that, in our turbulent yet
interdependent world, the United Nations continues
to be indispensable to our efforts to restore order
and ensure global peace, stability and prosperity. Its

A/71/PV.24

principles remain the crucial pillars for international
legality, a guide for the conduct of Member States and
the guarantor of the legitimate rights of all nations
and peoples. But, in order for the United Nations to
regain its credibility as the central instrument for
promoting peace, prosperity and liberty, it must be
more representative, transparent and accountable. For
that reason, my country supports comprehensive and
democratic reform of the Security Council, aimed at
enhancing its relevance and representativeness without
creating new centres of power and privilege.
The reviews conducted over the past year on
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, have shone
a light not only on the Organization’s achievements in
those areas but also on the shortcomings that need to
be addressed. We stand ready to take those processes
forward during the seventy-first session. Pakistan’s
long-standing and unwavering commitment to United
Nations peacekeeping has been acknowledged by
everyone, and we have a significant stake in the success
of that flagship enterprise. Arguably the most important
message to emerge from the reviews is the need for
prevention and mediation in managing conflicts and
the need to stop them from occurring in the first place.
Increasing the capacity of the United Nations in those
areas is therefore imperative. And yet we see India
continuing to reject the offer of the Secretary-General’s
good offices aimed at resolving long-standing disputes
in our region.
The terrorist threat has become more pervasive and
is evolving in complex and unpredictable directions,
posing an ever greater danger to international peace and
security. Countering terrorist entities such as Da’esh is
possible only by ensuring international collaboration
and reconciling the divergent interests of the regional
and external Powers in the Middle East. Pakistan has
been at the forefront of the global campaign against
terrorism. We have lost tens of thousands of lives in
that fight. The blood that has been shed, including that
of our innocent children, has only strengthened our
resolve to eliminate that scourge from our country. We
will fight terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
whether sponsored by militant organizations or by
hostile Powers in our region. We have made substantial
gains, but our campaign will end only when the last
terrorist is eliminated from our country.
The sovereign equality of States, the settlement
of international disputes by peaceful means and

16-308803/16

A/71/PV.24

the avoidance of the use or threat of use of force are
fundamental principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. It is those very principles that inspire
us to look to the United Nations to play its appropriate
role in promoting lasting peace in South Asia and live
up to its long-standing obligations to the people of
Kashmir. India’s continued denial of the right of selfdetermination to the people of Jammu and Kashmir,
promised in several Security Council resolutions, has
sparked another indigenous and popular uprising in
occupied Kashmir and has also led to tensions in the
region. The struggle of the Kashmiri people for selfdetermination is a legitimate one, and they have the
right to expect and receive moral and political support
from the international community.
The United Nations is under an obligation to
play a role in bringing an end to human rights abuses
and facilitate a peaceful settlement of the Kashmir
dispute, in line with the aspirations of the Kashmiri
people, through a free and fair plebiscite held under
United Nations auspices. We reiterate our demand
for an independent inquiry into human rights abuses
in occupied Kashmir and welcome the call from the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
for unfettered and unconditional access in order to
enable impartial monitoring of the human rights
situation there. Sadly, India does not even allow the
United Nations Military Observer Group in India and
Pakistan, one of the earliest missions ever deployed
by the United Nations, to fully function in accordance
with its mandate and report to the Security Council,
so that it can address threats to international peace
and security.
It is regrettable that by its recent declarations and
actions, India has created conditions that pose a threat
to peace and security in the region. Over the past few
weeks India has engaged in unprovoked shelling across
broad areas along the Line of Control. That continues
even as I speak. Pakistan has exercised the greatest
possible restraint in the face of such belligerence,
because we know only too well that such a tense and
fraught situation can easily spiral into uncontrolled
escalation. Pakistan wants a peaceful resolution to all
outstanding disputes, especially in Kashmir, where
today a settlement is more urgently needed than ever.
We stand ready to engage in a meaningful dialogue in
the interest of all of the people of our region. But it is
for India to take the first step, because it is India that
has exacerbated the current situation.
4/16

19/10/2016

Finally, we can address the daunting security and
development challenges confronting the world today
and achieve our shared goals only by strict adherence to
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. The
path to a more peaceful, just and prosperous world lies
in cooperative endeavours promoted through effective
multilateralism, to which my country remains fully and
firmly committed.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes the Secretary-General’s
report (A/71/1) on the work of the Organization. Over
the past year, in the face of a very complex international
situation and global challenges, the United Nations
has promoted multilateral cooperation and made
outstanding progress in the areas of peace and security,
development, women’s empowerment, climate change,
and migration and refugees, public health and counterterrorism. The efforts of the United Nations over the
past year have therefore focused on global trends and
on supporting the interests of Member States. China
commends Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the
Secretariat for their work in that regard, and would like
to take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General
for his efforts.
Today, even as one or another regional conflict or
hotspot subsides, others appear, and traditional and
non-traditional security threats become intertwined.
Globally, economic recovery continues to be weak
and lacking in the momentum needed for sustainable
development. During the current session of the
General Assembly, the international community should
therefore focus its efforts on building a community
of common destinyfor humankind and coordinate its
actions in order to address our global challenges.
First, we must adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations in
order to create a global climate conducive to peace and
stability. We must uphold the spirit of the Charter and
nurture a new concept of common, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security and promote a
global partnership that features dialogue instead of
confrontation as well as partnership instead of alliance.
We should stay committed to settling regional hotspot
issues through political means, make further efforts in
conflict prevention and other areas, strongly uphold the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime, actively
promote international counter-terrorism cooperation,
and develop synergies in the area of maintaining
international peace and security.
16-30880

19/10/2016

Secondly, we should step up our contributions
to development and further promote international
development
cooperation.
The
international
community’s first priority should be to put an end to
hunger and poverty, and to that end Member States
should combine their efforts and work to achieve
comprehensive implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. North-South cooperation
should be maintained as a main channel. Developed
countries should make good on their official development
assistance commitments to help developing nations
improve their people’s livelihood and accelerate their
development, while developing countries should further
promote South-South Cooperation and make efforts to
achieve collective self-sufficiency.
Thirdly, greater priority must be given to
international cooperation and proper measures must be
taken to tackle global challenges. On the issue of refugees,
we must first ensure that refugees are provided with the
basic necessities of life. Of fundamental importance is
to eliminate the cause of war and restart development
so as to address the root causes of the issue. With regard
to public health security, the international community
should support the countries concerned in their
efforts to establish public health emergency response
and management mechanisms, improve grass-roots
prevention and control systems, enhance prevention
awareness among the general public. Regarding climate
change, Member States must adhere to the principle
of shared but differentiated responsibility, equity and
respective capabilities, jointly deal with climate change
and push for the universal acceptance and early entry
into force of the Paris Agreement.
In his address to the General Assembly as it marked
the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations (see
A/70/PV.13), China’s President Xi Jinping discussed the
importance of fashioning a new kind of international
relations based on win-win cooperation and made
important proposals regarding support for the United
Nations. Those measures are being implemented. At the
Group of 20 Summit meeting held recently in Hangzhou,
participants reached the Hangzhou consensus on global
economic development, A blueprint was drawn for
building an innovative, invigorated, interconnected
and inclusive world economy, Participants pledged to
actively implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and formulate an action plan for it,
thereby bringing new vigor to sustainable development
efforts around the world.

A/71/PV.24

During the general debate in the Assembly at its
seventy-first session, the Chinese Premier, Li Keqiang,
stated (see A/71/PV.11) that China ready to take an active
part in international cooperation and support an even
greater role of the United Nations in the implementation
of the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda. China
will continue to strenghen its cooperation with the
developing countries and will do whatever it can to help
African countries and the least developed countries.
As a permanent member of the Security Council and
the world’s largest developing country, China is a builder
of world peace, a contributor to global development
and a defender of and a defender of the international
order. We have made significant contributions to the
maintenance of international peace and the promotion of
common development, and are ready to cooperate with
the great majority of Member States, firmly practice
multilateralism, uphold the principles and purposes
pf the Charter of the United Nations and promote an
even greater role for the Organization in international
affairs, with a view to advancing the cause of peace,
development and progress for all humankind.
Mr. Phansourivong (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): I have the honour to deliver this statement
on behalf of the 10 States members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar,
the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam and my
own country, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic.
I wish to begin by thanking the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive annual report (A/71/1) on the
work of the Organization, which provides a detailed
overview of the activities, achievements and challenges
of the United Nations on a wide range of issues of
common interest and concern to all humankind. As this
is Mr. Ban Ki-moon’s last year as Secretary-General,
I also wish to congratulate him and thank him for his
tireless efforts over the past 10 years to promote peace,
development and human rights in the world. I hope that
his successor will continue his good work.
On 31 December 2015, ASEAN marked one of
the most significant events in its history as it reached
a key milestone in its community-building efforts
by establishing the ASEAN Community. Next year,
in 2017, ASEAN will turn 50, an important occasion
that its member States will mark with pride and joy.
As an outward-looking intergovernmental regional
organization, ASEAN continues to consider the work

16-308805/16

A/71/PV.24

of the United Nations very important and greatly
values its cooperation with the Organization. Among
other examples of that link, the ASEAN Charter has a
provision expressing its commitment to upholding the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
Furthermore, the convening of the annual ASEANUnited Nations Summit, the ASEAN Foreign Ministers’
meeting with the Secretary-General and the President of
the General Assembly, the implementation of the justcompleted 2014-2015 ASEAN-United Nations work
plan, and the adoption of a 2016-2020 plan of action
to implement the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive
Partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations all
clearly reflect ASEAN’s commitment to strengthening
its cooperation with the United Nations.
We are very grateful for the Secretary-General’s
participation in the recent eighth ASEAN-United
Nations Summit, held on 7 September in Vientiane, and
the annual meeting of ASEAN Foreign Ministers with
the Secretary-General and the President of the General
Assembly, held on 22 September on the sidelines of the
general debate of the seventy-first session of the General
Assembly here at Headquarters. In the light of that,
ASEAN will submit a draft of the biennial resolution
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and ASEAN” to the Assembly at its current session,
so as to identify areas of cooperation and help address
the challenges that Member States face in areas such
as sustainable development, poverty, climate change,
peace and security, human rights, the rule of law,
disarmament and terrorism. I therefore look forward
to continued support for, and sponsorship of, the draft
resolution from all Members of the United Nations.
In his report, the Secretary-General highlights the
achievements of the Millennium Development Goals,
the need for the effective implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development — the framework
for global development for the next 15 years — and the
promise made by Member States to leave no one behind.
ASEAN also believes in the importance of sustainable
development in helping to secure a rule-based,
people-centred ASEAN community, as envisioned
in ASEAN’s Community Vision 2025, guided by
the purposes and principles of the ASEAN Charter,
which will serve as a solid foundation for ensuring
peace, stability and prosperity in the region and
for emphasizing the complementarity between the
implementation of both the 2030 Agenda and ASEAN’s
6/16

19/10/2016

Community Vision 2025, with the goal of raising our
people’s standards of living so that no one is left behind.
ASEAN is also striving for inclusive and sustained
growth. Consisting as it does of 10 countries with
varying levels of development, ASEAN has been
making efforts to narrow the development gap among
its members through its successive Initiatives for
ASEAN Integration Work Plans, currently at the
beginning of their third phase with the recent adoption
of Work Plan III. I therefore welcome the continued
support of our dialogue partners, the United Nations
and other external partners in our efforts to strengthen
the ASEAN Community, which was established on
31 December 2015.
The Secretary-General pointed out that climate
change poses a challenge to the achievement of
sustainable development and the eradication of extreme
poverty. In that regard, ASEAN welcomes the signing
and ratification of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change by Member States and the beginning of work
on the modalities, procedures and guidelines for its
implementation. In addition, ASEAN is committed
to improving the management of ASEAN’s diverse
ecosystems and landscapes, including its vulnerable
terrestrial, coastal and marine ecosystems, through
a landscape-based approach aimed at building
climate resilience.
On human rights, ASEAN has made progress in
its institutional development since the entry into force
of its Charter. Some highlights include the milestone
adoption of the ASEAN Human Rights Declaration
in 2012 and the Declaration on the Elimination of
Violence against Women and the Declaration on the
Elimination of Violence against Children in ASEAN
in 2013, following the establishment of the ASEAN
Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights
and the ASEAN Commission on the Promotion and
Protection of the Rights of Women and Children.
The ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on
Human Rights has conducted various programmes and
activities in consultation and cooperation with ASEAN
sectoral bodies and with the relevant institutions and
external partners concerned to promote human rights
awareness in 2016. They include the second Regional
Dialogue on the Mainstreaming of the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities in the ASEAN Community, held in
Thailand, the Workshop on Effective Communication
Strategies to Combat Trafficking in Persons, held
16-30880

19/10/2016

in Viet Nam, and the Regional Forum on Media and
Human Rights in ASEAN, held in Malaysia.
In order to enhance humanitarian assistance
efforts in the region, during the chairmanship of the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic in 2016, our leaders
adopted the ASEAN Declaration on One ASEAN, One
Response: ASEAN Responding to Disasters as One in
the Region and Outside the Region at the twenty-eighth
and twenty-ninth ASEAN Summits.
On peace and stability, ASEAN is also striving
to maintain and promote the Association as a flagbearer for regional norms of good conduct, particularly
through the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in
Southeast Asia. The Treaty is regarded as the key code
of conduct governing inter-State relations in South-East
Asia, which provides a foundation for the maintenance
of regional peace and stability. We welcome other
non-regional States’ growing interest in acceding
to the Treaty. In that regard, we welcome the recent
accessions of Chile, Egypt and Morocco to the Treaty
on 6 September 2016 in Vientiane and look forward to
Iran’s accession to the Treaty upon the completion of its
internal processes.
Furthermore, ASEAN attaches great importance
to strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament regime so as to maintain and promote
peace, security and prosperity in the region. We are
committed to preserving South-East Asia as a nuclearweapon-free zone and free of all other weapons of mass
destruction, as enshrined in the Treaty on the Southeast
Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone and the ASEAN
Charter. ASEAN also welcomed the biennial adoption
of the General Assembly resolution on that Treaty in
December 2015 during its seventieth session, which
reiterates the importance of the Treaty in strengthening
the security of States in the region and in contributing
to international peace and security.
On countering terrorism, ASEAN shares the deep
concerns over the increasing violence and brutality
committed by terrorist and extremist organizations
and radical groups in Yemen, Iraq and Syria. ASEAN
denounces all acts of destruction, violence and terror
in all its forms and manifestations. In line with those
efforts, ASEAN adopted the Langkawi Declaration
on the Global Movement of Moderates at the twentysixth ASEAN Summit in April 2015, which outlines
measures to promote moderation and curb extremism
throughout the region.

A/71/PV.24

ASEAN leaders announced the establishment of
the ASEAN Community on 31 December 2015 and
adopted the ASEAN Community Vision 2025 and its
three blueprints at the twenty-seventh ASEAN Summit
in Kuala Lumpur. Under the chairmanship of the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic in 2016, “Turning Vision
into Reality for a Dynamic ASEAN Community” was
chosen as the theme.
We believe that ASEAN’s collective efforts at the
regional level will contribute to the work of the United
Nations in promoting peace, security and stability,
as well as in contributing to inclusive and sustained
growth for all. I wish to conclude by reiterating
ASEAN’s resolve to strengthen cooperation with the
United Nations in all areas of mutual interest.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow me
to begin by thanking Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his report (A/71/1) on the work of the Organization.
I would like to touch briefly on some of the issues
that we find noteworthy in the report. In paragraph
97 of his report, the Secretary-General welcomes the
adoption of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
also known as the Iran Nuclear Deal, in the following
way:
“This historic accomplishment — a testament
to the value of diplomacy — marks an important
turning point in the international community’s
relationship with the Islamic Republic of Iran and
benefits nuclear non-proliferation. I am confident
that this agreement will lead to greater mutual
understanding and cooperation on the many serious
security challenges in the region and beyond.”
While we thank the Secretary-General for that
realistic assessment of the value of the agreement
and its positive impact on our region and beyond, we
invite the Secretariat to do its share by taking a more
constructive and positive approach in fulfilling its
reporting and monitoring functions. In our view, our
full compliance with the terms of the agreement and the
non-performance by certain Plan of Action participants
should be duly reflected in the reports by the Secretariat
on the implementation of the agreement.
Also, on the issue of disarmament, we reiterate
that the priorities of the international community
have not changed. Achieving the objective of nuclear
disarmament is the highest priority. However, as the
Secretary-General indicated in his report, the state

16-308807/16

A/71/PV.24

of affairs is disappointing in that regard. As a result
of nuclear-weapon States persistently not complying
with their obligations, there has been no progress
towards that objective. We are deeply concerned about
that dangerous situation and its consequences for
international peace and security. There are thousands of
nuclear weapons that threaten to annihilate humankind
by accident, miscalculation or madness. The only
absolute guarantee against the use of nuclear weapons
is their total elimination. We call on the nuclear-weapon
States to honour their special responsibility and legal
obligations relating to the total elimination of their
nuclear weapons.
As the main sponsor of the General Assembly
draft resolution entitled “A world against violence and
violent extremism”, we welcome the initiative by the
Secretary-General to develop a plan of action aimed
at preventing violent extremism. We think that it is an
important document, and that it could form the basis for
further negotiations aimed at finalizing a plan of action
that all Member States would implement.
On the issue of human rights, we note the efforts by
the Secretary-General and the Organization to further
advance human rights and fundamental freedoms.
However, the Secretariat should avoid trying to devise
principles or set priorities and agendas that Member
States have not agreed to. In that regard, we register
our disagreement with the analysis presented in
paragraph 77 of document A/71/1 concerning the death
penalty, and with the status attributed to the doctrine of
“responsibility to protect” in paragraph 76.
On the issue of peacekeeping operations, the
prerequisite for the success of the United Nations
in discharging its responsibilities, including in
peacekeeping, clearly lies in the partnership and
cooperation of Member States with the United Nations
and their contribution to the various activities of the
Organization. In that regard, we believe that the United
Nations should be able to use the potential capacity of
the whole membership in peacekeeping operations,
including troop, military, police and civilian
contingents. Therefore, the base of contributors should
be broadened, and, to that end, any invitation by the
United Nations requesting the contributions of Member
States to the peacekeeping missions or special political
missions should be transparent and include all potential
contributing countries.
8/16

19/10/2016

On the issue of sustainable development, as
stated in the report, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is built on the lessons learned from the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and other
internationally agreed commitments and on their
expansion. One lesson learned from the MDGs was
that deviating from a commitment to partnership could
lead to underachievement. We must keep international
cooperation on the right track, especially in the first
year of implementing the 2030 Agenda, which requires
full and effective international support and solidarity.
As Member States have started implementing the
2030 Agenda, a strong and more dynamic United Nations
development system, compatible with their needs and
priorities, is of much significance. In that context,
the forthcoming draft resolution on the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review should appropriately
address a number of important issues, including
the existing imbalance between core and non-core
resources; the necessity of revitalizing governing bodies
with equal participation and the presence of Member
States; transparency, accountability and coherence; and
exploring ways to avoid the overlapping of work across
the United Nations agencies.
The world today faces greater risks, but we are also
endowed with greater opportunities. Let us join hands
for a better and brighter future.
Mr. Rivero Rosario (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the presentation of the annual report
(A/71/1) of the Secretary-General on the work of the
Organization and the work undertaken to prepare it.
This will be the last such report of the current SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, I would like to take this
opportunity to recognize his dedication to promoting
and protecting multilateralism, his contribution to
international peace and security and his dedication to
achieving a better world.
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030
were milestones in the history of the Organization, thus
highlighting the importance of multilateralism and the
continuing relevance of the United Nations and the
purposes and principles set out in the Charter of the
United Nations. However, a long path remains until we
fulfil the agreed accords. We should not overlook the
fact that obstacles are still impeding progress towards
16-30880

19/10/2016

achieving sustainable development for our peoples.
We are confronting a world in which multilateralism
is being challenged on a daily basis. We have war,
aggression, soft coups and attempts at regime change
promoted by some hegemonic nations, interference in
the internal affairs of States and violations of national
sovereignty under the pretext of combating terrorism.
Preventing armed conflict presents a larger
challenge for the Organization than ever before. For
Cuba, building upon the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and strengthening
international law continue to be the basic pillars of
international security. In essence, that requires full
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States, the non-use of force in international relations,
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
The international efforts being made to preserve
future generations from the scourge of war, maintain
international peace and security, and achieve economic
and social progress and the full enjoyment of all
fundamental human rights are still insufficient. That
is attested to by the 795 million people who still suffer
from hunger, the 781 million adults who are illiterate
and the 17,000 children who die every day from
curable diseases.
To effectively leave no one behind, we must
change the current unjust and profoundly inequitable
international order, and the United Nations must play
an important role in that regard. We urgently need to
end the application of unilateral coercive measures
against developing countries, eliminate colonialism
and foreign occupation, and reject interventionism
disguised as humanitarian aid. We must end the political
manipulation of human rights by ensuring that we have
an impartial, objective and non-selective approach.
The imposition of single and imperfect concepts
of democracy, of models that ignore the particular
characteristics of each society and give control to
centres of world power, is unacceptable.
Cuba deems that a climate of international peace
and security, where the rule of law is respected
internationally, is a prerequisite for achieving
sustainable development. That requires the full
recognition of the sovereign equality of States, the
peaceful settlement of international disputes, respect
for political independence and for the political,
economic, social and cultural system that nations have

A/71/PV.24

freely chosen for themselves and the rejection of the
threat or use of force against any State.
It is also vital to have new, additional and
predictable financial resources for the implementation
of the ambitious 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. The full implementation of the 2030
Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals
requires capacity-building and the establishment of an
international mechanism that facilitates the transfer of
environmentally friendly technologies, on favourable
terms for developing countries.
Just as the report itself points out, last year was the
worst in terms of climate change, with the increased
melting of polar ice caps, rising sea levels and increasing
emissions of greenhouse gases. Urgent concrete and
immediate action must be taken to reverse that situation.
The Paris Agreement constitutes a starting point, but it
is not sufficient in itself if we want to preserve our planet
for future generations. It is up to the industrialized
nations to assume their environmental debt, change
their irrational models of production and consumption
and reduce their greenhouse-gas emissions.
The existence of nuclear weapons is a further threat
to human beings. The only way to save humankind from
the horrendous impact of nuclear weapons is through
their complete prohibition and total elimination. Cuba is
totally committed to the international efforts to achieve
that priority objective. We support the recommendation
to convene an international conference in 2017 for the
purpose of negotiating a legally binding instrument for
the prohibition of nuclear weapons, with a view to their
elimination. We hope that such an instrument can be
formally adopted in 2018 at the high-level international
conference on nuclear disarmament that the General
Assembly will convene.
We recognize that much remains to be done
in the fight against terrorism. The international
community must take specific steps towards adopting
a comprehensive convention on international terrorism
containing a full definition of that scourge. It is
unacceptable that the alleged fight against terrorism
should be used as a cover for acts of aggression and
interference in the internal affairs of States or for
perpetrating gross violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law.
The new genuinely just, democratic and equitable
international order that we all wish to see requires a
radically reformed United Nations. To make the United

16-308809/16

A/71/PV.24

Nations more democratic and effective, the General
Assembly must be revitalized and strengthened. It must
fully exercise its powers under the Charter, without any
interference from the Security Council in its work or
that of its bodies. The reform of the Security Council to
make it more democratic and representative means that
we must change its membership and working methods.
We must not further postpone that task.
We are proud to belong to a zone of peace, as was
proclaimed at the second Summit of the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States, held in
Havana in January 2014. Cuba reiterates that the rules
of coexistence based on friendship, cooperation and
respect are vital in international relations among States
and in ensuring the full enjoyment of the right to peace
and development of their peoples.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Today we are about
to select the ninth Secretary-General of the United
Nations. The final report (A/71/1) of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon on the work of the Organization is
therefore an appropriate inflection point for examining
the main challenges that face us and the means and
mechanisms to mend our problems. Those are not
simple issues, nor are they small in number. However,
because of the paucity of time, I will focus on just three
examples relating to international peace and security
that are emblematic of the problems we face.
In
an
increasingly
interconnected
world
where we have seen the globalization of
everything — from propaganda to violence, from
technologies to cyberattacks, from terrorism to
the ill effects of climate change, from conflicts to
narco-networks — the response mechanisms that we
have in place in the only global organization of our
times are inadequate.
Let us begin with the principal organ tasked with the
maintenance of international peace and security — the
Security Council. So far this year it has met formally
on approximately 180 occasions, and informally
perhaps more than 400 times. Yet on cardinal issues,
such as Syria, we see inaction; in other situations,
such as resolution 2304 (2016), on South Sudan, action
is agreed upon but not yet implemented; and, finally,
where measures are taken, as in the case of resolution
2276 (2016), on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, they are disregarded.
In a variety of ways, therefore, the Council has
become unresponsive to the needs of our time and
10/16

19/10/2016

ineffective in meeting the challenges it is confronted
with. It is an organ that ponders for six months on
whether to punish leaders of organizations it has itself
designated as terrorist entities. Then, unable to decide,
it gives itself three more months to further consider
the issue. One has to expectantly wait throughout a
nine-month process to know if Council members have
decided on a single issue. In some instances it does not
even begin that nine-month process of identifying and
listing publicly announced leaders of terrorist entities.
At best, it is now an organ that can be described as an
interesting and random mix of “ad-hocism”, scrambling
and political paralysis. The global governance
architecture calls for comprehensive reform.
Our public consciousness is being ravaged daily
by incessant acts of terrorism targeting innocent
people, our civilizational heritage and, increasingly,
the socioeconomic infrastructure of our societies,
especially in vulnerable developing countries.Yet on the
issue of terrorism the United Nations has still to come
up with a coherent policy, let alone take the lead on one
of the biggest threats to global peace and security. As
many as 31 entities within the United Nations system
deal with some aspect of countering terrorism. We know
the adage that too many cooks spoil the broth. That is
clearly the case here, as coherence and coordination
are missing. It is nearly impossible to argue the case
of the relevance of the United Nations on the issue of
terrorism, where even the adoption of an international
norm on the prosecution or extradition of terrorists
evades us despite 20 years of talk.
The inability to address what is among the most
dangerous of scourges faced by States and societies
collectively since the Second World War raises
questions about the relevance of the Organization to the
very lives of the people on whose behalf we are bound
by the Charter to act. The choice of relevancy requires
a willingness to address what is staring us in the face.
Yet we look away. We look away as some among us
stall their collective efforts while they use terrorists as
proxies in their territorial quests.
Today, a short while ago, we again heard one
such lone voice making claims to an integral part
of my country. The voice comes from a country
that has established itself as the global epicentre of
terrorism. Such claims find no resonance among the
international community. Less than 10 days ago, the
General Assembly Hall witnessed the general debate.
It also witnessed a singular lack of support for the
16-30880

19/10/2016

representative of Pakistan’s baseless claims (see A/71/
PV.11). Need one say more? Our response to Pakistan is
consistent: it should abandon its futile quest. The State
of Jammu and Kashmir is an integral part of India and
will remain so. No amount of misuse of international
platforms by Pakistan will change that reality. The sellby date of Pakistan’s anachronistic approach is long
past.
Peacekeeping is the leitmotif of the United Nations.
However, peacekeeping is under great stress. A plethora
of tasks and Christmas-tree mandates without adequate
funding; a departure from the well-established
principles of impartiality; the avoidance of the primacy
of politics and the focus instead on band-aid solutions
through peacekeeping; and an unwillingness to walk
away from the quagmires into the sunset — these
are all part of the burgeoning philosophical dilemma
facing peacekeeping. It would appear that we have
blunted peacekeeping as an effective tool. Additionally,
there are appalling cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse. Peacekeepers turning into predators is our worst
nightmare come true. India has fully supported the
initiative to create a trust fund for victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse. It was the first to contribute
to that fund. It is disappointing that only three other
countries have followed suit.
It is now 16 months since the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations concluded its report (see
A/70/95), yet tangible progress and the implementation
of its recommendations are still awaited. Against
that inaction, a tally of the disasters that are roiling
peacekeeping — the most used tool of the United
Nations — makes for worrisome reading.
Those are three key issues but they are also
examples of the many ailments of the Organization
that need to be addressed. This raises the question
whether we are failing in our duty to address these and
other problems from which the Organization suffers.
Observing the International Day of Non-Violence at the
United Nations just three days ago, we heard a dictum
coined by Mahatma Gandhi in his interaction with the
United Nations as far back as 1947. He said,
“Begin with a charter of duties of man and I promise
the rights will follow as spring follows winter.”
Gandhi believed that if each person fulfilled his or her
duties to others, no one’s rights would be violated.

A/71/PV.24

Fulfilling our duties will correct a lot of what
imperils us today. The duty to change what is not
working is inherent in our commitment to the Charter
of the United Nations. What we have is an Organization
that is ailing in many ways. As Member States, it is a
part of our duty to address those ailments. Now is as
good a time as any to begin that venture.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his final report (A/71/1) on the work
of the Organization. Costa Rica would like to recognize
the tireless and determined efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to promote sustainable development. The
process for negotiating the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and establishing the Sustainable
Development Goals was a milestone in the multilateral
process. We are confident that the Agenda will give new
direction to the central functions of the Organization.
It will be directed towards a more firm, more inclusive,
more universal and more sustainable development — one
that promotes the creation of peaceful societies, respect
for human rights and the rule of law and one that leaves
no one behind. We look forward to continue working in
that direction and to focus on implementing the Agenda
with the next Secretary-General.
Costa Rica recognizes the commitment of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and the extraordinary support he
gave to the negotiation, signing and entry into force of
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. The personal
commitment of the Secretary-General to promoting
this historic Agreement is especially remembered
by the Government of Costa Rica. Now that the first
threshold in terms of the number of ratifications has
been reached, we are enthusiastically looking forward
to the 55 per cent threshold for global emitters over
the coming weeks so that this important instrument
can enter into force as soon as possible. We must now
prepare for the most important and most complex stage,
which is the process of its implementation.
We recognize the transformational potential of the
2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement, and we hope
that the very significant political will underpinning
both of them will mark an inflection point in terms of
the complexity, comprehensiveness and transformative
nature of international agreements on sustainable
development, and that, thanks to such political will,
we shall be able to adopt other needed agreements on
peace, security, disarmament and migration.

16-3088011/16

A/71/PV.24

We pay tribute to the Secretary-General’s full
commitment to making progress on gender equality
and the empowerment of women in a cross-cutting
manner throughout the agenda of the United Nations.
The establishment of the High-level Panel on Women’s
Economic Empowerment is but one demonstration
of that commitment. It recognizes the absolute need
to integrate all women into the economic life of
our societies. The President of Costa Rica had the
honour, at the request of the Secretary-General, to
co-chair that Panel. Last September, it submitted its
preliminary report, which highlighted the fact that
the inclusion of women in economic activity was not
just the correct approach, but also the most intelligent
one, as it is absolutely necessary to ensure the full
and comprehensive implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The tenaciousness of the Secretary-General’s drive
and support with respect to gender issues deserves
praise, and Costa Rica, as a country that believes in
gender equality and women’s empowerment, hopes that
women and girls will continue to be at the centre of our
human endeavours.
The Human Rights Up Front initiative and its
implementation in the United Nations system must
continue so that we improve our capacity to respond to
serious violations of human rights and our capacities
to work preventively in seeking peace and ensuring
human rights for all. The courageous words of the
Secretary-General in defence of the rights of lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and/or intersex persons
should also be highlighted.
Costa Rica would like to recognize the support
given to the rule of law as a cross-cutting and enabling
way of fulfilling the purposes and principles embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations.
The themes that we have highlighted are but part of
the legacy left by the Secretary-General, not just over
the past year but during his entire term of office, for the
benefit of future generations. Therefore, I would like to
conclude by expressing our thanks to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for all his efforts and work throughout his
term of office.
Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): My delegation
thanks the Secretary-General for his report contained
in document A/71/1. South Africa is of the view that
the debate on the report of the Secretary-General on
the work of the Organization is an apt way to start our
12/16

19/10/2016

activities in the General Assembly, as it allows us to
take stock and reflect on the work we are doing as an
Organization. The report reflects his clear vision and
his firm determination to enhance multilateralism
and strengthen the authority and role of the United
Nations. The United Nations must remain at the apex
of multilateralism in addressing the global challenges
that we face.
There are many pertinent issues highlighted in
the report. My delegation wishes to focus on three,
namely, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
the maintenance of international peace and security,
and combating international terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.
South Africa supports the implementation of
the transformative 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development without any reservations. The triple
challenge of poverty, unemployment and inequality
that the Agenda seeks to address is in line with South
Africa’s national development plan as well as the
African Union’s Agenda 2063. At the core of South
Africa’s development plan is the objective to guide our
policies and programmes in every sector, including
how to allocate our budget and skills investment and
other resources at the national and local levels in order
to move South Africa forward and ensure sustainable
livelihoods for all our citizens. That will ensure the
domestication of the Sustainable Development Goals as
part of our national development plan.
We need a United Nations that is fit for purpose to
“save succeeding generations from the scourge of war”,
as mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report, and the
need for this has never been greater. Today, the world
is grappling with a multiplicity of new challenges that
threaten global peace and security, and therefore require
the intervention of the Organization. While we must
undoubtedly aim to strengthen the tools at our disposal
in addressing conflicts as they arise, we must also
emphasize the preventive approach — as highlighted
by the Secretary-General in his report — in addressing
conflict and its root causes in order to prevent countries
that are emerging from conflicts from relapsing. South
Africa is convinced that peace and stability in the world
will remain elusive if we do not address the nexus
between security and development.
We welcome the General Assembly’s recognition
of the increasing role that regional organizations play
in peacemaking and peacekeeping efforts. Regional
16-30880

19/10/2016

organizations are well positioned to understand the
causes of armed conflicts owing to their knowledge
of the region, which can benefit their efforts in
influencing the prevention or resolution of such
conflicts. Furthermore, they have a comparative
advantage owing to their increasing political resolve
to address a situation. It is beneficial for the United
Nations to work closely with regional and subregional
organizations in their mediation and peacemaking
efforts. Over the past few years we have witnessed
the practical advantages of that cooperation in the
area of peacekeeping on the African continent. While
we acknowledge that the primary responsibility for
international peace and security lies with the Security
Council, it is often regional organizations such as
the African Union that are the first responders in the
stabilizing of crisis situations.
The African continent is one of the largest troop
contributors to United Nations-mandated peace
operations. Additionally, the continent has made
significant progress in activating its Peace and Security
Architecture. That notwithstanding, more needs to be
done to ensure that the continent has adequate capacity
to address its peace and security challenges. In that
regard, we are calling on the United Nations to support
and adequately fund the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security.
The threat of terrorism continues to challenge the
international community. While the threat grows and
mutates, the results of terrorist acts remain the same:
sowing devastation, killing and maiming innocent
people, damaging property and infrastructure, fostering
fear in local communities, undermining social and
economic confidence and, in many cases, entrenching
the forces of poverty. Conflict situations, including in
the Middle East and North Africa, have also created
fertile environments for terrorist groups to carry
out their brutal acts with impunity. The activities of
those groups have complicated the search for political
solutions, which are necessary for the re-establishment
of peace, security and stability and the enjoyment of
fundamental rights and freedoms.
To counter the narratives and ideologies of terrorism
in the medium to long term, international cooperation
must address the conditions and contexts that drive it.
Military approaches alone cannot resolve the challenge
of terrorism. The United Nations, with the broad
range of expertise and tools at its disposal, is in the

A/71/PV.24

best position to lead the coordination of international
efforts in this regard. South Africa continues to support
the central role of the United Nations in countering
terrorism and strengthening the multilateral system
to take effective measures within the framework of
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. Initiatives to further improve coordination and
cooperation among the United Nations entities involved
in countering terrorism and coordination between
the United Nations and regional structures should be
encouraged and supported.
We acknowledge the work being done by the
General Assembly and Security Council in guiding the
international community’s response to terrorism. The
General Assembly, with its universal membership, has a
valuable contribution to make. Both the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
have added to the tools at our disposal to counter this
threat, as they are premised not only on addressing
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism but also
on respect for the rule of law and human rights. While
great strides have been made, much more needs to be
done. My delegation looks forward to contributing in
that regard.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to thank the
Secretary-General and the Secretariat for their services
to the Organization. We assure them and all Member
States of our commitment to ensuring that we progress
closer to our shared goal of achieving a better world
for all.
Mr. Shaltut (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation has perused the report (A/71/1) of the
Secretary-General on the work of the Organization.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General and the
Secretariat for their efforts, especially those expended
on the preparation of the report. The topics dealt with
by the Secretary-General in his report are of great
importance for my delegation and for the Government
of National Accord, which will represent Libya in this
international forum. Among these important topics are
sustainable development, migration and respect for,
and the promotion of, human rights and international
peace and security.
As the Assembly is aware, my country is passing
through a transitional phase. This phase has involved
meetings that led to the formation of the Presidential

16-3088013/16

A/71/PV.24

Council of the Government of National Accord, which
began its work in March.
The question of migration is one that concerns
all States. With a long Mediterranean border of 2,000
kilometres, my country — like others — is suffering
from the repercussions of the migration problem. While
we express our sympathy with all those who have found
themselves in difficult situations, we want to indicate
that Libya, in its current situation, cannot resolve the
problem on its own. Libya sympathizes with the victims
who have drowned in the sea or died in the desert;
however, this major question requires the assistance
of the United Nations, the international community,
developed countries and countries possessing the
appropriate technologies.
From Libya’s point of view, the issue of migration
necessitates working to establish and promote
development projects in the countries of origin so as to
provide employment opportunities for those who might
otherwise seek to migrate, thereby enabling them to
work in their own countries. Such projects would help
to prevent the catastrophic conditions that have befallen
those desiring to improve their lives by leaving their
countries of origin and heading to other countries that
might offer a better standard of living and a better life.
As the Assembly is aware, Libya has been
cooperating with the various United Nations bodies,
including the Security Council and the Human Rights
Council. The United Nations Support Mission in
Libya has been working in cooperation with Libyan
national authorities, particularly with the Government
of National Accord. Cooperation has been fruitful and
constructive. Libya has spared no effort to develop
such cooperation in order to emerge from the political
dilemma it has experienced during the past two years.
The issue of countering terrorism is an extremely
important one, and it receives Libya’s full attention. The
forces of the Presidential Council of the Government
of National Accord have declared war on behalf of the
world against the terrorists in the city of Serte and are
close to eliminating them.
Finally, I would like to express Libya’s continued
readiness to cooperate with all United Nations bodies
and agencies.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
now heard the last speaker in the debate on agenda item
109. May I take it that the General Assembly takes note
14/16

19/10/2016

of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of
the Organization, as contained in document A/71/1?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in French): Before
calling on the speaker in the exercise the right of reply,
may I remind delegations that, in accordance with
decision 34/401, statements in the exercise of the right of
reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention
and to five minutes for the second intervention, and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Sayed (Pakistan): I take the floor to respond to
the remarks made by the Permanent Representative of
India with regard to the issue of Jammu and Kashmir.
We believe that equating a legitimate struggle
for self-determination with terrorism is not only
disingenuous, but a travesty of history. The issue of
Kashmir cannot be wished away by fanciful rhetoric
and claims. Nor can India justify the barbaric killings
and atrocities committed against the hapless Kashmiris
under any guise.
Jammu and Kashmir is not an integral part of
India, and never has been. It is an issue on the agenda
of the Security Council and is recognized as disputed
territory. This core issue cannot be cast aside by empty
rhetoric. It has to be resolved in accordance with
Security Council resolutions. There is a need to start a
dialogue with Pakistan and the two representatives of
Jammu and Kashmir to resolve the issue according to
the will of the Kashmiri people. I would like to reiterate
that Prime Minister Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, in his
address in this forum (see A/71/PV.11), clearly reiterated
his offer to India to enter into a serious and sustained
dialogue for the peaceful resolution of all outstanding
disputes, especially Jammu and Kashmir.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that the General Assembly wishes to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 109?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 127
Global health and foreign policy
Draft resolution (A/71/L.2)
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly will now take action on a draft
16-30880

19/10/2016

A/71/PV.24

resolution entitled “Political Declaration of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on antimicrobial
resistance”, issued as document A/71/L.2.

Council Affairs and Conference Management — would
be included in the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2018-2019.

I should like to remind members that the debate on
agenda item 127 is scheduled to be held on Wednesday,
7 December, as announced in the programme of work
contained in document A/71/3.

The Acting President (spoke in French): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/71/L.2, entitled “Political Declaration of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on antimicrobial
resistance”.

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/71/L.2. I give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This statement is made
in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, and is also made available in
advance on the PaperSmart portal.
By paragraph 15 of draft resolution A/71/L.2, the
General Assembly would request the Secretary-General
to establish, in consultation with the World Health
Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations and the World Organization for
Animal Health, an ad hoc inter-agency coordination
group, co-chaired by the Executive Office of the
Secretary-General and the World Health Organization,
drawing, where necessary, on expertise from relevant
stakeholders, to provide practical guidance for
approaches needed to ensure sustained effective global
action to address antimicrobial resistance, and also
request the Secretary-General to submit a report for
consideration by Member States by the seventy-third
session of the General Assembly on the implementation
of the present declaration and on further developments
and recommendations emanating from the ad hoc
inter-agency group, including on options to improve
coordination, taking into account the global action plan
on antimicrobial resistance.
It is anticipated that the request contained in
paragraph 15 will constitute an addition to the
documentation workload of the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management of
one document of 8,500 words, to be issued in all six
languages. That would entail additional requirements
in the amount of $37,600 for documentation services
in 2018.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/71/L.2, the additional resource
requirements of $37,600 that would arise for 2018 under
section 2 — General Assembly and Economic and Social

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/71/L.2?
Draft resolution A/71/L.2 was adopted (resolution
71/3).
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now call
on the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Gómez Camacho (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Contrary to what we would have imagined not long ago
in this Hall, we have realized not only that health care
is of global interest, but that it must occupy a central
role on the agenda of the Organization. As with HIV/
AIDS, non-communicable diseases and Ebola, the
General Assembly has now, at the highest level, dealt
with antimicrobial resistance.
Indeed, resistance to antimicrobial treatments,
particularly antibiotics, is one of the greatest threats we
are facing today, as we see that people are beginning to
die throughout the world from infectious diseases that
until recently were routinely treated and cured. It is
undoubtedly a crisis when resistant pathogens are being
transmitted and multiplying in people, animals and
food, and causing 700,000 deaths each year. By 2050,
such resistance could generate more deaths than cancer
and could take 10 million lives per year. Moreover, its
economic impact would then exceed that of the 2008
financial crisis and reach a cost of $100 trillion. That
represents between 2 and 3.5 per cent of global gross
domestic product. As Margaret Chan has said, this is a
slow tsunami that respects no borders.
The term “antimicrobial resistance” once had little
meaning. However, today it is understood in all its
grave and complex aspects. We know that the solution
must be collective and multifaceted, with the support
of various United Nations entities. As with many other
formidable challenges, antimicrobial resistance is not
a North-South issue, or a competition where one party
wins and the other party loses. It is a global threat that
requires efforts from all of us and, in order to resolve
it, we must recognize the specific circumstances

16-3088015/16

A/71/PV.24

prevailing in each region and country. In addition, the
most advanced countries must commit to cooperating
with all the other countries.
Furthermore, the roles of the pharmaceutical
and food industries will be key. We have seen major
commitments on the part of both. However, we
must continue strengthening knowledge and mutual
understanding with a view to establishing the conditions
that will enable the pharmaceutical industry to develop
new antibiotics and the food industry to reduce its use of
antibiotics. Both sectors must continue increasing their
understanding of the social challenges and determining
which actions to undertake or to end.
I would like to thank President Thomson and
President Lykketoft for entrusting this task to me,
and to extend my gratitude to the organizations and
delegations whose constructive work led to the robust
Political Declaration.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I would
like to express my sincere thanks to Ambassador Juan
José Gómez Camacho of Mexico, facilitator of the
informal consultations, who demonstrated great ability
and patience in his conduct of the discussions and
complex negotiations on the outcome document. I also

16/16

19/10/2016

thank Member States for their valuable contributions in
reaching agreement on draft resolution (A/71/L.2).
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 127.
Programme of work
The Acting President (spoke in French):
Before adjourning, I would like to briefly refer to
the consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 115,
entitled “Election of the members of the International
Law Commission”, which will take place on Thursday,
3 November.
In order to facilitate the election of members of the
International Law Commission, and in accordance with
the established practice, the General Assembly will
take an advance decision on the matter of requesting
the Secretariat to issue a consolidated list of candidates
reflecting all submissions and changes received so
far. It is my intention to consult the Assembly in that
regard at the plenary meeting to be held tomorrow
morning, 6 October, as announced in The Journal of
the United Nations.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

16-30880
