United Natiom

1444th

GENERAL

PLENARY MEETING

ASSEMBLY

•

TWENTY.FIRST SESSION

olficial Records

Monday. 17 Qctober 1966,
at 10.30 a.m.

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

8. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General Assembly, 1 am extremely happy to welcome Botswana
and Lesotho as Members of the United Nations. 1 wish
to extend ta their Governments and peoples the warm
congratulations of the Assembly on this great occasion, together with our best wishes for the future.

Page
Agenda item :JO:
Admission of new Members to the United
Nations (contlnued). • . • • • • . . . • • • • • • •
Agenda item 9:
General debate (continued)
Speech by Mr. Huot 5ambath (Cambodia). . .
Speech by Mr. Zuayter (Jordan) • • • • • • • •
Speech by Mr. Shearer (Jamalca) • • • • • . •
statement by the representative of Guatemala . . . . . . . . • . . , .
4

"

•

,

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

1

1 now call on the representative of the United
Kingdom, who has asked to make a statement.

9.

S
7

10. Lord CARADüN (United Kingdom): It is a joyful
dutY 1 have to perform in welcoming as new Members
of the United Nations the African countries of Botswanà
and Lesotho, bringing the number of Commonwealth
States to twenty-five. We are constantly proud to say
that the Commonwealth represents something like one
quarter of the population of the whole world.

11

15

President: M r. Abdul Rahman PAZHWAK
(Afghanistan),
AGENDA ITEM 20

11. 1 extend the warmest greetings to His Majesty

the King of Lesotho and his Prime Minister, and to
the Minister of state for External Affairs of Botswana,
who are here with us today.

Admission of new Members to the United Notions
(conti nued)*

1
~

1. The PRESIDENT: The General Assembly will
take action thla morning on the recommendation of
the Securlty Councll that Botswana and Lesotho be
admitted to membership of the United Nations.

12. As we rejoice on the attainment of their independence. a11 of us are very conscious, 1 am sure,
that these two new countries face serious obstacles
and special difficulties. AIl of us can join in wholeheartedly, wishing that they will triumph over these
obstacles and difficulties.

2. We turn first to the consideration of the cirait
resolution which recommende the admission Ul
Botswana to membership of the United Nations
[A/L.484]. That drait resolution la sponsored by
twenty-three Members.
3. In the absence of a request for a vote, may 1
take it that the General Assembly decides by acclamation to admit Botswana as a Member of the
United Nations?

13. AH of us, too, will join together today not only
in good wishes but aiso in a determination to help
these new States, and on behalf of my Government
1 am glad to give the pledge that we shaH continue
to provide economic and financial assistance to them
now that they are independent.
14. Permit me, in the presence of His Majesty the
King of Lesotho, to repeat his words whenhis country
celebrated independence earUer this month. This ls
what he said:

The dr8ft resolution was adopted by acclamation.

4. The PRESIDENT: r declare Botswana admitted to
membership of the United Nations.

i

The delegation of Botswana was escorted to its
place in the General Assembly Hall.

1

,

5. The PRESIDENT: We turn now to the draft resolution recommending the admission of Lesotho to membership of the United Natiolls [A/LA85]. That drait
resolution is sponsored by twenty-three Members.

~

6. In the absence of a request for a vote, may 1 ta!ce
it that the General Assembly wishes to ndmit Lesotho
by acclamation ta membership of the United Nations?

11

The draft resolution was adopted by acolamation.

\1

li

"We trust that, given your good will and our own
resolution lo uphold the basic principles ofhumanity
and international morality, we shaH be able to play
a not unworthy part in that community of free
nations which we now join."
15. Let me also quote the words of the President of
Botswana, Sir Seretse Khama, in an independence
message:
"Nevertheless, knowingthe grave difficulties which
lie ahead for us, we take this present step forward
with confidence and with Il determination that so
soon as is possible we will stand on our own feet
economically. We believe that through the very faet
of independence and Us effect upon ourselves, we
will be able to develop within ourselves the will
and the ability to make our own way in the world. ~

7. The PRESIDENT: 1 declare Lesotho admttted to
membership of the United Nations.
The delegation of Lesotho was escorted to its place
in the General Assembly Hall.

1

L·,.,
:;.".

..

°ReBumed from t11e 1409th meeting.

1

2

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings

16. As these new States now embark on the adventure of independence, they do so in a spirit of courage
and determination. It is a courage and determination
which must excite the admiration of us all.
17. Mr. ACHKAR (Guinea) (translated from French):
In my dual capacity as Chairman of the African Group
and Chai rman of the Speci al Committee on the Policies
of Apartheid of the Government of the Republic of
South Africa, 1 have very special pleasure in welcoming to our great family OUr two brother States of
Botswana and Lesotho.
18. The admission of new Members to the United
Nations has become an Assembly ritual over the last
ten years. From the original fifty-one at the signing
of the Charter in San Francisco in June 1946, the
number of Member States has grown until it stands
today at 120. One might even say that the ceremonial
of the admission of new States has become routine
because it conforms to the nature of things and to
the vocation of the United Nations.
19. Nevertheless, our satisfaction has greater significance on this occasion because the independence
of Botswana and Lesotho, while representing one
more victory in Africa's stubborn fight to affirm the
rights and dignity of its peoples, also constitutes an
important breach in the conspiracy of racist and
colonialist forces which, south of the Zambezi River,
struggle vainly to build a wall to bar the way to the
wind of freedom, whose breath is shaking the entire
African continent.
20. At bay in their detestable bastion, theproponents
of apartheid look upon the liberation of this part of
southern Africa with immense fear and savage lust,
regardless of their hypocrltical statements intended
ta decei ve the vigilance of the African peoples and
the international conununity.
21. The neo-nazis of South Africa, Messrs. Vorster,
Miller, and the rest of the Boers, dream of making
these new independent States an outlet for the socalled Bantu peoples, whom they plan to pen up in
reservations more or less contiguous to these territories which they hope to turn into economic if not
political Bantustans. But Africa knows the spirit of
independence and the will to freedom of the peoples
of Botswana and Lesotho, who have always been able
to thwart the Machiavellian plans designed to thrust
them back into the hands of the South African colonialist mercenaries.
22. We are also particularly pleased by Botswana's
statement expressing its horror of apartheid. This
country's effort to build a non-racial society will
serve as a powerful example, showing that Africa
refuses to succumb to racism and that its chosen
way is that of universal brotherhood among men
inspired by love and solidarity.
23. We extend our warmest greetings to President
Seretse Khama and to the people of Botswana, who
are acting in this crucial part of the African continent as wise apostles of those human values which
are proclaimed by sa many Western Governments
but which a certain United Kingdom Government denied
in the face of racist pressure, and which the people of
Botswana were able to defend with courage and dignlty .

24. We recall in fact that Seretse Khama was banished
from his country and declared an "undesirable immigrant" in South Africa simply for having married the
woman he loved, who happened to be English. Today
this African nationalist is the President of an independent country which is striving to build its nationhood on the basis of the principles of the Charter and
of universa11y recognized values.

p
t:

25. The people of Lesotho for their part have in their
past a great tradition of independence which they maintained against wind and tide, against pressure of a11
sorts, and every kind of economic, social andpolitical
difficulty. The King of Lesotho is a fitting symbol of
this tradition. Even in the jaws of the South African
racist wolf, Lesotho has proclaimed its hatred of
racism. We admit that we have been made anxious
by certain statements and certain untirnely demonstrations which have taken place recently in Lesotho and
in South Africa. We rnake a fraternal appeal to the
people of this brother country to close ranks wlth a
view to preserving their heritage of pride and independence in the face of their many difficulties, the
serious and threatening nature of which we are the
first to recognize.
26. We wish to assure the peoples of Botswana and
Lesotho that a11 Africans are aware of the difficulties with which they have to contend and will spare
no effort, with the support of the international community , to help them as far as possible not only to
develop their nations but also to preserve the independence and territorial integrity of their countries.

n
S
p

c

3
h
il
fi

n

n

r
d

11
J<

27. We have no doubt that these proud and indomitable
peoples can count on international solidarity to help
them to wipe out the consequences of poverty and
slavery left by decades of colonialist negligence and
exploitation.
28. Whatever the intentions of the South Africancolonialists, we want our brothers in Botswana and Lesotho
to know that they can count on their brothers and
friends. Let there be no doubt that they will watch to
see that it is not the destiny of these nations to become mere appendages to nearby racist countries,
or reservoirs of endlessly available cheap labour,
but is on the contrary in accordance with the aspirations of their peoples, which are those of all African
peoples.
29. We have no doubt that there will never be any
question of our brothers in Botswann and Lesotho
yielding to South African blackmail. We are convinced
that they will be able to preserve the honour and dignity inherent in the status of sovereign countries.
30. On this memorable occasion, even as we welcome
Botswana and Lesotho, we cherish the fervent hope
and the profound conviction that the day ls not far
off when our brothers in Swaziland, Zimbabwe, Angola,
Mozambique and so-called Portuguese Guinea, and in
other colonies, not forgetting the greatest of them aH,
South Africa, will come together to join the great
family of the free nations of Africa, to work together,
in harmony with the free nations of the entire world,
for the realization of a better world, in peace and
brotherhood.
31. Mayibuyé Airica! Rise again, Africa! This ia the
watchword, the revolutionary ory of the oppressed

1
'J

j

1444th meeting - 17 October 1966
peoples of southern Afrien, for dignity, freedom and
truth for aH Africans, regardless of their race,
colour, or religion. Mayibuyé Arrica:
32. MI'. FOSTEH (United States): My Government
had the privilege last Friday, 14 October, of voting
in the Security Couneil in favour of the applications
for membership of the United Nations of the two
newly independent States which we weIcome into full
membership today, Botswana and Lt~sotho. The United
States representati vc in the Security Couneil, in suppOl'ting the applications of Botswuna and Lesotho,
noted their demogl'uphic and territorial importance,
recognized their suceessful politienl viewpoint and
development as representative demo<.:ralic Governments, and acknowledged the efforts of the United
Kingdom to bring about their self-government and
independence. He then said:
"My Government is espet'ially pleased that
Botswana and Lesotho share with the United States
the strong conviction that governments, to be effective and strong, must be based on the consent of
those they govern. My Government is well aware,
also, of the many obstacles that Botswana and
Lesotho have overcome in their praiseworthy drive
to build nations where Il man 1 s dignity and worth
are not determined by rnce. This is indeed a victory
in the world-wide strllggle for the renlization of
equal rights and opportunities for aU. This achievement brlngs Botswana and Lesotho to our membership with substantial contributions alrendy in
hand. "li
33. Today, l reaffirm the words of the United States
representuti ve in the 8eeurity Couneil and formally
welcome the rcpresentati ves of Botswana and Lesotho
to the United Nations family, sec:ure in the knowledge
that they will he worthy collnhorators in our joint
efforts to achieve the hlgh hopes and ideals of our
Organization.
34. Ml'. MULLER (South Afrien): Il is my pleasure
and pri vilege today to join ln publiely welcoming
Botswana and Lesotho ta membership of this Organization. Ollr relations with these two neighbouring
countries, the latest from our continent to be granted
independence, have alwaya been extremely close, und
we shaIl do whatever i8 possible to continue and develop this friendly relationship.
35. This sentiment was expressed in messages which
l conveyed from the South Africun Government und
people ta the Governrnents and peoples of the two
new States when l attended thelr recent independence
celebrations. It ia a sentiment whlch l wish to repeat
here today.
36. As neighbours in southern Afriea, our countries
naturally have rnany eommon interests, one of the
most important being that our sub-eontinent may continue to enjoy the pence that ia so essential for the
material prosperity and politieal well-belng of us aU.
In a broadcast to the South African nation last month,
my Prime Mlnister stated:
"We do not seek hostility with anyone. We do not
cast envious eyes on llny neighbouring or other
State. We do not wish to and will not interfere ln

!J See Officiai Recorda of the Securlty Councll, Twen!=y-flrs[ year,
13D6th meeting.

l

3

the affairs of others. We offer assistance where
necessary, in the knowledge that the only real
help is that which does not violate the self-respect
of the recipient or impair his honour. Il
37. My Prime Minister has since given the further
assurance in Parlinment that South AirIea will never
allow itself to be used as a breeding place for conspiracy agalnst or a springboard for attacks on any
other territory. This reflects South Airica's attitude
also towards Botswana and Lesotho.
38. Regarding the material advancernent and prosperity which, as l said, we hope and trust these
countries will enjoy, l should like to add that my
Government has traditionally co-operated fully with
them in the past in the economic and technical
spheres, to our mutual benefit. Theil' peoples, as
well as their Governments, have become familial'
with this and are also aware of our cornmon interests which have inspired such co-operation. My
Government is prepared ta continue to co-operate in
these fields and to afford such assistance as it may
be able to render. Such co-operatlon and assistance
will not be influenced by any intentionorwish ta exercise economic or any other form of domination over
these cou nt ries, but simply by a des ire to continue ta
li ve together as friendly good neighbours. And it is in
this spirit that l today express my congratulations ta
Botswana and Lesotho.

39. The PRESIDENT: 1 take pleasure in inviting MI'.
Nwako, Minister of State for External Affairs of
Botswana, to address the General Assembly.
40. Ml'. NWAKO (Botswana): Ml'. President, on behalf of the Republic of Botswana, which regained ils
complete independence on 30 September 1966, 1 bring
to the General Assembly the personal greetings of
the President, Sir Seretse Khama, the Government
and the people of Botswana. l use the word "regained Il
advisecUy because, throughout the eighty years or
more of their association with the United Kingdom
as fi Protectorate, the people of Botswana never
lost their sense of independence and never became
British subjects in the ordinary sense of the word.
Hence the arnicable atmosphere in which the Government of the United Kingdom and the Government of
the Republic of Botswana have now plaeed thelr relationship on a new basis.
41, Il had been the wish of the President of Botswana
to be present here in persan on this occasion, sinee
he carries primary responsibility for external affairs. 1 assure you that il was a matter of deep regret
ta him that he was prevented from doing sa by urgent
affalrs of state. When it became clear that it would be
impossible for him to attend in person, he delegated
ta me in my capacily as Minister of State for External
Affairs the dutY and the honour of attendance when
application was made by Botswana for membership
of the United Nations. Il is a matter of gratiflcation
to me that l should be present here today to accept
membership of the United Nations on behalf of my
country. l need hardly say that we conslder il a signal
honour to have been accorded membership of this
Organization, on which the pence and therefore the
future of the world and mankind 50 largely depend.
l trust that il will be possible for me to couvey adeqllately to the PresIdent and the Government and

4

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings

people of Botswana something of the warmth and kindness with which you, Mr. President, and the representatives of this august Assembly have received us.
42. Botswana can be counted among the small nations
of the world, covering an area of 222,000 square
miles with a population of approximately 600,000, but
it is our conviction that this does not imply that it
can be discounted in the councHs of the world. We
believe that it represents a significant portion of a
vital part of the continent of Africa and could play a
vital role in the affairs of that region.
43. We are not unmindful of the special interest
whlch this Organization has already shown in our
country. l refer to the United Nations Mission which,
in pursuance of a resolution of the United Nations,
visited my country to study its problems and to make
recommendations regarding economic assistance. We
are indebted to aIl those countries which have given
evidence of their practical inter est in our welfare
by their contributions to the United Nations Fund for
the economic development of the High Commission
Territories and ta other schemes of economic assistance for those Territories, and we dare ta express
the hope that, as our needs and problems become
better known among Member States, that interest will
grow. In this session also we have noted that the
affairs of our country have already received some
attention.
44. A perusal of the Constitution of Botswana will
show that our Republic is dedicated to the preservation, protection and promotion of the fundamental
rights and freedoms of aIl its people and ta a democratic form of government free from any discrimination based on colour, race or creed. It is our firm
intention to build up a non-racial State in which different groups can live together in peace and harmony
on a basis of equal opportunity, equal rights and
equal responsibilities.
45. We are aware that in the carrying out of the task
on which we have embarked-the building up of an
independent non-racial state-we shall encounter great
difficulties and obstacles, especially having regard
ta our geographical position, our limited resources
and our unfavourable climatic conditions, but we take
courage from the knowledge that we have the goad
wishes of so many nations and may count on the
massive support, both moral and otherwise, of the
more developed nations of the world represented
here.
46. It is our resolve ta maintain harmonious relations with a11 friendly States bath in Africa and in
other parts of the world. It is our belief that, though
small in terms of population and in terms of developed material resources, the Republic afBotswana,
by building up a non-racial State, can make a significant contribution, by way of precept as well as
example, ta the solution of a problem of major concern to the peoples of the world.
47. We firmly support the United Nations in its
peace-keeping role and its practical interest in the
economic and social development of all peoples in
aIl parts of the world. It is our humbh hope that,
as an active Member of the United Nations and its
various specialized agencies, we may be able to
share in the great tasks which it has set itself.

48. On behalf of the Republic of Botswana, l should
like to say that my Government has learned with deep
concern about the possibility ofthe Secretary-General
relinquishing the office which he has held with i5uch
distinction. My Government would like to addits voice
to those which have been raised in earnestly requesting
him to reconsider his decision and to continue to place
his distinguished services at the disposal of the
nations and the peoples of the world.
49. I should also like to take the opportunity of congratulating you, Mr. President, on your election as
President of the twenty-first session of the General
Assembly. l have no doubt that you will bring to this
office the distinguished qualities with which you have
already served your country and this Organizatian
in the pasto
50. May l in conclus ion, Sir, on behali ofthe Government and people of the Republic of Botswana, express our deep appreciation of the friendly reception
we have been accorded and assure you that it will be
the earnest endeavour af our delegation to be loyal to
the principles laid down in the United Nations Charter and so prove to be worthy Members of this
Organization.
51. The PRESIDENT: On behali of the General Assembly, l wish ta thank the Minister of State for
External Affairs of Botswana.
52. It gives me great pleasure to invite ChiefLeabua
Jonathan, the Prime Minister and Minister for External Affairs of Lesotho, to address the General
Assembly.
53. Mr. JONATHAN (Lesotho): It is my honour and
privilege as Prime Minister of Lesotho to express
to this Assembly the appreciation of His Majesty the
King of Lesotho, of His Majesty's Government and
of the people of my country upon the admission of
the Kingdom of Lesotho to the United Nations. We
are deeply grateful that the General Assembly has
this morning confirmed the decision of the :::'ecurity
Council ta have Lesotho accepted as the 121st Member
of this Organization. We accept fully our new obligations and solemnly undertake ta discharge faithfully
those obligations which we have assumed upon admission and which are embodied in the Charter to
which all Members of the world body subscribe.
54. In terms of size, population and resources, our
country is small and poor, but we are confident that
with God's help, with the goodwill of the community
of nations and with the courage and industry of our
own people, we shaH overcome the difficulties which
certainly lie ahead of us. We have no illusions about
those difficulties, and in surmounting them we shaH
rely upon our sympathy and your understanding of the
particular problems that beset us.
55. As a nation, we believe in a democratic way of
life and we have a profound respect for the dignity
and freedom of the individual-regardless of race,
sex or creed. We are proud that in our country aIl
men are treated with respect regardless of colour
and that our Constitution contains specifie safeguards
for the protection of fundamental human rights and
freedoms.

1444th meeting - 17 October 1966
56. Peaee we prize above aIl things, and it is not in
our nature to reject friendship and goodwill offered
in good faith, wherever we find it. We do not look for
difficulties, nor do we wish to perpetuate old antagonisms. We believe that these are things that mankind in its shrinking world cannot afford. Somewhat
innocently, perhaps we still bel1eve thitt, in these
times of sueh rapid seientific and technical change,
the common interests of the nations of the world far
outweigh their differences.
57. The Assembly will understand from what 1 have
already said that we in Lesotho have no illusions
about the limitations of our material strength and
importance, but we promise that our contribution
to the work of the United Nations will, within the
limits of OUr modest resources, be as constructive
and as positive as we ean make it. We pledge ourselves to do a11 we can to further the cause of international peace and security. In conclusion, 1 give
you the traditional salutation of my country: Khotsowhich, being interpreted. means "Peace".
58. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General Assembly, l wish to thank the Prime Minister and
Minister for External Affairs of Lesotho. The flags
of the two new Member States will be raised in a
ceremony whieh is to take place ut 2.45 p.m. today
in front of the delegates 1 entrance.

AGENDA ITEM 9
General debote (continued)

59. Mr. HUOT SAMIlATH (Cambodia) (translated
from French): Several distinguished speakers have
already been to this rostrum to tell the Assembly
of the problems eonfronting their countries and also
to state their views on a number of international
questions whieh are of concern ta us aU. For its
part, the Cambodian delega.tion intends to make its
position known as briefly as possible, in the hope
that the voiee of a country and people much preoccupied
by the present situation will receive your full attention.
60. Cambodia is an essentially und fundamentally
peaceful country. Whlle the young great Powers of
today may be discovering the intoxication of military
glory, a country with !l eivilization as old as ours
knows how vain it aU is. Like the nations of Europe,
the Khmer empire for sever al centuries made great
use of armed force. But times have changed.
61. We do not turn our backs on our pasto Yet, it
seems to us thnt in this twentieth century international relations must be based exelusively on law, as
was solemnly proclaimed when the United Nations
was established. Unfortunately, there Ilre still some
countries which retain an anncbronistic thirst for
conquest and domination. Cambodia is at present experiencing th,is fraxn its neighbours on the West and
On the Eust, supported alld encouraged by the United
States of America.
62. In this connexion, 1 should like to draw attention
to the real policy of Thailand towards my country.
AIl the protestations of good faith of the Bangkok
leaders cannot in fact camouflage an attitude and
overt aets which the Members of this Assembly will
appreciate at their true worth.

5

63. First of aU, there is the direct military intervention of the Thai army against Khmer territory.
Our frontier posta and villages are regularly attacked by the Thai armed forces, which are as
regularly repulsed by our covering troops. Indeed,
these atlacks are not a great source of anxiety. What
is more serious is the placing of mines by small
groups of Thais who infiltrate into Khmer territory.
These American-mB.de mines, of the latest undetectable model, are scattered over vast areas, which
the rural population is then forced to leave.
64. The Government of Thailand attributes this particularly base terrorist activity to so-called "rebels",
self-styled "free" Khmers. It ls true that some bands
of mercenaries participate in this activity, but we
have the clearesl proof that they are permanently
instaUed in Thai territory and depend totll.Uy on Thai
and United States services.
65. Nevertheless, we gave favourable consideration
to tiie mediation of Mr. Herbert de Ribbing, U Thant's
persona! representative, and made it clear that
C ambodia was ready to renew diplomatie relations
with Thailand immediately, subject only to the prior
signature of fi joint declaration proclaiming respect
for the present frontier between the two countries.
It will reeall that this frontier was fixed long ago
by international treaties and confirmed in 1962 by
a judgement of the International Court of Justice.
66. However, to this day, the Government ofThailand
has not seen fit to assent to our proposaI and the
information available to us indicates that it intends
to challenge the boundary line and even the judgement of the International Court of Justice concerning
Préah Vihear. y How, in these circumstances, could
we give any credence to Thailand's protestations of
good faith?
67. The pseudo-Government of Saigon for its part
maintains an insane claim to nearly a11 the Cambodian
coastal Islands. However, no serious-minded country
attaches the sUghtest importance to the diplomatie
activities of authorities who represent nobody but
themselves.
68. The military situation on the Khmer-South VietNamese frontier is far more serious. In effect, the
United States Air Force is continuing its terrorist
bomblng of our frontier villages, sowing death and
destruction among peaceful civUian populations. In
sorne cases, the United States Command in South
Vi et-Nam claims to have attacked units of the VietCong which have taken refuge with us. This is compIetely untrue, for aU the observers from the International Commission for Supervision and Control
have been able to see for themselves that the only
vlctims of these aggressive aets have been harmless
Khmer peasants. In other cases, the sarne United
States authorities maintain, against all verisimilitude,
that the borobed villages were in South Viet-Nam.
69. Lastly, 1 roay add that these attacks by United
States aircrait are being supplemented by those of
Saigon 's land forces, which are increasing their
incursions into our territory. Thus, in the East as

y Case concerning the Temple of Préah Vihesr (Cambodia V. Thalland).
Merita, Judgement of 15 June 1962. t.C. J. Reports 1962, p. 6.

6

General Assembly - Twenty-first Sessiçm - Plenary Meetings

weIl as in the West, we must face eo-ordinated
aggression which is obviously intended to destroy
our independence and territorial integrity.
70. Nevertheless, Cambodia 's only ambition is to
live at peace within its frontiers, practicing the
poliey of its choiee and pursuing with universally
recognized success its national development in every
field. Unfortunately, it does not appear that the United
Nations is in a position today to ensure that its
Members ' most saered rights, set forth moreover
in the Charter, will be respected and guaranteed.
71. l should like now to take up the problem which
is in the forefront of all our minds and takes precedenee over all the olliers with which the Assembly
is called upon to deal: namely, the wal' in Viet-Nam.
We have heard the head of the United States delegation [1412th meeting] give a rather special version
of that war and put forward what he describes as a
plan for the restoration of peace in Viet-Nam. We
have also listened without surprise to certain other
speakers offering him their ullconditional support.
72. The Cambodian delegation for its part believes
that it is essential to state the burning question of
Viet-Nam as H l'eally is, in other words, the assassination of a people by a foreign Power. The so-called
justifications of the Administration in Washington
will never be able to wipe out from our minds the
horror and brutality of the United States military action in North and South Viet-Nam. In this connexion,
we in Cambodia are better placed than anyone to
denounce to the representatives of the entire world
crimes which are the shame of allcivilizedoountries.
73. The United States is solely responsible for the
martyrdom of the Viet-Namese people, and it will
have to answer for it to histol'Y. It was the United
States which gave the dictator Ngo Dinh Diem the
support, means and advice which enabled him to
impose his bloody régime on the Viet-Namesepeople.
It was the United States, as General de Gaulle has
so righUy pointed out, which then imposed its political
and military authority on South Viet-Nam and made
the war break out again in the form of a national
r.esistance. AB these are facts and the so-called explanations of the United States representatives will
deceive no impartial person.
74. The colonialists of the past had at least the
merit of frankness when they sought to impose their
rule on other countries. Today, however, the United
States imperialists think they can hide their ambitions
under hypocritical formulae. Need we add .that no
colonial conquest of the last century was as brutal
as the invasion of South Viet-Nam by the United
States.
75. Attempts are made to place this invasion by
350,000 United States soldiers, and the indiscriminate
daily bombings, On an ideological plane, namely, the
fight against communism. This is merely 9.n attempt
to deceive international opinion. In fact, the VietNamese people are fighting for their independence,
Just as the Cambodian people and the people of the
United States themselves would fight if they were
attaC'!<ed and invaded. Such great nationalist countries
as l'rance are not deceived.

76. The United States representative has tried to
persuade this Assembly of the United States 1 will
for peace. We do not think that these fine words will
make us forget that at this very moment United States
aircrait are pouring bombs, napalm, chemical poisons,
into Viet-Namese villages.
77. The United States Government is deceivingworld
opinion in proposing what H ('alls a peace plan. What
it is really asking for is the capitulation of the VietNamese national resistance movement and the recognition of the right of the United States to maintain in
Saigon a Government of its choice which the people
of South Viet-Nam do not want. The recent farce of
elections, which our Secretary-General described
very aptly as neither free nor fair, could not of
course given any appearance of legality to the occupation of South Viet-Nam by the United States army.
78. Lastly, we regard as an affront to intelligence
and common sense the argument that Viet-Nam is
the victim of aggression by the Viet-Namese and is
being defended by the United States. The truth is that
Viet-Nam is the victim of aggression of which the
United States alone is guilty. This guilt is still further compounded by the des patch of Asian mercenaries to the batUe fields of Viet-Nam.
79. The United Nations is an organization which was
created so that the world should no longer be ruled by
the use of force and so that aU countries should be
entitled to settle their domestic affairs without
foreign intervention or interference. It is not, as
is thought in sorne quarters, Hs dutY to impose
mediation in the Viet-Namese war, because the
violations of the Geneva Agreements of 1954 on.
Indochina, of the United Nations Charter and of
international law as a whole, are purely unilateral.
80. It should simply demand an end to United States
aggression in Viet-Nam and the evacuation of its
troops from a country which they have invaded with
no other justification than an out-dated wiU to dominate. As for the arrangements for the withdrawal of
these troops, it rests with the Government of the
United States and it alone to discuss the matter with
the authentic representatives of the Viet-Namese
people, that is to say with the National Front for the
Liberation of South Viet-Nam and with the Hanoi
Governrnent of the North.
81. Of course we know perfectly weIl that the
United States Administration has chosen to turn a
deaf ear to aU the condemnations of world public
opinion, and ta use the power of its arms where
and when it sees fit. There can be no doubt that this
policy of force will lead to a world war, and at the
present rate of escalation, we may weIl imagine that
this General Assembly may be our last. In this
planetary conflict we shaU aU share the responsibility, unless we try every means at our disposaI to
campel the United States to obey te the letter the
Charter which it has signed.
82. There is another question of major importance
which this year again the General Assembly is called
upon ta examine: the restoration ta the People's
Republic of China of its seat in the United Nations
and in all its dependent agencies. However, this
year again, the United States has decided to use

,
1

j
j

li

\

',
,:

~.....

.....•. .....•..

x'

Ill

1

1444th meeting - 17 October 1966
every means in its power to perpetuate the farce of
the presence in China's place of the representatives
of the Chiang Kai-Shek clique.
83. For years now, the arguments put forward bYthe
United States and the countries it controls have not
changed. For years, the Cambodian delegation has
felt obliged to draw the Assembly's attention to the
denial of justice constitutect by the refusaI to give
China the place to which it is entitled. But we know
tho.t our appeals to reason, like those of aIl truly
independent countries, are blocked by a United States
imperialism exerted more and more openly in the
United Nations.
84. Nevertheless, the Cambodian delegation appeals
once more to aIl the delegations subject to United
States blackmail on this matter of re-establishing
the rights of China in the United Nations. The United
States never stops proclaiming that China is a warmonger and threatens the peace of the world. Yet,
ts there a single Chinese soldi el' outside China, a
single Chtnese milttary base in foreign territory?
In fact, the only wars being waged in the world at
present are being waged by the United States, and
the only bases which encircle and threaten China
and all the socialist countries are those of the United
States.
85. Responsible United States generals no longer
hesitate to proclaim that their objective is to push
China and Viet-Nam back to the stone age. A hystertcal
campaign is developing throughout the United States
in favour of using force, including atomic force, to
break the resistance of those countries which refuse
ta bow to its domination. And they dare claim that
China threatens the peace of the world!
86. The truth, the truth which we hope will one day
triumph, is that the People's Republic of China, a
nation of 700 million, is being kept out of the United
Nations in flagrant .violation of the principles on
which our Organization was founded. We should wake
up to a fact often recalled by Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, the Cambodian Chief of State, nameIy,
that the United Nations needs the presence of China
much more than China needs to sit in the United
Nations.
87. Above aIl, the United States must give back to
China that Chinese province of Taiwan which ft is
occupying and administering through the Chiang
kai-Shek clique.

7

unable ta solve problems which become graver and
more complex every year. We are forced even ta
recognize that its acceptance of violations of the
Charter by the Western great Powers the United
States in particular, is leading the world inevitably
into a general war.
90. In this respect we wouid like to pay a glowing
tribute to the efforts of U Thant ta save the United
Nations and the peace of the worid. Unfortunately,
his warnings, his appeals, his advice have gone unheeded by those responsible for the present situation.
We understand his anguish and his discouragement.
At the same time, we shall go onfervently hoping that
he will accept another term, for he has our full and
complete confidence.
91. The crisis which the United Nations is atpresent
going through undoubtedly has many causes; neocolonialtsm in sorne quarters, economic and politieal
imperialism in others, chauvinism on the part of the
great Powers, ideological rtvalry, and so forth. One
of the fundamental causes, however, is and continues
to be racism.
92. Throughout the world we are witnessing savage
demonstrations of that racism which is the shame of
certain countries and certain civilized societies. In
South Africa, the African population undergoes the
most cruel oppression at the hands of a white Government whose representatives sit here among us. In
Rhodesia, despite resolutions whieh have remained a
dead letter, the Government of Ian Smith is still in
power at Salisbury. In the United States, 25 million
Negroes are fighting for their dignity and the recognition of the fundamental rights which are refused
them.
93. Why could we not imagine the United states one
day committing against a white race the atrocities
of which it is guilty every day in Viet-Nam? Even
before the atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima,
we knew that certain Western Powers had nothing
but contempt for the so-called coloured peoples:
Present developments confirm that this attitude persists and is growing stronger in the self-styled free
world. The Cambodian delegation hopes that all its
brother countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America
will become aware of this question, which will become more crucial every year.
94. In conclusion, may 1 stress the pleasure with
which we welcomed the election of Ml'. Abdul Rahman
Pazhwak, the leading representative of a friendly
Asian country and a universaIly respected international figure. The Cambodian delegation asks hint to
accept its hearty congratulations and its best wishes
for the complete sucess of the noble task entrusted
to him.

88. We also believe that it is the dutY of the United
Nations to ask the United States troops to leave
South Korea, aiter first removing the Koreanquestion
from .Hs agenda and dissol ving the United Nations
Co~mission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of
Korea. It is indeed a sorry fact that United Nations
interference in the domestic affairs of this country
is in reality support for the colonialist policy of the
United States, which no longer even hesitates to use
tens of thousands of South Korean soldiers in the
Viet-Nam war. The Korean people are entitled to
peace and reunification; such reunifieation, by peaceful
means, is their own business.

95. Ml'. ZUAYTER (Jordan):Y On behalf of Jordan
and myself, allow me, Ml'. President, to express
heartfelt felicitations and congratulations on the
occasion of your election to the Presidency of the
General Assembly, and on attaining this position of
world-wide trust.

89. The Cambodian delegation notes with regret that
the United Nations has shown itself 'powerless or

ij Mr. Zuayter spoke ln Arabie. The Engllsh verllion of hls statemen~
was supplled by the delegation.
.
..

~fm:rA'';:'

~,
8

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings

96. The cordial bonds between our two countries
and our Arab and Afghan peoples have their roots
Ln early history when you penetrated into the East,
shouldering the task of spreading and propagating the
ideals of Islam with faith, bravery and sacrifice.
Your people have contributed greatly to the development of the Islamic civilization and to the service
of the Koran language, and this has manüested itself
in our many outstanding geniuses in the fields of
Imamat, liter ature , philasophy and jurisprudence.
And you have enriched us with Jamal Al Deen AlAfghan, who established a new movement in the Eàst
which enlightened our minds and hearts and sharpened
our creativity and became the vanguard of our first
lslamic renaissance.
97. Our gratification at yaur Presidency is assured
alsa by our recognition of your rare qualifications
and experience. This Organization has known you as
a capable, eminent and tactful diplomat with greatly
appreciated contributions in various fields, espeeially those related to human rights and freedom of
information and to the events in Viet-Nam. You, Mr.
President, have distinguishedyourself as the champion
of justice and peace. The qualities of manliness,
straight-forwardness and courage in righteousness
and in justice of our brotherly Afghan people, are
incarnated in the person of our President. Indeed, our
Organization is fortunate to have you as President.
98. May 1 take this opportunity to weI come the return of our sister country Indonesia to the United
Nations. Indonesia has always been the advocate of
justice and has always defended our position in the
United Nations with vigour and determination.
99. We also welcome the admission of Guyana,
Botswana and Lesotho to the United Nations, which
has brought the Organization closer to the implementation of the principle of universality. We are
confident that Guyana, Botswana and Lesotho will
join the procession of countries that uphold righteousness and defend justice, thereby playing an effective
role in tbe internatIonal arena.
100. We have joined with all other countries in expressing our confidel1ce in the Secretary-General,
U Thant, and in his wisdom and ability and our desire that he should continue in office as SecretaryGeneral. Our common endeavour is based on our
firm belief in his dedication to the Ideals and principles, both in the letter and the spirit, of the Charter.
1 should like to add here that U Thant cannot fulfil
his mission unless each Member State of this 01'ganization recognizes its obligation to work towards
the achievement of the goals of the United Nations,
and i ts responsibilities for any failure that concerns this Organization. U Thant cannot serve this
Organization if the majority of the States which have
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
peace are facing that responsibility with apathy and
indifference. We nurture the hope that the stand of
U Thant will shake the conscience of the United
Nations, thu8 prompting it to play an effective role
in resolving the problems that he has referred to,
such as thoSè of Viet-Nam and the financing of the
Organization. This should go hand in hand with the
strengthening of the Executive Office and other organs
of the United Nations.

101. The subject of disarmament is an important
issue that the General Assembly has to deal with at
every session and we regret that the great Powers,
which are primarily responsible for the maintenance
of peace, have not reached a constructive agreement
in regard to this important question. We recognize
that disarmament amongst the great Powers cannot
be attained except in an atmosphere of mutual confidence. It is unreasonable for thase Powers ta continue
spending hu~e sums of money on armaments for the
maintenance of peace, while spending meagrely for
peace building. This matter is of primary importance
to the developing countries. There is no doubt that
the countries concerned bear a heavy responsibility
in assuming this course of action, which leads ta
complications that are repugnant ta the goals and
aims of the Organizatio n .

;;:9;''~:'

Il
:t~

i~l
il

;i

A~

N~

an

qu

thl
co

Cr

an

ev

so
pli

10

102. We must admit that our Organization has
achieved some of Us goals. 1 should like to underline the word "some", since the way ahead is still
a long one, and since the goals that have not been
achieved are still many.

W~

to

WI

·pr
fal
ml
ap

Mr. Kaberoka (Rwanda), Vioe-President, took the
Chair.
103. The Organizution has made significant strictes

in decolonization and has stressed the principle of
self-determination, as is evidenced by the fact that
the number of countries that had signed the Charter
at the inception of the United Nations was only 51,
and today that number has reached 121. This involves and increase of 70 new nations whose independence, sovereignty and membership in the United
Nations have been recognized. Furthermore, the
United Nations made valuable contributions in the
cessation of hostilities in Cyprus, the Congo, the
Dominican Republic, and between lndia and Pakistan.
We do not minimize the magnitude of the success
achieved by the United Nations in the development
and social fields. It suffices here to point out the
achievements in the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization and the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research. The effect of
aIl those achievements, if adequately implemented,
would raise the standard of living and would bridge
the gap between the developed and the developing
countries. It is an imperative dutY of the United
Nations to reassess the media of information in the
light of the significant modern discoveries such as
Telstar.
104. Despite all this, the Organization faces many
problems and issues that cannot he neglected, sinee
their solution is a basic necessity and constitutes
an integral part of the functions of the United Nations.
Indeed, the United Nations has been created for this
purpose.
105. Consequently, 1 cannot toueh on each item on
the agenda at this session. We reserve the right to
express our views at the appropriate time when tliey
are diseussed in the various committees. However,
at this juncture, 1 should like to outline the position
of Jordan regarding some of these items.
106. We are deeply disturbed at the escalation of
the war in Viet-Nam and the tremendous human and

ml
th]
pr
le:
pe

tic

10
ag

pe
mi

l'il

10~

thl
,~

if!
.~
i(

rj

t,
:;~

:~

1

;

,

il'1
~

f

°pl

an
lut

ti~

stl
fOI

111
by
fOl
ail
stl
an

re
ml
an
W{

co
th!
11
ca:
arl

Cc
an
T~

J
:1

Ge
to'

in
th!
,
~

~

1444th meeting - 17 October 1966
material lasses of the people of Viet-Nam and the
threat this poses to international peace. This has
prompted us to support aIl endeavours and efforts
leading ta a cease-fire, and the attempts to find a
peaceful settlement on the basis of the Geneva
Agreements of 1954. We believe that the United
Nations should play Hs part in bringing this war ta
an end on the basis of non-Interference from any
quarter. In addition ta the most valuable efforts of
the Secretary-General, it might be possible ta encourage the International Control Commission ta
create an atmosphere conducive ta negotiations
among a11 the parties concerned. It has become
evident that the problem of Viet-Nam cannat be
solved by a military viotory on one side, or a complete surrender on the other.
107. Our position regarding Kashmir is quite clear.
We have supported the need to find a peaceful solution
ta this problem on the basis of self-determination.
We wish ta pay tribute to the USSR for Hs efforts in
.promoting the Tashkent COlûerence. In view of the
fact that the implementation of the Tashkent Agreement 'il has lately been facing same diffioulties, we
appeal to the parties concerned ta resume negotiatians in the spirit of that Agreement.
108. As ta the Cyprus issue, we advocate a cordial
agreement guaranteeing peace and tranquillHy to the
people of Cyprus and safeguarding the rights of the
minority, and at the same time not ignoring the
rights of the majority.
109. Our positions in the Security Council and in aH
the sessions of the General Assembly are clear. We
oppose and condemn colonialism in aIl its forms,
and we calI for Hs final liquidation. We also absolutely condemn the poUcy of apartheid and our position in the Security Council has ùpheld the Africans 1
struggle against discrimination and their efforts
for liberation.
110. We condemned the îllegal seizure of àuthority
by the Ian Smith régime in Rhodesia and we called
for the establishment of a government representing
aIl the peoples of that country. We have opposed
strongly the domination of the majority by the minarity ,
and we have confronted the United Kingdom with its
responsibility. We hereby declare our regret that the
measures taken sa far have not been sufficient ta put
an end to the vicious minority rule in Rhodesia, and
we further declare that there .is an urgent need to
oontinue the efforts for abolishing the oppression of
the majority of the people.
111. That was also our position with regard ta the
cases of South Africa, Angola and Mozambique. We
are dismayed by the decision of the International
Court of Justice on the question of South West Africa §j
and by the manner in which the case has handled.
Therefore, we believe it is imperati ve that the
General Assembly assume aIl its responsibilities
towards that case. We also believe that the Mandate
in South West Africa must come ta an end, and that
the United Nations must take the neoessary measures
jJ Tashkent Declaration of la January 1966.

y South West Afdca, Second Phase, Judgment. I.e.J. Reports 1966,
p.6.

9

to secure that Territory's independence, lest the
catastrophe of the Mandate in Palestine he repeated.
That Mandate over Palestine was meant ta provide a
transitory period towards aohieving independence,
but instead it was applied in the most vicious and
savage manner, and systematicaIly led ta the liquidation of its Arab char acter and the disintegration of
!ts identity, and the expulsion of its population. It is
not strange, therefore, that Jordan does not distinguish between the manner in which it handles the
cases of Angola, Rhodesia and South Afdca, on one
hand, and the Palestine question on the other, sinee
aH these cases are basically colonial issues whieh
started with the emigration of a minority group and
ended by expeIling or oppressing the majority-or
bath-and depriving it of its most basic human and
political rights.
112. The cases of Rhodesia, South Africa and Palestine oonstitute a challenge ta the United Nations and
its Charter and ideals. It is saddening ta witness the
great Powers encouraging such a challenge, either
directly or by their Indifference to theil' obligations
or by their reluctance ta hait aggression. It is the
dut y of liH other countries candldly ta urge the great
Powers ta exercise their responsibilities.
113. It is only natural for Jordan to be in the forefront of the eountries which are call1ng for the
liberation of South Arabia, Aden and Oman, and ta
demand the evacuation of the British fOJ'ces and the
liquidation of British colonialism. This accords with
our policy, which opposes colonialism wherever it
exists. Furthermore, it is a tesponse to the demand
of the Arab nation.
114. The report of the Commissioner-General of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East [A/6:>13] is being
presented today ta the Special Political Committee,
where the Arab representatives will be engaged in a
full discussion of the Palestine question. It is therefore my dutY to declare the foHowing from thls international rostrum:
115. First, the tragedy of Palestine is more than a
vicious colonialist catastrophe. It is morewicked than
apartheid. It is more evil than oppression. It is more
tragic than poverty. It is the liquid'àt1on of the indigenous people of Palestine through theil' oppression
by, and the transplantation of, an invading alien
people. It is the liquidation of an identity and the
destruction of a homeland.
116. Second, Jordan will consider its independence
incomplete and its security and peace in jeopardy
sa long as the rights of the Palestinians are usurped.
The greatest responsibility for restoring their rights
rests' on Jordan, in view of the fact that the majority
of the refugees are in Jordan.
117. Third, in spite of the fact that the cas e of
Palestine is disoussed as a marginal issue, ta the
UNRWA report, we solemnly declare that the Palestine case is not a refugee question that can be resolved by the provision of food, shelter and employment. In other words, it is not a case of food and
shelter requested from others, but a case of usurped
land and usurped r-ights. Us solution can be found
only in the -re-storation of the homeland ta its rightful

10

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings

owners. First and foremost, it is a poli tic al issue,
directly and firmly linked with the soil and the homeland. The refugees will continue to be refugees until
they return to their homeland and their land is restored to them. Nothing is more wrong than to imagine
the solution to be in the nature of the provision of their
food, shelter and compensation, while in faet it lies
in the restoration of their rights and in their
repatriation.
118. Fourth, as we have stated earlier, the case of
the Palestinian refugees is not a case of the few cents
whlch UNRWA distributes to them as aIms and whieh
do not sustain them. Although such assistance cannot
compensate them for the loss of their country,
nevertheless the responsibility of the United Nationswhich was led by sorne of the great Powers at its
very inception to ratify the catastrophe-in shouldering
the burden of the refugees and their relief, is a legal,
political and humanitarian responsibilUy which must
continue until the refugees are repatriatecl. We consider the attempts to sc ale down the relief and services as foreshadowing a plan to liquidate the whole
case. We shaU resist any attempt of that kind and
shan be on guard to keep the Palestine issue alive
untU the restorat1on of the usurped homeland to the
refugees.
Fifth, the maintenance of peace i8 of primary
importance to the United Nations. However, Ilot
every peace which i8 imposed at the expense of
justice is a lasting peace. Sueh a peace carries
withill its womb the seeds of Us own destruction.
When oppression is associated with peace, that is
a bad omen for peaee. The indifference with which
the United Nations has been facing the Palestine
case, coupled with the feelings of the Palestinians
that the gates of international justice are closed
to them while opened ta the frauds of others, prompts
the Palestinians to think that the solution lies outslde
the United Nations. What can be expected of them
when they see before their own eyes their farms and
gardens and the fruit of their sail within their reach
but being exploited by usurpers, while their only
compensation is the few cents doled oLtt to them?
Their demand tha.t their rights be protected and their
dignity sustained, that they be spared the humiliation
of international charity, through the appointment of
a custodian for their property, sa that it may be
supervised and they may be compensated from the
proceeds thereof, in place of the meagre assistance
they are now receiving, has fallen on deaf ears. Sorne
of the great Powers which were responsible for their
catastrophe have been the most udamant in opposition
ta the appointment of such a custodian; they justify
their opposition by the principle of sovereignty, when
there is no sovereignty for a usurper.
120. It might be said that tMs sovereignty ls a gin of
the United Nations, or rather the gift ofthe thirty-two
nations that approved the partition of Palestine, when
the United Nations itself had no jurisdiction ta bequeath a country to aHens. A few days aga 1 heard a
representative of the authorities that usurped my
country, confiscated the land of my forefathers,
desecrated their graves and exiled my people, speaking
about high ideals and Ideologies, shedding crocodile
tears over the Charter of the United Nations and calling
for ine creation of the post of United Nations High
119.

Commissioner for Human Rights. If you were to ask
him his opinion concerning the appointment of a custodian to protect the property and rights of the Palestinian refugees and to distribute the revenue therefrom
among the rightful owners, he would be the first ta
abject-as if those people were not human beings who
had natural rights aince their creation on this earth,
and as if they did not have rights to their properly.
lt seems that the people who cry most for human
rlghts are the first to undermine them, and, similarly, the people who speak most about human ideals
are those who are the first ta destroy them. Likewise,
those who speak most about United Nations resolutians ure the first to defy them. Their opposition to
the repatriation of the refugees and the annexatlon of
areas in addition ta those given ta them unjustly by
the thirty-two nations has compounded the refugee
calamity. The adoption of a policy of racial discrimination and their treatment of the Arab minority are
Just other manifestations of the intentions of the
authorities toot occupy my country.
121. Sixth, l would like ta declare from this international rostrum that Jordan bears Hs full responsibility for the liberation of Palestine and refuses any
appeasement thut leads to its liquidation and it shares
the view of the rest of the Arab countries in putting
the question of Palestine above differences between
one Arab country and another.
122. Seventh, in spite of the fact that moat of the
refugees are concentrated within Jordan, it does not
consider itself alone ln dealing with the question but
considers that the responsibility of the Arabs in regard ta it is joint and collective. Since 0.11 Arabs are
coneerned with the Palestine question, whether they
are AlgerianB in the West or Iraqis in the East, we
should like our friends here ta know that their stand
towards this issue will deflne to us their stand
towards the rest of the Arabworld. Wehave supported
every liberation movement in tbis Organization and
defended every legitimate right and associated ourselves wlth the oppressee! untU oppression has ceased.
The same prineiples require others ta take a simila.r
stand towards our problems. a stand thnt is predicated
upon the princlples of the Charter. Some of our friends
have suggested in previous sessions that we undertake
negotiations witb the usurper authorities. We certainly
hope that during tbis session they will not drift inta
such an attitude, and we hope that they will he aware
that we absolutely refuse any appeasement or negotiations. We absolutely rejeet any substitute for our
usurped rights. Therefore we were saddened to hear
that sorne of our frlends are opposed ta the appointment of a custodian for the property of the refugees.
We interpret that opposition as support for the acts
of pillage committed by the usurpera and as willingness to perpetuate the humiliation and indignity inflicted on the refugees.
123. Eighth, l should like ta declare that the passing
of tlme, indifference and decreased material assistance will not solve the problem of Palestine. On the
contrary, they will only increase the complexity of
the case and inflame it. We shaH never forget palestine. Those who have died in exile have charged their
sons, before their death, with the duty of seeking
revenge. lt is in the interest of international peace
to accord the Palestine case its due importance,.

124. Fi

principl
implemt
for Just
internat

125. W
innocent
and rely
their ri
Us mlsl
earnestl
will it
ideal th
oreeds
the light

126. M
the oPI
JamalcE
election
We kno
the Uni
conflder
this sel
for the·
127. l

convey
dlstingu
able dir
earned
128. T

tion thE
Lesothc
of Bed
they ha
and eq~
delegat:
Indones
has res
Nations
tributio
graphie
of Its
genera]
througl:
129. J

dependi
pleasec
set. Tl
and im
ta the 1

There
partiei
130, 1

Indian
arrang
are be
if they
the Un
ranger
those
leader
franch
people

1444th meeting - 17 Gctober 1966

1)

124. Finlllly, Jordan will oon tinue to adhere ta the
prinoiples of the United Nations and ta insist on the
Implementation of its Charter. We shall always caU
for justioe and support respect for human rights and
international peace based on honourable justice.

o

125. When the day cornes when the aggrieved and

k

(l

[l

B

o

,i

Y

e

e
e

'1

s

g

n

e
'1

e

d
d
ct
~

r
:1

,
)

r
r

innocent on this earth can call upon the United Nations
and rely on it to redress their grievances and restore
their rights, when this Organizution truly believes in
Us mission ta combat injustice and endeuvours most
earnestly ta implement its goals, then-and only thenwill it bestow on manklnd and civilization a lofty
Ideal that will rise ta a level close ta those heavenly
creeds that brought the peoples out of darkness into
the light.
126. Mr. SHEARER (Jamnit'u): 1 have already had
the opportunity to express te Ml'. Pazhwak the
Jamaican delegation's sincere congratulations on his
election to the office of President of this Assembly.
We know of no one whose dedication ta the good of
the United Nations is greater than his, and we are
confident that under his guidance the activities of
this session of the ABsembly will prove to be fruitful
for the welfare ancl peace of mankind.

127. l would also request the delegation of ltaly to
convey my delegation's thanks and appreeiation to its
distinguished Foreign Minister, Ml'. Fanfani, whose
able direction of the business of the twentieth session
earned the respect and admiration of nU delegations.
128. The Jamaican delegation has noted with satisfaction the emergence to Independance of Botswana and
Lesotho, formarly the British Proteeted Territories
of Beehuanaland and Basutoland. We are pleased that
they have taken their places among us as sovereign
and equal Meroller States of the United Nations. My
delegation is aiso particularly pleased ta weleome
Indonesia, one of the great countries of Asia, which
has resumed its participation in the work of the United
Nations. We entertain high hopes of the special contribution which, by reaaon of its wealth, its geographical location, lts large population and the genius
of its vigorous people, Indoncsia can make ta the
general effort towards international co-operation
through the United Nations.

129. Jamaicn looks forward also ta the eoming independence of Barbados, and my Government Is
pleased that the date for that independence has been
set. The people of Barbados al'e lovers of freedom
and independent in outlook and have a deep dedication
ta the highest principles of parliamentary democracy.
There will he a gain ta the United Nations from the
participation of thnt nation in our future actl.vities.

130. As for the other territories of the former West
Indian Federation, my Government understands that
arrangements suited ta each territory's oircumstances
are being worked Qut which will enable aU the Islands,
if they wish', ta continue in a form of association with
the United Kingdom. Our information is that the arrangements are acceptable to the political leaders in
those territories, who, let us remember, are aU
leaders elected in the free exeroise of a popular
franchise and enjoy the full confidence of their own
people.

11

131. At the other end of the Caribbean Sea is the
territory of British Honduras, whioh is saon ta enter
the community of independent nations. Many of its
people are linked with the people of my country by
ties of kinship. My Government is concerned that
the citizens of that territory should not be denied
any of the menns of seU-determination whieh are
internationally recognized as their inalienable right
sinee resolution 1514 (XV) was adopted by the Assembly. Tt ia essential, in our view, that no arrangements should be imposed upon them which are dietated by interests other than their own; and we welcome
the firm assurance the United Kingdom has given us
that no settlement of their future will be reached
whieh is not in aceordanee with the wishes of the
people of British Honduras.
132. Our Caribbean region is an area of growing importance in the politieal, strategie and eoonomic affairs of the Western Hemisphere, and the former
British territories will have a powerful influence on
the direction which the :politieal' evolution of this
reglon eventuaUy tnkes. Our non-racial sooieties
and our bellef in the superiority of the demoeratio
way of life are elements of genuine stability in a
world in which stability is at a :premium.
133. In arder ta play the part we oan in the politieal
evolution of the region. however, we must find real
solutions te our internaI economie problems whieh,
though not very grave when eompared with those of
many other countrles, are nevertheless real. Jamaiea
weleomes the interest which the economic organs of
the United Nations have now begun ta show in the
needs of the Caribbean regian. These organs and
agencies of the United Nations must now do for our
regian what they have done suocessfully for other
parts of the world and must enlarge and intensify
those programmes which are aimed at improving
the generai level of social and eeonomic development
in the Carlbbean area.
134. Uppermost in our minds at present is the
urgent problem which has been presented ta the
Security Cauncil and ta us by the Seoretary-General' s
intimation that he is unwilling ta be available for a
second term of office. Soon aiter his deeision was
announced, our Prime Minister, speaking in the name
aÏ our Government. personally urged the SecretaryGeneral, in the interest of world peace and of the
future strength of the United Nations, to reeonsider
this decision. My Government continues to associate
itself with the warm expressions of oonfidence which,
formally and informaIly, have reaehed the SecretaryGeneral ln recent weeks and with the insistent though
delicate pressure being exerted upon him from aIl
sides ta consider serving for a further period.

135. At the same time, we cannat close our eyes ta

the faet that the considerations whioh have influenced
U Thant 'a deoiaion were not entirely persona!. He
has made it clenr that his view of his functions is
different from that of a section of the membership,
and that he had experieneed increasing restrIctions
on the Iegitimate prerogatives of his office. He was
careful ta stress, it is true, that we ought not to
assume that if certain conditions were met he would
be able to ohange his decision. One thing however
i8 obvious: the Secretary-General can searcely he

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings

12

expected to permit our entreaties und expressions
of confidence topersuade him to serve on, if they
are not accompanied by assurances in regard to the
future functioning of his office. There are no small
or middle-sized states whieh would wish to restrict
the Secretary-General in his diplomatic and politieal
initiatives. None of us among the sman States would
wish to place restrictions on the legitimate exercise
of the funcUons of his office. I refer ta this matter,
therefore, with the object of exhorting my colleagues,
the representatives of sman and medium-sized
Powers, to recognize the responsibility which rests
upon us to see to it that the restrictions of which he
has complained are removed.
136. If U Thant is not persuaded te continue in of-

fice, there is a very grave risk that his successor
will have to take these restrici:ions as part of the
normal conditions in which the funetions of his office
must be discharged in the future. 1 need not add that
those who would lose most by any such development
would be the sman and medium-sized Member States.
If we act concertedly, we have the means to ensure
that the Secretary-General is indeed left free to take
whatever initiatives the Charterpermits or authorizes
him to take, and that there is no interference with
his administrative or executive responsibilities. 1 am
confident that we shan be sufficiently alive ta our own
interest to give positive support to the SecretaryGeneral in his determination to maintain the independence of his office.
1~7. In the sphere of international political relations
and the maintenance of peace there are two questions
on which my Government considers It desirable at
this Ume to state or re-state its position. 1 shaH
refer later on to one of these subjects: the grave
situation in Viet-Nam. The other question, a domestlc
matter is fraught with even more fateful consequences
for the peace of the world and the future existence
of our Organization. 1 refer, of course, to the present
disagreement about the respective powers of the
Security Council and the General Assembly in the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
disagreement is still not resolved and it is important,
in my Government's opinion, for the Assembly to
recognize that the current impasse is in faet a situation of crisis. As the impasse continues without being
resolved, it is alarming to note how dramatically our
general expectations about peace-keeping have dimlnished between the seventeenth session, when the
Assembly, by its resolution 1854 (XVII), accepted
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on certain expenses of the United 'Nations,21
and the present time. The whole United Nations is
being rapidly enfeabled, and it is already being taken
for granted in some quarters that the Assembly w1ll
not dare to order another peace-keeping operation
either now or in the future.
138. We keep on saying ta each other that the impasse concerns not really li financial but EL political
disagreement. Unfortunately, this is not the whole
truth. rt is both financial and political; which means
of course that it is aU the more serious. A determined effort is immediately required on the part of
1

§; Certain expenses of the United Nations (Article 17. paragraph 2
of the Charter), Advlsory Opinion of 2D July 1962: 1.C.J. Reports 1962,
p. 151.

aH Member states to revive the strength of our
Organization and infuse new 11fe into its peacekeeping functions; and the evidence suggests that
only concerted action by the small and the middlesized States offers any hope of setting this effort
in motion.
139. Earlier in this debate, as we pondered over
the financial stringencies in which the Organization
now finds itself, my delegution listened with keen
anticipation to the addresses of the Foreign Ministers
of France and the Soviet Union. 1 confess that we
were profounctly dlsappointed to discover that they
had no announcement to make about voluntary contributions towards the budgetary deficit. Was this
the understandlng on which the consensus was reached
50 that the nineteenth session could resume normal
business? Were the vohmtary contributions to he made
only by those countries which had already paid up
their assessments in full? My Government hopes that
aU countries which have not yet eontributed may find
it possible to reconslder thelr refusaI and to help
the United Nations to dispose of this unfortunate
deficit.

140. On the question of jurisdiction and the relative
powers of the two main organs of the United Nations,
the issue which goes to the root of the impasse, 1
believe it is useful that my Government should once
more state its position. Essentlally my Government's
views are the followlng:
(g) There is no essential confUct between the powers
of the Securlty Council and the General Assembly in
regard to the maintenance of pence and security. The
powers were intended to complement each other;

@ In Article 24 of the Charter, lt ls laid down the.t

the Mernbers of the United Nations confer on the
Security Council "primary responsibility" for the
maintenance of international peace and security; and
"primary responsibllitytl ought not to be construedindeed lt cannot be construecl-as thOllgh it had the
same meaning as "exclusive responsibility";

14]
the
ls
ab<
tio

shc
fur
wh
the
cri
My

In

she
ane

Spi

co:

an;

ha
re
gi1
on
su
nt]
an
as
tb
an

Nl

re
of
un
an

14
thl

cIl
a
th

th

ta
pl'

14

(Q.) This primary responsiblllty was conferred on

in

the Council for a purpose-and that purpose was
speclficaUy set out "in order to ensure prompt and
effective action by the United Nations". The Council
i8 accordingly accountable to the general membership for the promptness and effectiveness of its
action in this field:

ct

(9.) This account should be rendered ta the general
membership through the Council' s annual report to
the Assembly, and the Assembly ought to consider
and to debate this report;
(.e.) The Council has the power under Article 45 of

the Charter to apportlon amongst allies who participate in a military enforcement action the tasks which
each should undertake and the facillties which each
should provlde; but this power shoulcl not be confu8ed
with the power of the Assembly to make financial assessments on the whole membership ln order ta defray
the expenses of an operation for the maintenance of
international peace. This taxingpower of the Assembly
is in fact exclusive.
This ls a summary of my Government's views on this
Issue.

fe

Yf

g<
to
th
ln
ti
tt

bl

cc
te

e,

te

1444th meeting - 17 October 1966
141. As tIlis general debate now draws to its close,
the Immediate question which cOlûronts the Assembly
is what should be done at this twenty-first session
about this difficult problem of peace-keeping operations. It is tempting ta conclude that, as events have
shown, the time is not ripe to pursue this matter
further; it Is tempting ta conclude that, left for a
while, things will work themselves out and to take
the attitude that the Organization has survived other
crises and will weather and survive thls crisis also.
My Government disagrees with thts line of reasoning.
In our judgement it is essential that the whole subjeet
should be kept alive and under continuing analysis
and examination. We conclude with regret that the
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations.
composed as it is is unlikely ta reach agreement on
any aspect of the problem. Sa we believethat the time
has come to widen and break down the subject and ta
revise our machinery for the conduct of our study,
giving to each of a number of smaller commlttees
one or two aspects of the problem to examine. The
subject should he broadened ta cover any aspect of
"the maintenance of international peace and security",
and separate study should he devoted to such aspects
aS the arrangements envisaged under Article 43 of
the Charter; planning for the use of such facilities
and forces as may be held at the disposaI of the United
Nations; the command of United Nations forces; the
relatianship of the Assembly to the CouncD in matters
of peace and security; and the financing of operations
undertaken' în the maintenance of international peace
and security.
1

142. My delegation will co-operate in committee with
those delegations which, like ourselves, see the
claims being advaneed by certain Member States as
a serious threat to the system of collective security
through the United Nations and to the effectiveness of
the General Assembly, and which believe it is unwise
to postpone for any period the further study of the
pl'oblem.
143. 1 have deaIt at some length with this important
internaI issue affecting international peace and S8curity. But peace cannat prevail in ft world where ft
few wealthy countries can continue to spend every
year on weapons of war almost as much as aU the
goods which the poorer countries together can manage
to produce. Nor can we expect that the purposes of
the Charter will continue to be fulf11led as Us authors
intended when the trend of developments and the prnctical reault of aU the msasures we can summon up
the courage ta adopt is only ta widen further the gap
between the eeonomicaUy advanced and the developing
countries. It is time for the highly developed countries
to take praetical measures in order ta adapt their
economic relations with the less advanced countries
to accepted changes in world opinion.
144. No one disputes that the ultimate responsibility
for aconomic and social pl'ogress in the developing
countries rests with these countries themselves, but
it is equaUy ta be recognized that low incorne levels
set rigorous lirnits ta the rate of growth which developing eountries can at their best achieve by their
own unaided efforts. The rising expectations of their
own nationals would not talerate the rigid limitations
on consumption that they would he oblige<! to impose.

13

Moreover, developing countries must give high priority
ta social investment which ls not productive in the
short l'un and which ean have llttle effect in terms of
Immediate expansion in the national incorne.
145. Low export priees for the commodities we of
the developing countries have ta seU set limits ta
our farmers' income and limits on our workers'
earnings. At low wage levels 1 agricultural employrnent
grows every day less and less attractive. The drift of
population to our urban areas is accelerated, creating
new overcrowding and new urban unemployment with
aU their attendant problems. The rate at which these
problems accumulate puts an Intolerable strain on
our meagre capital resources. While the priees of
the commodities we sell are declining, developing
countries are obliged to buy capital goods, heavy
equipment and machinery nt priees which keep on
l'ising. For example, the average priee of a certai,n
type of farm tractor we buy was 1:1,500 in 1960; lt
required sixty tons of sugar nt the free world market
priee ta pay for that machine at that time. At the
priees prevailing now-for both tractors and sugar,
however-it would require as mueh as 131 tons of
sugar to pay for a traetor of that same type. This is a
frustrating and untenable situation for developing
countries and is full of danger ta stable international
relations.
146. It is useful to remember that two important
principles underlying the body of recommendations
by the first Unlted Nations Conference on Tracte and
Development-recommendations endorsed bY aU States
Members represented in this Assembly-were, first.
that steps had to be taken to expand the expert earnings
of developing countries, and second, that the flow of
investment resources to these eountries must be
stimulated, the investment moving on terms they can
afford ta pay. The most important of these two principles was the need to expand export earnings. Although the great nations which dominate world trade
know the crucial significance of such earnings ta
developing countries. they have paid that principle
litUe more than lip service. Two years have passed
since the Conference dispersed. And what do we
find?' What positive steps can we point to as having
been taken by these advanced countries to help sustain the purchasing power of exports from developing
countries? Not a single new international commodity
agreement has in faet bean negotiated in the interval.
We have faUed up to now, for example, ta work out
Un agreement on sugar, concerningwhich theproblems
of organizing an international agreement, if not the
laast intractable. are certainly the most fully analysed
and widely understood. In short, we have managed ta
do little towards S8curing a guarantee of steady
market priees for sugar, for cocoa, for citrus products,
for bananas-to name Some commodities my country
produces-or for any of the commodities on which our
countries depend for the maintenance of their export
income. steps have yet to be taken to stabilize and
guarantee the import purchasing power of developing
countries.
147. The conditions of trade in goods other tban
primary products are even more difficult. The industriaUy advanced countries cannat claim to be
helping our development effeetively if at the sarne
time they frustrate our attempts ta expand prod1.i.e-

1:p

,ôli..lil

114
1

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings

tion in simpler industries such as textile manufacture
and food processing. by keeping their markets closed
against us and by accelerating substitution with synthetics. If they wish ta stimulate thelong-termgrowth
of the whole world economy, they must carry out
structural changes and adopt a new orientation in
their industry. They ought ta be willing to shift the
emphasis in industrial expansion to capital-intensive
industry, leaving ta us, the developing countries. the
fields where the units of capital required are smaUer.
lt is my hope that the advanced countries will recognize their moral obligation to our people and will
agree ta forego a amall part of the benefit wh"ich the
size and strength of their economies could bring
them if market forces were allowed free play.
148. They aU know that we must have a continuing

expansion in our export earnings; they know that
this expansion cannat be assured us except at sorne
smaU conscious sacrifice on their part; and it is
time that they let their own people know that these
are the realities of international trade and development in our decade. We expect them ta come to the
second Conference prepared ta make effective concessions. We expect them ta agree upon a global
trade policy involving a lowering of tariffs on a
selective basls and a removal of restrictions on
imports from our countries which will allow our
producers, so long as they are efficient. ta compete
in their markets on terms approaching equality.
149. With problems of auch gravity demandlng attention in the sphere of trade, it is distressing to
observe that the international flow of investment
funds is stagnating despite the expanding capacity
_ of developed countries to supply sllch funds. What is
more.· the terms on which investment capital is
movinginto the developing countries are becoming
most rigid and burdensome. It lB time that the capitalexporting countries were prepared to get together to
contain the rise in international interest rates. 1t
seems ta my delegation that the best prospects of
securing a general contalnment of thia rise lies in
expanding the supply of capital on a multilateral
basis and in a wll1ingness to explore new and imaginative. means of limiting the influence of internaI
market movements on the priee of international investment capital. It is our hope that serious attention
will be given to the se problems by the Economie and
Social Councll, by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization. by the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development and by the International Monetary Fund. 1 trust that the tenor of the
discussion in the appropriate Committee at this
twenty-first session of the Assembly will be such
as ta impress upon these organizations the urgent
need to find acceptable solutions.
150. This world community 1 with Member States
proud in the achievement of almost impossible feats
of scientinc endeavour. ia demonstrating a conspicuous
lack of ability to deal with these practical, day-to-day
problems of human existence. Although it professes
the knowledge that the existence of our peoples depends on the rewards for their labours, there ls a
chronic incapability to act together in maintaining
or improving their condition. r submit that the situation caUs for increaBed concerted action on the part
of countries in dealing with the problem of the eco-

nomic development of the emerging nations as their
collective responsibility. This collective responsibility does not end with the creation of new bodies,
the holding of special meetings and conferences ta
define the problems. and suggestions for measures
to cope with the problems. Mere talk wlthout action
is meaningless. As we prepare for the second United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, these
are the things we should bear in mind, and they should
condition our attitude so that the neri Conference may
be fruitful in yielding positive decision8 for immediate Implementation. It will be no great achievement
if the decisions are of a type which leads merely ta
further negotiation.
151. It is a source of personal satisfaction ta me
that the Secretary-General. in the introduction ta
his annual report fA!S301/Add.1]. could refer ta
the increasing interest being shown in the protection
and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms as one of the most encouraging developments
of recent times. My Government i8 pleased that the
proclamation of 1968 Us the International Year for
Ruman Rights is serving to encourage Member Statês
to intensify their efforts and undertakings in the field
of human rights. As for the measures and activities
whieh will be carried on in celebration of the twentieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the Assembly now has before it the report
[A/6354] from our Preparatory Committee for the
International Conference on Human Rights which has
the full support of the Commission on Human Rights
and the Economic and Social Counoil. 1 am confident
that each Member State will find in that report interestlng ideas that may influence the form which its
national celebrations will take. My Government 18
pleased that preparations are proceeding apace for
the International Conference on Human Rights in
1968, and l renew my appeal to the Members of this
Assembly to make this Conference a signal contribution to the cause of pl.'omoting respect for, and observance of, human rights. Having taken the decision
that the Conference should be called. we should allow
no trifling considerations to stand in the way of its
Buccess.
Last year in the debate on the restoration of
the lawfuI rights of the People's Republic of china,
the Jamaican delegation expressed Hs considered
views on the question of the representation of China
in the United Nations. We urge that the issue be
not resolved by a margin of numbers in the hazards
of a final vote taken after lengthy and acrlmonious
debate. Rather, we considered that li. concerted effort
should be made ta achieve an understanding about the
future of ChinaIs participation in the work of our
Organiz ation.
152.

153. In the period sinee the twentieth session of the
General Assembly, Jemaica has observed no effort ta
proceed on the course commended to the Assembly by
my delegation. There has been no effôrt by those
nations which bear the major responslbility for the
present situation, those nations from which an initiative
in the right direction would he most likely to meet with
success. Instead, the People's Republic of China is
today perhaps more isolated from the international
community than it was a year ago-isolated by its own

aeti
Chi
nati
stat
Org
gra'

154,
siar
able

tWel

how
to r
tian
gem

adhl

rave
tive,

155.
posi
shaJ
inte
this
tion:
of tJ
enla
tows

156.
my
cerr
both
of "
are
othe
occ
figh
in t
suff
pre
tion
pro
of l
ta t
fer
lm

Gen
157
stat
to t

Llth

-1444th meeting - 17 October 1966
actions, it Is true. but also by our inaction. 80 long as
China 1 s relationship with the rest of the communityof
nations remains unsettled, aIl hopes for peace and
stability in Asia are wreal, and the capacity of this
Organization to function in accord with its Charter iB
gravely impaired.
154, My delegation will be prepared during this session of the Assembly. if the circumstances are favourable, ta enlarge on the ideas we expressed nt the
twentieth session of the Assembly. Should it be clear.
however, that Members are in the mainconcernedonly
to reaffirm unyielding positions, and to vote on resolutions which faU ta take into account differences that are
genuinely hald, then my delegation will he compelled ta
adhere ta the position it adopted last year until more
favourable developments encourage it to join in initiatives that are likely to be weIl received.

15

Washington to go a few steps further and to name a
date and a place at which it proposes that the conference should begin, and to name the period within
which the withdrawal of its forces would be carried out
if the progress of the conference proved satisfactory.
158. r would appeal to the Government in Hanoi to
discard its suspicions of American intentions and, on
its side also, to agree to come to the conference table.
It was a great European statesman of a past generation
who said:
MIt is an error to suppose that the wisdom of stateBmen ean discover a magic recipe for the maintenance
of peace: whereas peace can in fact be assured only
if one or more of the interested Powers will make
concessions to each other by lowering their demands
or discarding their mutual suspicions. Il

155. 1 said earlier that rwould state my Government's
position on the war in Viet-Nam, which carries a heavy
share of the responsibility for the recent revival of
international tension, and r will now do So in closing
this address. This widening struggle i8 poisoning relations among the great Powers, damaging the prestige
of the United Nations, and frustratlng the efforts to
enlarge the membership of our Organization further
towards the goal of universality.

159. The Jamaican people have a vital interest inthe
United Nations and are concerned to see this Organization achieve and maintain the highest level of effectiveness as an instrument of international peace. My delegation takes this opportunity to renew our resolve to
co-operate with other delegations in the effort ta ensure
that this session of the Assembly will contribute to the
easing of international conflicts and ta the building of a
world in which justice and prosperity will prevai!.

156. Humanitarian considerations, If no other, impel
my delegation to express in this forum our deep concern with the sad plight of the people of Viet-Nam. of
both North and South, who have suffered the horrors
of war for over a generation, whose national assets
are being daily destroyed and for whom torture and
ether inhumanities have become events of everyday
occurrence. My Government deplores the continued
fighting in Viet-Nam, and appeals to an those engaged
in the present conflict to agree, in the interest of the
suffering people, to negotiate their differences without
pre-conditions. In the view of my Government. the solution to the problem in Viet-Nam can be sought most
profitably within the context of the Geneva Agreements
of 1954. My Government therefore appeala particularly
to the Soviet Union as Co-Chairman of the Geneva Conference to co-operate with the United Kingdom in an
Immediate initiative towards the convening of a new
Geneva conference.

160. The PRESIDENT (translatedfromFrench):Icall
upon the representative of Guatemala, who has asked
to exercise the right of reply.

157. My Government accepts as genuine the United
States Government's expressed desire to put an end
to that conflict. l would appeal to the Government fn

Litho ln U.N.

161. Ml'. CADENA (Guatemala) (translatedfromSpanish): In connexion with the reference made by the
representative of Jamaica to the Guatemala territory
of Belize, also known as British Honduras, the Government of Guatemala wishes once again to place on
record the reservation which it has consistentlymade
in respect of thls territory, The territory of Belize is
a disputed territory and consequently General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) does not apply to it, by
virtue of the exception laid down in paragraph 6 of
that resolution.
162. The policy of Guatemala in respect ofthis terri-

tory and its people was laid down by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of my country in his recent statement
to this Assembly during the general debate (1413th
meeting).

The meeting rose at 1.5 p.rn.

77001-November 1968-2,200
