United Nations

S/PV.6027

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

6027th meeting
Tuesday, 2 December 2008, 11.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jurica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Croatia)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Kafando
Ms. He Fen
Mr. Artiñano
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Dolgov
Ms. Qwabe
Mr. Williams
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African
Republic and the activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office
in that country (S/2008/733)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-62886 (E)

*0862886*

S/PV.6027

The meeting was called to order at 11.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic and
the activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in that country (S/2008/733)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Central African Republic, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. PoukréKono (Central African Republic) took a seat at
the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. François Lonseny
Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support
Office in the Central African Republic.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Fall to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Jan Grauls, Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of
Belgium.
It is so decided.

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Central African Republic and the activities of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that
country, document S/2008/733.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. François Lonseny Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the
Central African Republic, and His Excellency Mr. Jan
Grauls, Chair of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Belgium. I now give the
floor to Mr. Fall.
Mr. Fall (spoke in French): Allow me, first of all,
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council and to express my great
pleasure at being in the Chamber once again, to
introduce the latest report (S/2008/733) of the
Secretary-General the situation in the Central African
Republic. My statement will focus on major
developments since July 2008 in the political, socioeconomic, humanitarian, security and human rights
areas. I shall also provide an overview of
peacebuilding issues and the activities of the United
Nations country team during the past six months.
Following a great deal of procrastination among
the various parties, we are at last in a position today to
give the Council good news: the upcoming holding of
the inclusive political dialogue in the Central African
Republic. The road to that event has been long and
arduous; however, events accelerated significantly in
recent weeks. The work of the political dialogue will
begin on 5 December and will last for two weeks,
through 20 December. That result has been made
possible through the concerted efforts of the
international community, which helped to remove the
final obstacles and to get the parties concerned to agree
to the holding of that long-awaited forum.
Taking advantage of the general amnesty law
recently promulgated by President Bozizé, all key
players in the political life of the Central African
Republic are expected in Bangui to participate in the
political dialogue, which the people of the country

08-62886

S/PV.6027

want to be an inclusive process. In that regard,
arrangements have been made, with the assistance of
the regional force, the Mission de consolidation de la
paix en Centrafique, to provide security for all
participants. At the moment, we expect about 40
participants from abroad, including former President
Ange Félix Patassé, who has lived in exile in Lomé
since the coup d’état of 15 March 2003; Mr. JeanJacques Demafouth, former Minister for Defence and
Chairman of the Armée populaire pour la restauration
de la Démocratie, who has lived in exile since 2002; as
well as others, such as Messrs. Mekassoua,
N’Goupandé, Miskine and Massi.
I should like to pay special tribute here to the
tireless efforts of President El Hadj Omar Bongo
Ondimba, whose personal involvement has been
decisive in achieving these results. I should also like to
acknowledge the perseverance of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, who has continuously encouraged the
highest officials of the Central African Republic to take
the decisive step towards political dialogue. I should
also like in particular to note the efforts of President
Abdou Diouf, Secretary-General of the International
Organization of la Francophonie, which provided
assistance in carrying out our mandate to facilitate the
process. I would also like to welcome the multifaceted
support and guidance of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
and the Community of Sahelo-Saharan States.
Today we are on the eve of a political forum that
will consider the recommendations of the Dialogue
Preparatory Committee dealing with pivotal questions
posing the greatest challenges facing the Central
African Republic, namely, political and governance
issues, armed groups and the security situation and
socio-economic development.
As I said at the beginning of my statement, the
period under consideration was marked above all by
sustained efforts to finalize preparations for the
holding of the inclusive political dialogue. The major
impediment pertained to the issue of the general
amnesty law promulgated by the head of State of the
Central African Republic on 13 October 2008. This law
provided amnesty for all offences committed by
various individuals in the Central African Republic,
except for crimes falling within the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court. However, the Armée
populaire pour la restauration de la Démocratie and the
Union des forces vives de la nation (UFVN), which
include the great majority of the opposition parties,

08-62886

have expressed serious reservations regarding this law,
which they consider to be unrealistic, limiting and not
in keeping with what had been recommended by the
Preparatory Committee and the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. In recent months, therefore, attention was
focused on how to break the deadlock caused by the
general amnesty law.
In that regard, the Follow-up Committee to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement of 21 June has
already held three meetings in Libreville to assess
progress made in the implementation of the provisions
of the Agreement and to consider disputed points
resulting from differing interpretations of the Peace
Agreement.
During the third meeting, held in Libreville on
19 November 2008, a framework document was
adopted to promote the process of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of elements of
political-military groups. I should like to emphasize the
commitment of France, as demonstrated by its financial
contribution to the DDR process and to invite the
international community to provide financial support
for this operation.
On 26 October, the Government of the Central
African Republic announced the release of 12 prisoners
of the rebel groups ARPD, the Mouvement de
libération du peuple centrafricain (MLPC) and the
Union des forces démocratiques pour le rassemblement
(UFDR), in accordance with the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement of 21 June. The release of prisoners was a
significant gesture, demonstrating the commitment of
the Central African Republic Government to the
implementation of the Libreville Agreement.
To avoid the disputes which arose repeatedly
whenever basic texts were adopted, we offered
facilitation between the Government and the opposition
in order to ease the remaining difficulties. These
contacts made it possible to reach consensus on the
composition of the Dialogue Preparatory Committee
and to receive proposals for the names of four
individuals who could chair the political dialogue. The
final choice was the former President of Burundi,
Mr. Pierre Buyoya, who will assume the chairmanship
of the inclusive political dialogue. President Buyoya is
expected in Bangui this evening or tomorrow. At this
stage, we can say that we are beginning the final phase
before the actual holding of the inclusive political
dialogue.

3

S/PV.6027

It is significant that the uncertainty in the
political process over the past six months has had an
overall negative impact on the security situation, in
particular in the north-west provinces of the country.
Several clashes have been reported between APRD
elements and Government forces in several locations.
This has led both parties to accuse each other of
ceasefire violations. Aside from several isolated
clashes in a few zones in north-western Vakaga,
involving dissident groups of the UFDR, and the recent
ambush of dissident rebels of Miskine’s Front
démocratique du peuple centrafricain (FDPC) on
11 November, which cost the lives of about a dozen
Government
soldiers,
the
ceasefire
between
Government forces and the UFDR and FDPC has, in
general, been respected.
In the socio-economic sphere, the country is
continuing to face multifaceted challenges. Social
tension linked to salary arrears remains a source of
major concern despite recent efforts by the
Government to pay off those arrears. Trade union
leaders have issued an ultimatum that these would be
strikes at the beginning of next year if the remaining
four months of arrears are not paid by then.
In the economic sector, relative progress has been
noted in the mining sector with the withdrawal, by the
Ministry of Mines, of the permits of several companies
which appear not to have honoured their contractual
obligations. Nevertheless, a great deal still remains to
be done to clean up this sector and ensure transparency
in the exploitation of natural resources.
In the human rights field, the situation over the
past six months continues to be of concern. Several
cases of summary or extrajudicial executions have
been noted in the conflict zones. Despite the signing of
the Libreville Agreement, APRD elements in the field
continue to carry out atrocities in areas under their
control, including extrajudicial executions, pillaging,
racketeering and forced enlistment of young villagers
into self-defence groups or as informants.
Clashes between the APRD and the Forces
armées centrafricaines (FACA) have resulted in
massive displacement of people and have exacerbated
insecurity. Reports of alleged atrocities perpetuated by
highway bandits known as zaraguinas, poachers and
dissident rebel groups, as well as reported cases of
extrajudicial executions, continue to be a source of
concern.

4

We also wish to point out that the national
defence and security forces are also accused of human
rights abuses. Within the framework of its mandate, the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the
Central African Republic (BONUCA) recently issued
its first report on human rights in the Central African
Republic.
On the operational level, the country team
continues to make commendable efforts in the
humanitarian sectors, in combating HIV/AIDS and in
mobilizing resources to build up operational capacity
given the country’s colossal needs.
In the period under review, the United Nations
has continued to work closely with the authorities of
the Central African Republic to establish structures and
mechanisms within the framework of the Peacebuilding
Fund to consider the immediate needs of the Central
African Republic in priority areas. These include the
security sector reform, good governance and the rule of
law, in addition to the revitalization of communities
affected by the conflict.
With $10 million allocated by the Fund, the
National Steering Committee has approved 11 of the
26 projects submitted to it by the technical committee
established to this end. In the meantime, the
Peacebuilding Commission is continuing to work on a
strategic framework designed to serve as a basis for its
commitment to the Central African Republic. To this
end, it held its second meeting of the Central African
Republic configuration on 8 October 2008 in New York
and undertook its second visit to the Central African
Republic, from 30 October to 6 November 2008.
During that visit, it organized several meetings with
key development partners and with United Nations
agencies to discuss peacebuilding priorities and other
related issues.
A
mission
was
dispatched,
led
with
professionalism and dedication by Ambassador Grauls
of Belgium — whom I welcome, and who will be
joining us later for the opening of the dialogue. We
look forward to welcoming him to Bangui once again.
The three priorities identified by the mission are
security sector reform, good governance and the rule of
law, and the establishment of development poles. In
our view, those three pillars can foster a climate of
stability for relaunching economic activities and for
combating the extreme poverty in which people are
languishing.

08-62886

S/PV.6027

Regarding a review of the United Nations
presence in the Central African Republic, the
Secretary-General, after consultations with national
and international partners, intends to prepare and
submit to the Security Council proposals for an
integrated mission in the Central African Republic to
ensure consistent and coordinated action.
We are thus at a turning point when the Central
African Republic must shoulder its responsibilities in
facilitating the commitment of the international
community to aid it in implementing the priorities set
out by the Peacebuilding Commission. To provide the
best
possible
opportunity
for
the
proper
implementation of these transformational objectives,
peace and security are essential. The actual holding of
the political dialogue will without doubt serve as a
catalyst to ease the atmosphere, and to promote a
relaunching of economic activities and the successful
holding of the general elections planned for 2010.
Now that a genuine window of opportunity is
opening up for this country, all efforts must now be
focused on the holding of this major political forum,
which the Central African Republic desires. The
international community must also assist the peace
process by providing substantial support to the DDR
programme provided for in the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. The stability of the country is at stake here,
and it is this that will allow for the advent of peace and
sustainable development in the Central African
Republic.
The President: I thank Mr. Fall for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Jan
Grauls, Chair of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Belgium.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the accession of Croatia to the presidency of the
Council — an accession that constitutes a historic
event for your country — and to assure you of the full
support of my delegation during the month of
December.
I would now like speak in my capacity as Chair
of the Central African Republic country configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Over the past few years, the Government of the
Central African Republic has focused on restoring

08-62886

stability throughout its territory and launching a
process of national reconciliation, although the living
conditions of the Central African population remain
extremely difficult as a result of insecurity and extreme
poverty. This progress has awakened a hope in the
international community of seeing the situation in the
Central African Republic improve over the coming
years. And that hope has in turn awakened a new
confidence in the political will of Central African
actors.
It is in that context that, last May, the
Peacebuilding Commission was entrusted with the
responsibility of accompanying the Central African
Republic on the road to stabilization. Since then, our
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission has
been making rapid progress towards the definition of a
strategic framework, expected to be completed in
February 2009, which will establish the precise
parameters for the joint commitments of the Central
African
configuration
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission and the Central African Government.
The Central African Republic is the fourth
country on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and we have the opportunity to benefit
from the experience of our predecessors. However, the
situation in the Central African Republic is of a
different scale, when compared to the situations in the
other countries on the Peacebuilding Commission
agenda. Effectively, this country has just emerged from
decades of instability and conflict. The inclusive
political dialogue to be launched in Bangui this Friday,
5 December, where I will be present, a few days after
the fiftieth anniversary of the independence of the
Central African Republic, should mark a decisive step
towards agreement among all political, economic and
social actors and those of civil society. The
Peacebuilding Commission is convinced that the
Government is aware of the historic importance of this
dialogue, and the international community awaits its
outcome with interest. The success of this dialogue
should see the Central African Republic move from the
conflict phase to the post-conflict phase in its
development.
I would also like to indicate that, on two
occasions over the past few months, the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations has impressed upon the
Central African authorities that this political dialogue
must be facilitated. I am convinced that these personal
interventions on the part of the Secretary-General have

5

S/PV.6027

not been without effect. I would also like to refer to the
decisive role of President Omar Bongo Ondimba of
Gabon in the process that led to the launching of these
dialogues.
The process of peacebuilding in the Central
African Republic is only beginning. That is why the
Central African Government and our configuration
have focused our talks on a limited number of
priorities. Together we have identified three priority
areas for peacebuilding, to which Mr. Fall has already
referred.
The first is security sector reform, which
concerns in-depth reform of those institutions that are
crucial for the stability of a democratic State and which
includes
efforts
focused
on
demobilization,
disarmament and the reintegration of politico-military
groups. This process of demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration should be launched as soon as
possible after the conclusion of the inclusive political
dialogue, on the basis of a plan of action prepared by
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
One of the first priorities of the Peacebuilding
Commission will be the mobilization of additional
resource for this process.
The second priority is good governance and the
rule of law, which represent important challenges in
this country still suffering from serious human rights
violations, insufficient democratic structures, an
administrative culture in need of modernization and
public services that must do more to reach the
population beyond the capital. In close cooperation
with Central African authorities, UNDP launched two
good-governance programmes in October. The recent
human rights report by the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African
Republic (BONUCA) also provides a good platform
for cooperation with the Central African authorities.
Impunity, too often enjoyed by human rights violators,
including members of the armed forces and the police,
remains a serious problem.
The third priority is the establishment of focal
points for development with the three-fold objective of
restoring Government authority throughout the entire
territory through a decentralized structure, revitalizing
economic areas and improving access to public
services in densely populated areas. This concept was
developed by the European Commission in cooperation
with the Central African Government, which

6

incorporated it into its poverty reduction strategy
paper.
During this watershed period, the joint
perspectives of the inclusive political dialogue and
peacebuilding efforts must not, however, allow us to
forget that the presence of a peacekeeping operation
continues to be indispensable at this point. Even
though the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad is not on our
agenda today, I should like to advocate that the
European Union Force be replaced at the end of its
mandate by troops of a United Nations force in the
north-east of the Central African Republic, as the
Government has requested. Such measures are
necessary until the Central African armed forces are
themselves in a position to guarantee security in this
part of the territory. In this context, my delegation and
the Peacebuilding Commission welcome the transition
from the Multinational Force of the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community (FOMUC) to the
Mission for the consolidation of peace (MICOPAX),
the regional peacebuilding force of the Economic
Community of Central African States.
Faced with the magnitude of these challenges, it
is also fundamentally important for the international
community and the entire United Nations system to
work in an even more concerted fashion, something
that our specific configuration will exert itself to
achieve. The recent visit to Bangui of a delegation of
our configuration enabled us to gauge to what extent it
would be desirable for the United Nations in the
Central African Republic to be able to speak with one
voice and to act in a more coordinated fashion. In this
context, the Peacebuilding Commission welcomes the
intention of the Secretary-General, set out in his last
report on BONUCA, to rapidly issue recommendations
for the establishment of an integrated United Nations
office in the Central African Republic. That integration
is absolutely indispensable. In the meantime, the
Peacebuilding Commission supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to prolong BONUCA’s
mandate for one year with the objectives described in
the report.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing the hope
represented by the process now underway for the
Central African people so long as the necessary will
and vision to build a better future are present. Within
our formation, national ownership has already been
reflected in the identification of peacebuilding

08-62886

S/PV.6027

priorities. On the eve of the inclusive political dialogue
We welcome the commitment of the Central African
Government to put in place the necessary conditions
for the work of our special formation.
In order to restore stability and peace throughout
all of the territory, the process of political dialogue
must be relaunched with the inclusion of all political
actors and armed groups. It will, therefore, be
necessary, on the one hand, for the international
community to support the Government in its efforts
and, on the other, for the Government to display
genuine political determination in order to build,

through joint action, lasting peace in the Central
African Republic.
Finally I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
François Fall, and his team in BONUCA for their
commitment and their excellent collaboration with my
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I should now live to invite Council
Members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on this subject.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

08-62886

7
