THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR
rd

MEETING: 18 MARCH 1978

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2073)

.. ... ..........,.........,....

1

...............,,...,..,........ ......

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12606);
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12607). . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

S/W.2073

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2073rd MEETING
Held in New York on Saturday,
Resident: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
tiesent: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2073)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2606);
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2607)
The meeting was called to order at 7p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/12606);
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12607)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken previously by theCouncil, I invite the representatives
of Lebanon, Israel, Egypt, Jordan, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, the Syrian Arab Republic, Viet Nam and
Yemen to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote.
2. In accordance with the decision taken by the Council at
the 2071st meeting, I invite the representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tu&ni (Lebanon),
Mr, Herzog (Israel) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation

18 March 1978, at 3.30 p.m.
Organization)
took places at the Council table and
Mr, Abdel
Meguid (Egypt),
Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan),
Mr. Kikhia (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr* Al-Hussamy
(Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Cu Dinh Ba (Viet Nam) and
Mr. Al-Haddad (Yemen) took the places reserved for them
at the side of the Guncil chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Sudan in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite him to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in conformity with rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr, Medani (Sudan)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.

4. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have before
them in document S/12610 a draft resolution submitted by
the United States.
5. Mr. BARTON (Canada): My Government has already
made clear through a statement in the Canadian Parliament
that we deeply regret, as do all around this table, the events
which have caused the Council to discuss again the situation
in the Middle East. As we have deplored the recent attack
on Israeli citizens on the Haifa-Tel Aviv road, we must
today equally deplore the large-scale military operations
now being conducted on Lebanese territory. Such renewed
violence can but exacerbate passions and must be regarded
as a serious obstacle to the peace and stability in the region
for which we have been striving for so long.
6. We believe that the Council should take effective
measures to help to achieve two main objectives: first, to
put an end to present hostilities and the resulting loss of
life, human misery and material destruction; secondly, to
create conditions in which the vitally important peace
initiative which recently raised our hopes for a definitive
negotiated solution of the Middle East problem can be
resumed.
7. To achieve effective peace on the ground, the fighting
must come to an immediate halt and Israeli forces must
withdraw from Lebanese territory. But a call for withdrawal will not suffice if it is not accompanied by practical
measures to prevent renewed violence in the border area.
Means must be found to enable the Lebanese Government
to exercise as soon as possible its full authority and control

over its own territory. It would appear to us that a United
Nations peace-keeping force, appropriately constituted and
with a suitable mandate, offers the greatest Promise of
achieving this res&. Such a force would help to stabi1ize
the situation and create conditions which would restore the
territorial integrity of Lebanon and help to establish an
atmosphere conducive to further negotiations.
8. The Secretary of State for External Affairs has already
stated that Canada is concerned and willing to act. He has
said that the Canadian Government will be prepared to
consider contributing to a peace-keeping force provided we
are satisfied that such a force would be able to carry out its
mandate and contribute to a restoration of stability in an
extremely troubled and perilous situation. We would, of
course, have to consider what role Canada would be
expected to play in such a force so as to ensure that this
was within our capability.
9. Our long-term objective must be an all-embracing
negotiated peace settlement for the entire region. The
recent explosion of violence cannot but be regarded as a
grave setback to the peace process. The tragedies of the past
week and in particular the human suffering that has ensued,
deplorable as they are, must not be allowed to stand in the
way of renewed efforts towards peace.
IO. We stand ready, together with our colleagues on the
Council, to respond to the appeal of the Lebanese
representative to act promptly.
11. Mr. YOUNG (United States of America): The Security
Council meets today against a background of tragedy but
with an opportunity to play a constructive role in restoring
security and stability in violence-torn Southern Lebanon.
12. The aim of the Council must now be to end as quickly
as possible this new cycle of violence, and to deal with
some of the immediate underlying causes. The only real
solution lies in a comprehensive settlement of all Middle
East issues. At the moment, however, our efforts must be
focused on removing the sources of friction and instability
in Southern Lebanon.
13. The United States approaches this debate, and the
action which we hope will stem from it, with three
fundamental principles in mind. First, we expect Israel to
withdraw from Southern Lebanon, and we have made our
views in this respect known to the Israeli Government.
Secondly, the territorial integrity of Lebanon must be fully
respected, Thirdly, the United Nations has a vital role to
play in assisting the Government of Lebanon to restore in
Southern Lebanon conditions that will facilitate the reestablishment of its authority and provide a return to
security and a peaceful life for the people of the south.
1% Our consultations in the past two days lead us to
believe that most Council members share our perception of
the imPOrtanCeof these principles. Our view is that a
United Nations peace-keeping operation is needed that
would have two primary functions. First, the United
Nations would have responsibility to establish and provide
security in the southern border region of Lebanon and,
secondly, it would assist the Government of Lebanon in

promptly re-establishing its authority in that area and, once
this was established, relinquish its responsibilities te
Lebanon.
15. We believe all members of the Council wish to prevent
further escalation of violence and thereby facilitate a return
to peace negotiations. We are confident that the Council
will agree that a temporary United Nations presence ia
Southern Lebanon, remaining only until the Government of
Lebanon can exercise full authority, will help to fulfil be
first purpose of the Charter, the maintenance of inter.
national peace and security.
lo, In order to give concrete expression to the principles
that I have just outlined, the United States Government is
introducing a draft resolution [S/12610] for consideration
by the Council. That draft resolution, in operative para.
graph l, calls for strict respect for the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon. I would
say that the statements made in this chamber leave no
doubt that the preservation of Lebanese territorial integrity
is the Council’s primary goal in this debate. That goalis
made explicit in operative paragraph 3, which describes the
purpose of a United Nations peace-keeping force as
“confirming the withdrawal of Israeli forces, restoring
international peace and security and assisting the Government of Lebanon in ensuring the return of its effective
authority in the area”.
17. Operative paragraph 2 calls on Israel immediately to
cease its military action against Lebanese territorial integrity and withdraw its forces from Lebanese territory.
Immediate Israeli withdrawal is, in my Government’s view,
one of the key conditions of restoring full political
independence and territorial integrity to Lebanon. In
operative paragraph 3 the Council would decide to establish
immediately a United Nations force for Southern Lebanon.
The mandate of such a force, in my Government’s view,
should be of temporary duration. It should restore peace
and security to the area and transfer effective authority to
the Lebanese Government. When that is done, the objeo
tives established by this draft resolution will have been fully
achieved and, we fully expect, the cause of peace and
justice in the Middle East substantially advanced.
18. We have consulted widely on this draft resolution and
have tried to meet most of the concerns expressed. ‘The
representative of the Soviet Union suggested the inclusion
of a reference to the time frame for the United Nations
interim force referred to in operative paragraph 3. It is our
view and expectation that, in keeping with past practice
any time frame the Council may decide upon will be
included in the Council’s action on the report of the
Secretary-General referred to in operative paragraph 4.
19. Mr. von HASSELL (Federal Republic of Germany): 1t
is with utmost concern and deep compassion that the
Government of the Federal Republic of Germany has
witnessed the eruption of a new chain of violence in the
Middle Fast. The Federal Government regards as Particularly deplorable the heavy toll these tragic events have
taken among the civilian population. Moreover, these events
gravely imperil all efforts aimed at achieving a Peaceful

setffement of the Middle East conflict, This is particularly
true for the most recent efforts in this direction, including
the courageous initiative of the Egyptian President.

present predicament of his country and people, It is now
four days since the Israeli attack on Lebanon took place..
My Minister for External Affairs, speaking at New Delhi on
16 March, had the following to say:

20. My Government would like to emphasize in this
connexion that the present conflict must not obscure the
fact that only a comprehensive and just settlement of the
Middle East crisis as a whole will be able to achieve a
durable peace in this area.

“The Government of India strongly deplore Israeli
transgression of Lebanese sovereign territory, The massive
action by Israel cannot be justified on the plea that it is
meant to safeguard Israeli security. Until such time as all
occupied Arab territory is vacated by Israel, in accordance with United Nations resolutions, and the Palestinians
are granted their legitimate rights, the danger to peace
and stability in the region will remain. The international
community has been impatient to see the process of
peaceful negotiations on the Arab-Israel conflict getting
under way. Meanwhile, punitive reaction on such a scale
cannot but be serious and is likely to be strongly and
widely condemned. It not only leads to loss of innocent
lives but also hardens and embitters feelings, increases the
danger of wider conflagration and jeopardizes efforts
towards a negotiated settlement,.”

21. As to the urgent problem at present before us, the
Security Council should try, in the view of my Government, to outline a solution on the basis of the following:
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of all States in the area, as spelled out in
Security Council resolution 242 (1967). For the crisis at
present afflicting Lebanon, this means, in particular, respect
for the sovereignty, integrity and political independence of
Lebanon and, consequently, the immediate cessation of
military action by Israel on the territory of Lebanon, the
political independence of Lebanon and Israel’s immediate
withdrawal from the territory of Lebanon. In this context,
we favour a stronger role for the United Nations in
restoring peace and security and in preventing further
violence in the afflicted area, For this purpose, an interim
peace-keeping force should be set up immediately.

27. In considering the Lebanese request, the Security
Council has to bear in mind the two points referred to by
my Minister for External Affairs, which are fundamental
for peace in the Middle East: first, that occupied Arab
territory should be vacated by Israel and, secondly, that the
Palestinians should have their legitimate rights restored to
them. It is with reference to these two objectives that the
process of negotiations should commence for a comprehensive peace settlement. Attempts to ignore or sidetrack these two basic objectives will result in a recurrence
of the tragic cycle of violence and reaction which we have
seen so often in the past.

22. As for the composition of such a force, it should
preferably consist of troops from countries which are not
permanent members of the Security Council. We consider it
essential that this force should be set up immediately in the
territory from which Israel is asked to withdraw. We are
also of the opinion that the interim peace-keeping force
should transfer its security functions as soon as possible to
the authorities of the Republic of Lebanon.
23. These elements having been spelled out, it follows that
my Government firmly supports the draft resolution
presented by the United States [S/12610]. Its text fully
satisfies the basic principles which we deem necessary for a
speedy solution and which we should decide upon without
further delay.

28. My delegation has always been of the view that the
fruits of aggression shall be denied to the aggressor and
that, in principle, the aggressor should withdraw from
occupied territories unconditionally and, preferably, unilaterally. Preconditions demanded for withdrawal are often
excuses for delaying withdrawal or for continued occupation.

24. Mr. JAIPAL (India): The Council is meeting at the
request of two Member States-Lebanon and Israel. We
have heard both of them.

29. We should not like to see the United Nations drifting
into the unfortunate position where in every case of
aggression there has to be introduced a United Nations
force in order to make the aggressor withdraw from the
territory occupied by him. We realize, of course, that there
may be exceptional situations where a United Nations force
with a special mandate may have to be introduced for a
very limited period of time. In all such cases, it is essential
and, indeed, consistent with the sovereignty of a Member
State that a United Nations force should not be introduced
into its territory except at its request or with its prior
approval. This is an indispensable condition. The United
Nations should not add to the problems caused by
aggression against a Member State by seeming to take
advantage of any abnormal situation prevailing in its
territory. It is equally important that the United Nations
force should not become involved in functions and duties
related to the maintenance of internal law and order, for
that could have serious repercussions on the impartiality of
the United Nations force.

25. I must confess that I was deeply impressed by the
poignancy of the request made by the representative of
Lebanon. His country, which has always been a peaceloving country with an ancient culture whose contributions
to civilization and the ways of peace have been substantial
and significant, is once again the target of aggression, owing
to circumstances not of its creation. The representative of
Lebanon has requested the Council to uphold the Charter
and prevent Israel from taking the law into its own hands.
He has demanded quite simply that Lebanese sovereignty
should be restored to Lebanon over all its territory and that
Israel should withdraw from Lebanese territory. We strong
ly support this request of Lebanon, and we trust that it will
be endorsed unanimously by the Council as the first order
of its business.
26. I take this opportunity to convey to the representative
Of Lebanon my delegation’s profound sympathy in the
3

30. I am mentioning these general points only because my
country has had some experience of involvement in United
Nations operations in the Middle East, the Congo and
Cyprus.

to draw attention to the fact that, as is made abundantly
clear
by the reports of the Chief of Staff of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization, in the past three
months alone, from December 1977 through February
1978, there have been 44 instances of Israeli troops
penetrating the territory of Lebanon and 39 instances of
Israeli violations of the air space and territorial watersof
Lebanon. These figures bear eloquent testimony to the
continuing violations by Israel of Lebanon’s sovereignty.

31. I should like now to turn my attentioh to the
statement made by the representative of Israel [2071st
meeting]. It would seem that the purpose of Israel in asking
for a meeting of the Council was mainly to criticize the
United Nations. To begin with, the representative of Israel
said that he was “sincerely convinced that this is an
unnecessary debate”. He added that Israel and Lebanon
should be left alone without United Nations interference to
solve the problem. He went on to say that the Council had
“forfeited its right to pass judgement”,
that it had
betrayed “its own principles and purpose”. He said more
about the “craven submission” and the “cynical hypocrisy”
of the United Nations.

36. At previous meetings the Council has heard statements
by the representatives of a number of Arab States, and also
a statement on behalf of the Palestine Liberation Organization. These statements have convincingly demonstrated the
barbarous nature of the premeditated attacks by the Israeli
military on peaceful settlements, on Lebanese and Pafestinian women and children. The delegation of the Soviet
Union fully supports the demands made in those statements
that severe condemnation should be meted out for the
criminal actions of Israel’s armed forces, that an immediate
stop should be put to Israeli aggression and that Israeli
troops should be withdrawn immediately from the territory
of Lebanon.

32. I do not know what purpose the representative of
Israel seeks to achieve by this unrestrained insult to the
United Nations, of which Israel is a Member. If this is
Israel’s official attitude towards the United Nations, it
makes us wonder what respect any United Nations force
can expect from Israel. On the one hand, he says that Israel
wishes to receive adequate guarantees that the status quo
ante will not be restored. Adequate guarantees from
whom? Surely not from the United Nations, in which
apparently Israel has no confidence. On the other hand, he
has also said that Israel has “created conditions in which
the Government of Lebanon can restore control over [its]
territory and . . . re-establish its sovereign right”, to quote
his own words [ibid., para. 591. That is truly an extraordinary statement. I hope it will be taken into account by
those contemplating the introduction of a United Nations
force.

37. The present act of open aggression has been dictated
by Israel’s desire to fulfil its age-old design: to occupy
Southern Lebanon and destroy utterly the Palestine resistance movement, which is a staunch champion of the
legitimate national rights of the Arab people of Palestine.
This is borne out by the resolution adopted by the Israeli
Parliament just before Lebanon was invaded, calling for a
merciless struggle against the Palestine Liberation Organization and the annihilation of its leaders. We can with every
justification regard these as carefully premeditated and
thought out acts on the part of Israel, aimed at the total
destruction of the Palestine resistance movement, and thus
as an attempt to undermine the struggle for the implementation of the legitimate aspirations of the Arab people
of Palestine. It is becoming more and more obvious that
Israel has elevated terror and the spreading of fear to the
level of State policy.

33. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The Security
Council has met once again to discuss the direct aggression
of Israel against Lebanon, a sovereign State Member of the
United Nations,

38. Israel’s attacks on its neighbours under the pretext of
strengthening its own security, its expansion under the
pretext of seeking living space, the deprivation of a whole
people or of whole peoples of their elementary rights, the
practice of terror in occupied territories: all this is very
familiar to those peoples of Europe that struggled against
Hitler’s fascism.

34. The extensive intervention of Israeli troops in the
territory of Lebanon, the barbaric bombardment of
Lebanese cities and other inhabited points-as a result of
which there have been numerous victims among the
peaceful population-have
caused the greatest possible
concern and evoked the greatest possible condemnation.

39. The representative of Israel spoke here in a remarkably
casual way, insulting not only individual members of the
Security Council and individual Members of the United
Nations, but also the Security Council and the United
Nations as a whole. We share the views already expressed
here that a decisive end must be put to these kinds of
statements in the Council.

35. This new attack by Israel on Lebanon is yet another
link in the whole chain of Israeli acts of aggression against
the Arab States. It is not out of place to recall that since
1968 the Security Council has had occasion to consider the
question of Israel’s aggressive crimes against Lebanon 13
times, The Council in its resolutions has frequently condemned Israel’s attacks on Lebanon and has demanded that
an immediate end should be put to them. However, Israel,
in gross violation of the relevant decisions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly, and at the same time
flouting the elementary rules of international law, has
pursued and indeed even stepped up its policy of aggression
and expansion and continues its constant violations of the
sovereignty of neighbouring Arab countries. We cannot fail

40. The aggressive actions of Israel against Lebanon give
the lie to the public pronouncements made by Israeli
leaders to the effect that they are desirous of a peaceful
settlement of the Middle East problems. This aggression is
one more convincing piece of evidence of the expansionist
essence of Israel’s policies, which are aimed at redrawing
4

45. The Security Council must take a very serious approach to the present events in Lebanon, since this is by no
means merely a local conflict but rather a blow against the
Arab movement of national liberation, a blow planned in
advance, a blow against even the possibility of achieving a
just settlement in the Middle East.

the map of the Middle East by means of annexing to Israel
lands which have belonged to the Arabs from time
‘immemorial.
41. The talks and manoeuvres regarding separate negotiations between the Egyptians a@ the Israelis have been and
remain a screen for the continuation of aggressiveactions
against the Arab countries neighbours of Israel. These
separate negotiations have not led, nor can they in fact
lead, to any easing of tension in the Middle East.
Furthermore, they have actually increased the danger of a
new military flare-up.

46. The Council should also take into account the views
expressed by almost 90 States Members of the United
Nations to be found in the statement of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries of 17 March [see
S/12609]. Those countries unanimously condemned Israel’s
blatant acts of aggression against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon. We cannot fail to agree
with the opinion expressed by the non-aligned countries
that the Israeli invasion has seriously complicated the task
of reacting a comprehensive settlement in the Middle East,
which should be based on recognition of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to
self-determination and creation of their own independent
and sovereign State in Palestine, the withdrawal of Israeli
troops from all Arab territories occupied in 1967 and strict
observance of the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations.

42. Moreover, there can be no doubt but that responsibility for Israel’s aggression is borne also by those who
condone Israel’s policies and who through their inaction are
virtually encouraging Israel to undertake new adventures.
43. Developments in the Middle East show that there can
be no peace in that part of the world until the removal of
all the causes of the Middle East conflict, and first and
foremost Israel’s occupation of the Arab territories and its
deprivation of the Palestinian Arab people of their inalienable rights. As the Soviet Union has frequently said, by way
of warning, failure to settle the Middle East question will
create a situation fraught with serious consequences for
international peace and security.

47. Nothing can justify the criminal aggressive actions of
the Israeli military against the sovereign Arab State of
Lebanon and the Arab people of Palestine, who are thus
victims of Israel’s expansionism.

44. The Soviet Union has been and remains a consistent
champion of a comprehensive settlement in that part of the
world, a settlement involving all the parties concerned,
Including, of course, the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Such a settlement should provide for the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from all Arab territories occupied in 1967 and
for the exercise by the Palestinian Arabs of their inalienable
rights, including their dght to self-determination and the
right to create their own State. It should guarantee the right
to independent existence, and the security of all States
directly involved in the conflict and an end to the state of
war existing between the Arab countries involved and
Israel. As was emphasized by the General Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, the President of the Presidium of the Supreme
Soviet of the USSR, Mr. Brezhnev, “only if those fundamental provisions are implemented will there be Pgenuinely
durable peace in the Middle East rather than simply a
fragile truce”,

48. The Soviet Union believes that the Security Council
should severely condemn the new aggressive actions of
Israel against Lebanon and take effective steps in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations to put an end
to Israel’s aggression against Lebanon and the Arab people
of Palestine and immediately demand the withdrawal of
Israeli troops from Lebanon’s territory.
49. The Soviet Union severely condemns Israel’s armed
invasion of Lebanon and declares that full responsibility for
the dangerous consequences of this new abrupt deterioration in the situation in the Middle East is borne by the
Government of Israel. We can only remind those who sow
the wind that they run the risk of reaping the whirlwind.
T&e meeting rose at 7.35 p.m.

5

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite4
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
ddpositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Genkve.
KAK

IIO~8UHTL

COMO

Lltho

in United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

II3AAHXfR

OPrAHZi

PUBLICACIONES

SAl.@fH

DE LAS

Ol3%EASIHEHHhIX

NACIONES

HAyHlln

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

New York

in other

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

78-70005-February

1980-2,200
