GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

Thursday, 28 September

FIFTH SESSION

Flushing Mead

Official Records

CONTENTS

P

General debate (concluded)
Speeches by Mr. Aklilou (Ethiopia) and the Secretary-General
Admission of the-Republic of Indonesia to membership of the United Nations.
President: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEZAM (Iran).
General debate (concluded)

[Agenda item 9]
SPEECHES BY MR. AKLILOU (ETHIOPIA) AND THE
SECRETARy-GENERAL
1. Mr. AKLILOU (Ethiopia) (translated from
French) : A year ago, when the fourth session of the
General Assembly met, there was an atmosphere of
optimism and determination to accomplish the work
before us. The President of that session, General
R6mulo, expressed the hope that the fourth Assembly
might become known as the "Peace Assembly".l Now,
twelve months later, that spirit of optimism has given
way to a spirit of acute concern, if not fear, at the
dangers which threaten the peace of the world. It was
this which lead the United States Secretary of State
to say the other day [279th meeting] that a feeling of
anxiety pervaded our hopes and our work. "\iVhy is it",
he asked, "that we have been unable to achieve peace
and security through the United Nations in these five
years ?"
2. We are filled with anxiety, then, concerning the
surprises which the future may hold in store; fears
that the United Nations may be called upon to face
events even more serious than those of the present time,
and that such problems may greatly e.xceed its powers
and capacity. As the Foreign Secretary of the United
Kingdom so aptly remarked the other day, the United
Nations has no assurance that, now that the spectre of
war has loomed up, it may not manifest itself elsewhere.
Indeed, the danger exists everywhere, in Europe, in
Africa, in the Pacific islands and in other parts of the
globe.
3. Is there any reason to be surprised at this? Some
speakers have tried, with varying degrees of clarity, to
.1 See Official Records of the

General Assembly, Fourth Ses-

SIon, Plenary Meetings, 220th meeting.

173

determine the responsibility for th
For my part I shall confine myself to
tion of other members to the rather m
of these problems. We are told th
participants in a cold war, at leas
This expression, "cold war", was in
a few months after the end of the S
This means that the problems raise
war have not yet been solved, and
the conditions which caused it no lon
us, they 'were replaced in the course
and even more serious problems.
4. Thus, wittingly or unwittingl
directly from the Second World W
without enjoying a period of peace.
5. When we recall that the era
wars, which lasted for twenty-three
end with the treaties of Paris and
within -the short period of two y
Treaty of Versailles followed the
after an inter'Jal of a few months, we
to wonder at the existing situation
years have passed since the Second
principal enemy States have not
treaties, and we are, in fact, in a
war.
6. We should recall that he yea
'World War began the period of th
and the Locarno Treaties; Germany
of Nations, although the League
weal<er organization than the Unite
five years after the Second World W
no peace treaties been concluded w
Japan, but we are faced with the m
to world peace.
7. Can it be wondered, then, that t
which was set up to serve the caus

structure of peace tl'eaties. Is the United Nations not)
so to speak, in the position of a train unable to move
or go forward for want of a track?
8. In these circumstances, is it surprising that the
United Nations should now be confronted with the
difficult auestion of Korea, and that the question of
Formosa "'should be included in our agenda, when the
disposal of those two territories should have been
settled by peaoee treaties which C\till do Mt exist five
years after the an'11istice? No wonder, then, that the
Members of the United Nations are in constant fear
that a new crisis may break out in Europe, Asia, or
Africa, over territories and peoples whose fate is still
to be determined.
9,. Most of the problems with which the Generlli
Assembly is now confronted have arisen out of the fact
that no peace treaties have been concluded; that applies
particularly to the question of the former Italian colonies
in Africa. Apart from Italy's renunciation of them, disposal of these former colonies is not in any way provided
for ;n the Treaty of Peace concluded with Italy in 1946.
As we all know, the disposal of these colonies was to be
determined by the four great Powers o!. {n the event of
their failure to agree, by the General Assembly.
10. With the exception of certain frontier adjustments
claimed by Egypt, our very great friend in Africa,
Ethiopia, is the only Member of the United Nations
which has territorial claims to be settled. under this
peace treaty. Certcdn problems resulting from the war
which were not solved by the Peace Conference .thus
have to be settled. Owing to the failure to achieve the
settlement of these problems, and in spite of the peace
treaty of 1946, which incidentally did not cover all the
issues, it has been impossible hitherto to re-establish
relapons of friendship and trust between former
enemies; and the accumulation of bitterness caused by
sevellty-fi.ve years (If injustice has still not been removed
and 1:", resulted in the recent disturbances in the southern regions of Ethiopia.
11. It? this case, therefore, the United Nations is l10t
called upon to carry out one of its routine functions,
npme!y, to see to it that the provisions for the peaceful
settlement of international disputes are observed, but
ratbe:.: to fulfil a function and a responsi.bility of a more
fundamental kind, namely. to lay the very foundations of
peaceful rela.tions. The:-ein lie the function and responsibility of the General Assembly, to which the twenty-one
countries which took part ~n the Paris Peace Conference
refe-red the question for settlement. It was a novel and
unprecedented step to make the General Assembly itself
i"esponsible for settling the. conse9uences of.a war and
of half a century of aggresslOn, mIsery and bItterness.
12.. Why, then, v-.·a~ it decided, under the terms of
article 23 of the Peace Treaty with Italy, to call upon
the General Assembly to settle this question? There are
only two possible reasons for the decision to appeal to
the Assembly in the event of the failure of negotiations
betwet' .le four rrreat Powers responsible for settling
the question.
13. The first of these reasons was certainly that if the
gn~at Powers failed to agree, the matter shouid be placed
before the ~mdler States, which, having 110. interests at

14. The other reason for referring the qu
General Assembly) and at the same time, fo
that organ in preference to the Security Cou
desire to prevent any failure to reach a so
the existence of the veto in the Security C
15. Such, at all events, are the only reaso
justify referring the matter to the fifty-nine
brs of the Assembly, whose disinterestedn
of equity are the only guarantees that a
will be reached in this matter.
16. But it is cl~ar, in our opinion, that the
for referring the issue of the colonies to
Assembly have already lost their validity.
tion was to avoid political bargaining, there
in referring the matter to the Assembly,
simple reason that none of the great Powe
the other States which took part in the
Conference are seeking to engage in politica
As far as they are concerned, there is no o
way of a solution. On the contrary, they o
settlement in favour of Ethiopia.
17. In this connexion, I would recall that
Conference, Brazil, a country friendly to E
among the nations directly concerned and
the treaty. Do India and the Union of S
which are not agreed on certain of the que
the General Assembly but which played a
important part in the liberation of the fo
colonies, disagree concerning the general
settlement of the Eritrean question? Can i
Norway, which tookpart in the Paris Confe
siring to preserve complete objectivity, did n
ticipate in the discussion of the question th
the countries opposed to finding a just sol
territory? Moreover, Egypt.. the Europe
indeed all the States represented· at the P
ence including the three great Powers
concerned with the problem, are agreed up
18. Yet in statements made at the Gene
on the evening of 17 May 1949, 2 open r
:nade to political bargaining. The ju
Ethiopian claims were frankly recognized
whelming majority, but at the same time
that, for reasons of political expediency, th
be satisfied.
19. When we are told that the decision
questions to the General Assembly was
the members of the Assembly would have a
of justice, we wonder what the people o
think of such justice? And what do t
Eritrea, whose deepest aspirations have
satisfied, think of it?
20. A1Lhough it was not the right mom
the substance of the question, the repr
Guatemala spoke fervently the other
:meeting] from this rostrum in praise
recommended by two of the five memb
minol";ty, of tbr ·.Tnited Nations Com
Eritrea. The ~olm ion he advocated is co
2

Ibid.,

meeting.

Third;?ssi(ji~,

P'Jrt II, Plenar,'Y M

Ethiopia, and contrary to the interests of Ethiopia,
whose interests the representative of Guatemala took
upon himself to intcI:pret. Is that justice?
21. So we have fled from a non-existent danger, only
to meet it precisely where we might have expected to
be able to avoid it, that is, in a forum where the
question ought to be discussed with complete objectivity.
It must, then, be concluded that the declared reason the desire to avoid political bargaining - is no justification for referring this matter of territorial settlement to
the General A~sembly.
22. Moreover, the second reason, the reason why the
matter was referred to the General Assembly rather
than to the Security Council-the desire to avoid a veto
by a single Power-has likewise proved illusory. If
the General Assembly has not escaped the danger of
becoming a centre of political bargaining which, four
times within three years, has prevented any solution of
the problem, the responsibility for this is now clearly
established.
23. If a single State, wh~ther or not it is a Member
of the United Nations, can in practice defer or prevent
the solution of a problem, are we not in the same position as we were in the Security Council, where the
right of veto exists, and are we not faced with the very
danger which we wished to avoid?
24. Consequently the arguments which were invoked
to justify reference of the question to the General
Assembly have, by reason of the actual course of events,
unfortunately been proved to be without foundation.
25. Much has been said in praise of the idea of
regionalism and of the need to leave the responsibility
for settling their own affairs to the States of the same
continent or the same region. There is no doubt that,
far from constituting an obstacle to a decision, the States
of the African continent are actively seeking to satisfy
the desires of the peoples and the just claims of
Ethiopia. Ask them, ask Egypt, ask the Union of South
Africa, ask Liberia. Neither the African States nor the
twenty-one States that shed their blood and expended
their resources for the liberation of the territories concerned and then drew up the peace treaty are impeding
this decision.
26. It is therefore doubtful whether in the case of the
other peace trer.ties which have still to be drafted the
settlement of certain questions should be referred to
the General Assembly, as was the case for the treaty of
1946. It may well be asked once again whether it was
right to refer the matte. to the General Assembly, which,
with its Interim Committee, has alreadv failed four
times to meet its responsibilities because of purely
political considerations.
27. Meanwhile, threats to the peace continue to develop ~n Africa, while territorial claims are directly and
openly made against my country in the very region
where the war broke out in 1935. In the circumstances,
I feel that I am entitled to ask the members of this
:,\ss~bly how much longer we must wait to obtaio
Justice from the General Assembly,
28. Ought we still to be patient? Patient, after ten
years of waiting, after Iour postponements of the prob-

that we must display a spirit of moderation and conciliation? Mv country, faced with a threat to its national
security, is fhe only country which at the present time
gives evidence of a spirit of conciliation. Everyone
knows that we have carried this spirit of conciliation
to the limit.
29. That is why I ask you how much longer we must
wait to obtain justice from the General Assembly. Is
that body determined to find just solutions for the
problems which it has the duty to solve, and that without
hesitation and in all sincerity? Last year, when the
fourth session of the General Assembly began its work,
I found it necessary to call attention S to the fact that
the same questions which had appeared on the agenda of
the third session of the Assembly had remained unchanged on the fourth session's agenda. Today we
observe exactly the same phenomenon: the same problems again come unsolved before the General Assembly.
Moreover, the Interim Committee, despite the advantage
of working under the direction of an eminent Chairman,
has made no progress whatever with its programme of
work for this year.
30. These are the reflections which the work of the
General Assembly during the past three years arouse
in us. It is high time to face problems squarely and to
tackle the questions which have been held over from
the tint four sessIons of the General Assembly. As was
very ""ell stated the other day [279th meeting] by the
United States Secretary of State:
"This session of the General Assembly is a session
of decision. Before us lies opportunity for action
which can save the hope of peace, of security, of
well-being and of justice for generations to come.
Before us also lies oppr7'tunity for drift, for irresolution, for effort feebly made. In this direction is
disaster ... If [the United Nations] does not move
forward it will move back."
31. If there should be further failures on the part of
the General Assembly, we should be justified in asking
whether there was not profound truth in the shrewd
words of the great British stateman who, a century ago,
with reference to the Concert of Europe - the United
Nations of that period, if I may say so - said the
following: "Each nation for itself and God for us all".
32. The time has come to face the problems on the
agenda squarel.}': and, for the first time in the history
of the United Nations, to find a solution for each and
all of them.
33. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon the Secretary-General, the last speaker in the
general debate.
34. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: We are all, I
am sure, ready and eager, after seven days of general
debate, to begin work here· and in the committees upon
the seventy items of our agenda. What I have to say
today wi!1 therefore be very, very brief.
35. First, allow me to express my gratitude for the
references made during the debate to the Secretariat.
S See

Official Records of the General Assembly. FourthSes-

SiOl~, Plenary Mcetings, 227th meeting.

36. At a moment when the world is more sharply and
dangerously divided than at any time since the United
Nations was founded. I have been greatly impressed by
the strong support for the principles of the Charter and
the faith in the United Nations approach to the problem
of peace that have been expressed by so many speakers
in the general debate.
37. It must be admitted. of course, that the basic
differences between the two sides in the world conflict
have not been diminished by a few days of general
debate.
38. At the same time I do not recall at any previous
session such a demonstration as we have had here in
the opening days of purpose on the part of governments
, to make the United Nations work effectively for peace.
Many concrete proposals to this end have been made.
They will receive. I am sure. the consideration they
merit from the committees that examine them.
39. My 0"'11 views as Secretary-General on the great
issues before this session of the General Assembly have
been placed on record in· several reports and statements
during the past few months.
40. I refer to my fifth annual report 4 to the Members on the work of the Organization and my memorandum of points for consideration in the development
of a twenty-year programme for achieving peace
through the United Nations [A/1304] j to my statement
to the Security Council on 25 June last. concerning the
Kor,ean conflict. when for the first time I invoked
Article 99 of the Charter j and to additional statements
of my position on some of the issues before you in
public addresses at Oslo and Chicago.
41. I shall not take the time of the representatives to
repeat these views today. although I wish to discuss
some of them further at a later stage. in particular
when the time comes for the Assembly to consider the
development of a twenty-year peace programme.
42. I wish now only to place before you the following
three artiCles of faith as a short resume of the whole
debate:
43. First. the United Nations must and can demonstrate its capacity to deal effectively with armed aggression now and in the future. .
44. ,Secondiy. through the United Nations it is still
possible gradually to reduce the present tensions and. by
patient work. to move towards a reconciliation of the
conflicting interests so manifest in the world today.
45. Thirdly. the Member States can and should use
the United Nations and the specialized agencies in a
comprehensive programme aimed at effectively raising
living standards within the next few years throughout
the world, and especially among those 1,500 millions
who today live either, in poverty or on its borderline.
46. The President stated the grave responsibility of
this Assembly in two sentences on the opening day.
when he said:
4, See Official Records of the Getleral Assembly, Fifth Session,
Supplr.meJlt .No. 1.
5 See Official Records of the Security Com~il, fifth year,
No,15.

we did not succeed in saving the
cata.strophe which threatens it!·
47. The issue of war or peace does
the hands of the governments represen
Through the action that your govern
you to take in this Assembly you hav
power to increa!>e or to decrease the c
in a way that may be decisive for the f

Admission of tile Republic of Indo
bersllip of tile United Nat
48. The PRESIDENT (translated

The General Assembly has before it t
49. The first [A/1393] contains the
dated 25 September 1950 irom the Perm
of the Republic of Indonesia. to the
addressed to the Secretary-General. T
appended a declaration in which the
server. on behalf of his Government,
Republic of Indonesia accepts the .ob
Charter and undertakes to honour the
when it becomes a Member of the Unit
50. The second document [A/1402]
a letter dated 27 September 1950 from
of the Security Council to the Presiden
Assembly. drawing the attention of the
resolution adopted by the Security Cou
meeting on 26 September 1950,6 con
mission of the Republic of Indonesia to
the United Nations.
51. F1nal1y. the delegations of Aust
have ·.presented a joint draft resolution
te.xt of which is as follows:

"The General Assembly,
UN oting the recommendation of the

cil of 26 September 1950 that the R
nesia should be admitted to membersh
Nations,
UN oting also the declaration made
tative of the Republic of Indonesia t
it will accept the obligations containe
of the United Nations.
Admits the Republic of Indonesia
of the United Nations!·
52. If there are no objections. and
wishes a vote to be taken, I shall de
resolution unanimously adopted by t
sembly.

The Rep'ltblic of Indonesia 'lClas adrn
ship of the United Nations by acclama
At the invitation of the President, M
sentati'lle of the Republic of Indonesia
on the rostrum.
53. The PRESIDENT (tra,nslated f

am sure that I speak for all the member
Assembly in welcoming the representat
and assuring him of our deep satisfacti
sion of his country to membership of th
6/bid., No. 45.

54. I shall now call upon those representatives who
have reqt1ested an opportunity to express their satisfac.tion and extend a welcome to our new Member.
55. Mr. VAN HEUVEN GOEDHART (Netherlands): It is with feelings of deep satisfaction and of
friendship for the Indonesian people that I rise to welcome gladly and wholeheartedly, on behalf of the Government and the people of th~ Netherlands, the admission
of the Republic of Indonesia to the community of nations.
56. Ever since the Round Table Conference at the
Haglte was broug}).t to a successful end, my Government
has been hoping that the unfavourable situation which
e,,,ists with regard to the admission of new Members to
our Organization would not prevent Indonesia from now
becoming a Member of this Organization.
57. I shall refrain from dwelling at length on the
problem. of United Nations membership. I am aware of
the fact that at the gates of Lake Success stand a
number of countries which, in our firm belief, fully
qualify for membership, but which have, on the basis
of irrelevant considerations, ueen barred from admission
for several years. I know that there are many delegations here present that sincerely deplore this abnormal
and unfortunate situation. They will the more readily
join me in welcoming the Republic of Indonesia, whose
immediate admission has been recommended by the
Security Council and adopted by the General Assembly
this afternoon.
58. The privilege of membership carries with it many
duties and responsibilities. J have no reason whatever
to doubt that the Indo!:esian Government is fully aware
of this and recognizes that, by joining our Organization,
it shouders a heavy but therefore fascina.ting' task, the
task of trying to live up to the high princip1es and
purposes of the United Nations Charter.
57. Above all, that Charter aims at the establishment
and maintenance of a community within which law,
order and basic human rights are secured, and membership of the United Nations implies willingness to bear
and share the heavy burden of the preservation of
world peace and security.
§O. The peoples of Indonesia are peace-loving. It is,
1 am convinced, their earnest desire to contribute to the
well-being of the world. But it is not only for these
reasons that my Government welcomes the Republic of
Indonesia as the sixtieth Member of the United Nations.
Apart from those considerations, which may have induced every delegation to vote for the admission of
Indonesia to the United Nations, the Netherlands had
a special reason of its own: the pleasure of welcoming
?ur partner in the Union reprl;lsenting a new conception
111 East-West relations.
61. So many ties have been established and do now
e,\:ist bewteen Indonesia and the Netherlands that it is
only natural for the Netherlands Government and
pe.ople to take particular pleasure in greeting in our
n1t~st the. independent and sovereign Republic of IndoneSia. It 1S therefore for us a r{':lson for re.ioicing that
the flag of Indonesia will be hoisted on a sixtieth mast
in front of this building, and that the Members of the

62. Mr. KESKA..{ (India): It is a matter of grea
pleasure to my delegation that this session of the Gen
eral Assembly has unanimously accepted the United
States of Indonesia into the family of nations. I take
this opportunity of offering my hearty congratulations
to the representative of Indonesia on the consummation
~f his. country's great struggle for independence and
hberat10n.
63. My country has very intimate ties with the
people of Indonesia, both historical and cultural. Dur
ing the long course of history, we have been associated
in various ways with its people. It is a matter of specia
pride to us because our country has been the firs
which, from the very beginning, has tried in its humble
way to further the cause of the independence and
liberation of Indonesia. Therefore it is with feelings o
great gratification that today I am able to c.,::tgratulat
the representative of Indonesia on the admission of hi
country into the family of the United Nations.
64. Knowing the valiant people and leaders of Indo
nesia so well, I am sure that Indonesia will fulfil in a
very able way the obligations and duties of a membe
of the United Nations.
65. I again take the pleasure of congratulatino- th
representative of Indonesia and the Indonesian Republi
and offering to them my hearty congratulations.
?6. Sir Keith OFFICER (Australia) : My delegation
1S very happy to have been assoc~,lted with India in
proposing to the General Assenlbly that it act at onc
on the !ecommendatiofl of. the Security Council tha
Indones1a, mu' very dear ne1ghbour, should be admitte
to membership in the United Nations, and at th
immediate and unanimous response of the Genera
Assembly.
67. Last Saturday [281st meeting], we heard the hea
of the NetherIands delegation remind us that Indonesi
stood at the door of the United Nations and that th
time had come to open it arid let Indonesia itl. Toda
we have done so and now I can welcome, on behalf o
my country, the Government of the Republic of Indo
nesia as the latest Member of the United Nations.
68. Today, Indonesia has come with us to the end o
the long and sometimes difficult road towards fu
110l.tionhood. We are hopeful that, as a result of th
agreements reached between the Government of th
Netherlands and the Government of Indonesia, this wi
be the last occasion on which it will be necessary fo
the affairs of Indonesia to figure on the business pape
of the United Nations. Vve look forward with confidenc
to a long period of peace and prosperity for our lates
Member, and we feel certain that its contribution to ou
work will always be a useful one.
69. Mr. SARPER (Turkey) : I am sincerely please
and ha~py today to have the privilege on behalf of m
delegatton to welcome the Republic of Indonesia as th
sixtieth Member State of this family of nations.
70. The sympathy of the Turkish people towards th
people of Indonesia is not new. It has been publicl
expressed by the entire Press of Tur1<:eyon almo
every occasion. I am happy to associate my delegatio

178

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

and myself personally with these sincere expressions of
sympathy and friendship towards the people of Indonesia. I am sure that the Republic of Indonesia will
bring a valuable contribution to our efforts towards
achieving the aims of the United Nations. There can be
no doubt that the Republic of Indonesia will be an
element of stability in its part of the world.
71. I congratulate the representative of the Republic
of Indonesia and convey my best wishes of success to
him personally and of a peaceful prosperity to his
country.
72. I must pay tribute to the people and the Government of the Netherlands for the comprehension they
have shown towards the yearning of this young republic for freedom and independence.
73. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Before calling upon the representative of Iran I should
like to draw your attention to the fact that there are
still fourteen speakers on my list. I hope that in his
speech, the representative of Iran will set an example
in brevity.
74. Mr. ARDALAN (Iran) (translated from F1'ench) ;
As a believer in the principle of universality within the
United Nations, the delegation of Iran. has always
supported applications for the admission of new Members. As the representative of an Asiatic and Islamic
country, it is with especial pleasure that I congratulate
the peoples of Indonesia on achieving their independence. It is thanks to the wisdom of their country's
leaders as well as to the breadth of vision of the
Netherlands Government - not to mention the efforts
of the Security Council and the General Assembly that this has been achieved.
75. It is an honour and a keen pleasure to me to see
that the Security Council's recommendation has been
unanimously adopted by this Assembly, and to hear the
applause from all sides.
76. The Iranian delegation is convinced that the cooperation of the young Republic of Indonesia will contribute to the strenthening of peace and security in
the world.
77. Faris EL-KHOURI Bey (Syria): I shall be
very brief. However, I have to refer to a few points
v:rhich it would be profitable to mention on this occasion.
78. The existence of the United Nations and of its
Charter, with the conditions established therein for
self-determination, was a good awakening point for the
colonial Powers to recognize that the present age is not
as it used to be and that they were ready to grant
independence to the non-self-governing peoples without
obliging them to struggle fiercely for their independence.
Appreciation should be expressed here to the United
Kingdom, which was the first to inaug-urate this policy.
The Netherlands Government has taken another step in
that direction, a step which is appreciated by the whole
wor1cl,
79. At the same time, it must be remembered that
Chapter XI of the Charter, which deals with Non-SelfGoverning Territories, is a very good stimulus in that
respect to all nations. We now find that the non-selfgoverning people in Asia have been attaining- their
independence one after the other. In the future, we
hope that the rest, not only in Asia but in every

country - in Libya and elsewhere - will also attain
their independence in the same way.
80. We should also not forget a second point, namely
that the people of Indonesia suffered as it continued it~
fierce struggle for independence. Syria was a member
of the Security Council while it was dealing with the
problem of Indonesia and is therefore aware of the
sufferings endured by the Indonesian people. For that
reason Syria is delighted to see that Indonesia has now
attained its independence and that it has been welcomed
into the United Nations by a unanimous vote.
81. Another point which has to be taken into consideration is the fact that Indonesia, in joining us here
will make great contributions in two different respects:
82. First, Indonesia will contribute in helping the
remaining non-seH-governing peoples of the world to
attain their independence, because those who have
suffered and know the meaning of loss of freedom also
understand the difficulties of others and will be able
to help them.
83. Secondly, Indonesia will be very helpful, with the
other small nations, in safeguarding the peace of the
world. I say "small nations" although Indonesia with
over 70 million people, should not really be ca'lled a
small nation. With its resources and geographical position it is counted as one of the great nations of the
East. Nevertheless it is considered as a small nation in
relation to the five great Powers which are now
dominating the world.
84. We are solicitous of peace, but we have to understand who is disturbing it. Are the small nations disturbing peace? Never. It is the great -Powers which are
disturbing it, either directly or through their followers
or subordinates. If that is so, what can we small nations
do in order to secure peace and to oppose and suppress
the activities of those who disturb it? We have no
armies and no forces to oppose them, but there is
another way open to us. vVe are Members of the
United Nations, and we each have one vote just as have
the .biggest of the Members of the Organization. By
castl11g all our votes on the side of justice and what is
right we shall keep at bay those who would perpetrate
aggression or seek to use the resolutions of the United
Nations as a means of establishing their policies.
85. That is our way. It is a very strong way, and we
should not underestimate our capabilities. The small nations must agree, as I have indicated, not to cast their
votes except on the side of justice and of right .. They
must not support power politics or serve the aims of the
politicians by helping them. If we do this, and if we allow
no one to rely upon our votes in order to establish his
aims and desires, we shall be rendering a great service to
universal peace. We shall stop those who wish to disturb
the peace, for although we are weak and have no
armies we nevertheless have our votes. Vlfe must be
careful not to cast them recklessly.
86. Mr. KYROU (Greece): I shall conform to the
~resident's advice .and be really very brief. Congrat~11a­
hons to IndonesIa; congratulations to the U11Ited
Nations.
87. Sir Mohammad ZAFRULLA KHAN (Pakistan).
The struggle for independence in Indonesia began just
over five years ago and achieved its happy const1lnmation last year when a peaceful settlement was arrived

alOe.lween f

Tllafstrugl

~p611S1

el

IOe.re(9"e to

loepeop[e a
IDeDriited]
I! achild of
il were, the
United Nati
~, It will
01 its own
PaKistan bel
S(XIusor of
Coundl, WI
was reached
IOe Assemt
!ilusfaction
expressed t1
welcome In(
lion. We re:
It gives us
nesia to mel
Pas been al
General As:
mendation t
we have Ion
nesia, been
!I), This c
along the re
one of the
While, therl
tOe admissi<
ship of the
great fellow
Dope that 1\1
awaiting a<
aamitted to
~, In thi!
Ceylon whi<
lar not bel
independent
as, for inst;
We therefo:
are soverei:
with regard
w1l!ing to
Charter, w:
United Nal
91. With
I~ay be p<
as It were,
olIndonesi
certain def
respect of
But we do
deuce whi<
States in t
were to ae!
~eference t
Impatiently
stalus, anc
they, too, v
Sec DUi,
----,1

~on, Plellar

he achievement of the mdependence of Indonesia 1S
therefore to be shared between the people of Indonesia,
the people and the Government of the Netherlands, a~d
the United Nations. In that sense independent Indom:ata
is a child of the Unikd Nations, and today we 111ark, :l,S
it were, the coming of age of one of the children of ~:l(;;
United Nations.
88. It will be recalled that almost from the beginning
of its own membership of this great Organization
Pakistan became, along with Australia and India, a co··"
spon~or of the Indonesian case before the Security
Council. When the settlement to which I have referred
was reached and reported to the General Assembly and
the Assembly welcomed it and marked its sense of
satisfaction concerning it [resolution 301 (IV)], we
e.xpressecl the hope 7 that we should, at an early date,
welcome Indonesia as a member of this l?;reat Organization. We rejoice to see that hope fulfilled this afternoon.
It gives us great j?y to welcon:e the R~public of ~nd~­
nesia to membershtp of the Umted Natlons, to wJ:nch tt
has been admitted by a unanimous resolution of the
General Assembly on the basis of a unanimous recommendation by the Security Council, something for which
we have long waited bet which has, in the case of Indonesia, been achieved this afternoon.
89. This consummation marks one further milestone
along the road of self-determination of peoples, which is
one of the declared objectives of the United Nations.
While, therefore, expressing our joy and satisfaction at
the admission of the Republic of Indonesia to membership of the United Nations and welcoming it to this
great fellowship, we may be permitted to express the
hope that many other nati0ns and States which are still
awaiting admission will also, at an early date, be
admitted to this fellowship.
90. In this conne..xion we might mention particularly
Ceylon which, for some incomprehensible reason, has so
far not been admitted to membership. Ceylon is as
independent, as sovereign and as peace-loving a State
as, for instance, Australia, Canada, India or Pakistan.
We therefore hope that Ceylon. and other nations which
are sovereign and independent and peace-loving, and
with regard to whom it is felt that they are able and
willing to discharge the obligations contained in the
Charter, will soon be admitted to membership of the
United Nations.
91. Wit'l regard to the progress of self-determination,
I may be permitted to state that with the cominl?; of age,
as it were, in respect of independence, of the Republic
of Indonesia, we in that region particularly felt that a
certain deficiency which we have felt throughout in
respect of our own independence had been made up.
But we do not yet have that complete sense of independence which would only be achieved by us if other
States in that region still awaiting their independence.
were to achieve it in practice. I might make particular
reference to Vietnam and Malaya in that respect. We
impatiently await their independence and sovereign
status, and w~ hope that after they have attained it
they, too, will be admitted to this great fellowship.
T See Official Records of the Gelteral Assemb
ly, FOltrtlt Ses.riOlt, Plellal'y Meet-illgs, 271st meeting.
.

Nations. Libya has been mentioned as a~ instance.
are hoping that al) from 1 Januar y 1952 Libya wiIi
be i.ndependent and will in due course be admitted
membership. I need not go further to particularize o
nations which are awaiting a similar, happy cpnsum
tion, but it is a very important princpile. It is on
those things without which this Organization wo
never be complete, that thE: principle of self-determ
tion should be carried to its utmost consummation a
early a date as possible.
93. Once more I welcome the admission to this g
fellowship this afternoon of the Republic of Indone
94. Mr. FREI (Chile) (transla.ted from Spani
The Government and the people of Chile welcome
admission of Indonesia as a new Member of the Un
Nations. Our nation, which has a Pacific coast-lin
more than 3,200 miles, views with particular inter
from a geographical and political point of view,
course of events in South-East Asia, events which
certainly destined to change the equilibrium of the v
ous continents and to pave the way for econo
development of trade.
95. The encouraging example of the Netherla
which understood the historic significance of our tim
must be recognized and stressed ..W e must not fo
here that almost simultaneously with the discovery
America in 1492 came the discovery of Indonesia in 1
Today we meet again because we have a common ta
to determine the interests we have in common and
work for the improvement of the conditions of
people, without which all success becomes imposs
96. It is important for the United Nations to adm
nation of almost 75 million human beings into
international community. The strength of the Organ
tion lies in the fact that it includes all peoples, no ma
what their regimes. In this great parliament t
acquire rights and ul1,dertake obligations. We
believe in democracy and human dignity consider t
presence here to be essential, for it is thus that la
sections of mankind which heretofore have renla
outside international organizations can come into c
tact with institutions which will enable them to
change ideas and methods of ensuring the succes
their efforts and of improving their standards of liv
97. General ROMU LO (Philippines): I rise on
half of the Philippine delegation to express our gratif
tion at the unanimous approval of the draft resolu
for the admission of the Republic of Indonesia
membership of the United Nations. The deep inte
which my Government has taken in the establishm
of Indonesia as a sovereign and independent Stat
well known to all. We took an active part in
deliberations of the Security Council which brou
about the termination of two so-called police act
against the Republic of Indonesia and the final se
ment of the dispute last year at the Hague.
98. Together with eighteen other States of South-E
Asia and the Middle East, the Philippines attended
January 1949 the New Delhi Conference which
called to express the solemn and unanimous suppor
the Asian peoples for the political aspirations of
Indonesian nation. The Philippine Government

political, economic and social problems that confront it.
That sympathy remains and will be deepened further
by., the knowledge that the Republic of Indonesia will
sQon have the opportunity to labour side by side with
us in solving the larger problems of the world.
99. The admission of Indonesia to membership of the
United Nations is an act of simple justice towards that
country and an act of enlightened self-interest on our
part. The participation in our work of a country of
75 million people, possessing enormously rich natural
resources and stretching along the Equator from the
Pacific ocean to the Indian ocean cannot but be regarded
as an act of transcendent significance in the historv of
the United Nations. In the perspective of the growing
mliversality of the United Nations, this act is equivalent
to the integration of a whole continent in the world
Organization. And that is important to remember at
this juntufe because for Asia, which today has become
the focus of the most vital international developments,
the presence of the Republic of Indonesia in OUlt midst
represents a major acquisition.
100. Here, where the voice of the Asian people must
and will be heard more and more on matters that
concern them, as well as \)n the peace and well-beinf'
of hUil1anity as 3. whoie, }n.e presence of the Republic of.
Indonesia will be an addttional guarantee that that voice
will resound with greater fullness, clarity and force
than before. Welcome to the great people of Indonesia .
to this council of the nations of the world.
101. MYANAUNG U TIN (Burma.): It is indeed a
very pleasant task and a proud privilege for me to come up to this rostrum today to welcome the Republic of
Indonesia to the United Nations. Exactly SL"l:teen
months ago, during the latter part of the third session
of the General Assembly, I came up to this very
rostrum 8 with a heavy healt· and, on behalf of my
delegation, I expressed grave doubts about the.sincerity
of the Netherlands Governtnent in proposing the postponement of the discussion of the Indonesian question
so that a settlement could ble made between the two
parties. In view of the then prevailing circumstances,
our doubts were quite natural. Happily, these conditions
and circumstances have changed for the better, and I
take this opportunity to pa.y our tribute to all those
Member States which jointed in the effort to restore
inde~'C11dence to Indonesia., In fact, as Sir Benegal Rau,
the leader of the Indian delegation, said the other day
in the -Security Council,'l and as Sir Mohammad
Zafrulla Khan said five minutes ago on this rostrum,
Indonesia is a child of the United Nations.

102. I must also take this opportunity to congratulate
.the N~therlands Government on its success in arriving
ata peaceful s~ttlement with Indonesia.
103. If the third session of the General Assembly, held
in Paris two years ago, could be described as that of
8 See Official Records of the General Assembly, TMrd Session, Part Il, Plenary Meeti119s, 208th meeting.
.
9 See Official Records of the Security Council, fifth' year,

No. 45.

appropriate and timely that Indon
the fold at this crucial moment
tribute towards the solution of A
incidentally, are world problems
104. It is indeed good to note th
the Security Council except Chi
mission of Indonesia. China abst
that Indonesia had recognized the
China. Incidentally, on behalf of m
Government, I should like to sa
with feelings of deep gratitude t
us by the Nationalist Chinese del
it sponsored the admission of B
Nations. In fact, this was not the
have been more instances of ki
Neverthe1ess, while we acknowled
that Burma has. no alternative
realities of the present situation. T
the countries neighbouring China
;J,ew regime. The situatiol1 of Ind
that of Burma, India and Pakista
105. I do not propose to dwell a
growing importance of Asia in w
Lange, the Foreign Minister of
pointed out yesterday [287th me

"The process of national an
Asia is one of the most striking
tion of our time. The experien
countries which have recen
emerged as free nations, seve
resented in this Organization,
a prQminent part in the solutio
lem. . . . [They] may be expe
grasp of the problems involved
as sovereign States of nations
under foreign domination than
distant from the scene and w
background."

106. The Norwegian Foreign M
the right note, and the Burmese
the representatives of the non-As
larly those of the metropolitan P
appreciate his observations.

107. Burma's firm and consiste
questions relating to the Non-Se
ries is well known to this Genera
very outset, our d Jegation has
of unfortunate countries, makin
based on our actual experience o
domination. We cons~rl.er it a gr
freedom, for our freedom as well
all those peoples who are less fo
I am fully satisfied that Burma ha
in her hour of trial and now t
become a sovereign independen
fledged :M;ember of the United
Mr. Palar as the representative of
greatest of pleasure and congratu
on the splendid work he has don
incidentally, for South-East Asia.

in which it is situated and of the community of
At this time, when the Republic of Indonesia has been
associated in the United Nations as a whole.
unanimously admitted to the United Nations, the
de1eg'cltion of Egypt deems it a pleasure to pay a tribu'te
115. Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium)
to the heroic people of Indonesia and to the efforts they
lated
from French) : Beligum has always show
have exerted to regain their independence and enSl.tre
interest
in the establishment of tht; Republic of
the territorial integrity of their country.
nesia. As a member oi the Security Council, B
109. Egypt was one of the first countries to extlmd
was a· member of the Committee of Good Off
recognition to the young Republic of Innonesia, having
1947 and 1948. Together with Australia and the
done so in 1946; and was the first State to concludle a
States, it is still a member of the United N
treaty of friendship with it. Since that time, the mem~
Commission for Indonesia. We have always bee
bel'S of the Arab League have followed with unceasing
fident that the Indonesian people would achi
admiration the determined efforts of the Indonesian
independence.. Last year, we assodated ourselves
Republic to consolidate its independence.
hear.edly with the satisfaction exprt.ssed by the G
110. Now that this republic has become a Member of . Assemhly at the agreement reached ~y the Round
Conf~rence at The Hague, which s~t the final
the United Nations, there can be no doubt that it will
the establishment of the new independent State.
be, by reason of its potentialities and resources, an
we were glad to applaud the admission of the R
important factor for the consolidation of peace and
of Indonesia to the United Nations. The Belgian
stability in its area, which is so vital to the security of
tion
wholeheartedly associates itself with the W
the world.
and congratulations that have been extended
111. ':"\'he Egyptian delegation - and I believe I speak
reperesentative of Indonesia.
also for the other Arab delegations here - is happy to
116. Mr. YOUNGER (United Kingdom) : on
extend a warm welcome to the Republic of Indonesia
of the United Kingdom, I most warmly welco
into our midst; and we express our most fervent hopes
Republic of Indonesia as a fellow Member
for its glory and greatness.
United Nations. I am sure that it must be a ma
112. Nai Warakan BANCHA (Thailand): The del~
great satisfaction to all of us here to feel that the
gation of Thailand gladly supports the entry of the
Nations has recently been able to play so helpful
Republic of Indonesia into the United Nations. Bound
in
the progress of Indonesia towards indepen
from ancient times by ties of friendship, economks and
But that, of course, in no way diminishes our
culture with the people of Indonesia, the people of
and the strength of the tribute which we wish
Thailand welcome with great joy the rise to indepento the statesmanship and the wisdom of the lea
dence of Indonesia. We are. particularly gratified that
the
Netherlands and of the Republic of Indones
that independence was attained by the peaceful means
respect to the process of transition.
of settlement with the Netherlands under the auspices
of the United Nations. This augurs well for the impor117. There are, as several speakers have sai
tant part that Indonesia will play in the promotion of
many other countries awaiting'admission to the
peace and progress in South-East Asia, and the delegaNations. Sir Mohammed Zafrulla Khan today, a
tion of Thailand is happy to have this opportunity of
Bevin, in addrressing the Assembly last week
welcoming Indonesia's admission into the 'United
meeting] , mentioned especially the case of C
Nations.
another Asian· country whose claim to member
this Organization is as incontestable as that
113. Mrs. ROOSEVELT (United States of AmerRepublic of Indonesia. BUlt as the Assembly
ica): The United States has been deeply gratified by
aware, Ceylon is not the only instance. There
the action of the Security Council in recommending to
less than eight other countries still debarred
the General Assembly that the Republic of Indonesia
membership of the Organization, although an
be admitted to membership in the United Nations. We
whelming majority in the Security Council and
note with pleasure the General Assembly's cordial and
General Assembly have on a number of occasion
unanimous welcome to the Republic of Indonesia. The
for their admission. I hope that the decision
United States welcomes the appearanr.e of this new
Security Council to recommend the admission o
State in the halls and in the activities of the United
nesia in this instance means that the deadlock
Nations. All Members of the Organization must view
subject, which has. so long paralysed the Co
with satisfaction the advent in their midst of a State
action, has now been broken and that it will n
with whose origins the United Nations was so closely
concerned. For the United States, I should like to say -found possible to reach agreement on the admis
all those States which a majority of the G
that we hope to find ourselves using our vote in the
Assembly have considered qualified to become Me
United Nations with the votes of the small nations in
the cause of justic~ and peace.
118. The United Kingdom delegation will do
114. The United States is confident that the Republic
thing in its power to bring this about. In the me
of Indonesia wili rapidly assume a prominent position
my country is delighted that at least one o
within our Organization. We know it has much to
admirably qualified ca."1didates is to be admitte
contribui:e. We shall watch with sympathetic interest
I am confident that Indonesia; now in the As
the developing national life of the Republic of Indonesia.
and in future years, will make a notable contribu
the work of our Organization.
We shall expect its influence to be felt in the community

donesia-these developments which symbolize tha new
spirit of Asia and the struggle for freedom and independence in all the Non-Self-Governing Terr:wries.
120. My delegation wishes to express its deepest
gratification at the entrance of the Republic of Indonesia into this venerable world body. Aside from our
deep interest in the Republic of Indonesia as a peaceloving nation, we are intimately tied to the people of
Indonesia in such a cOUll'llunity of interests-cultural,
spiritual and otherwise-as has traditionally existed
between the Arabs and the Indonesian people for so
many generations.
121. We trust that this happy occasion will be followed
by the Rdmission ot the other States, such as the Hashimite Kingdom of the J ordal1, which aspire to join this
'venerable world body at the earliest possible moment.
122. I take great pleasure in extending to the Republic of Indonesia, in the name of my country, our sincere
felicitations on this occasion.
123. Mr. EBAN (Israel) : I deem it appropriate that
the fifty-ninth Member of the United Nations should
greet the sixtieth Member on its admission to our midst.
It is an especially pleasant duty for Israel to welcome
and congratulate Indonesia, one of the first and one of
the many Asian States with which Israel has established
relations of mutual recognition and friendship.
124. The swift rise ot new and distinct political units
to full independence a.'1d sovereignty has been one of
the most significant events of recent history, and the
United Nations, to its immortal credit, has invariably
given full support to this trend of liberation.
125. My delegation therefore joins in congratulating
the Governments of Indonesia and the Netherlands on
the statesmanlike accords which have led to this happy
result. This general congratulation should also extend
to the organs and commissions of the United Na~ions,
which have facilitated a settlement bas~d on the mdependence of Indonesia.
126. I am certain that those new State's which have
managed to make their way to membership amidst the
deadlocks and comple...'\:ities of the general· membership
problem must be among the first to hope that the many
States not represented here and seeking admission will
similarly join us at an early date. We witness a hopeful and significant event as the Republic of Inclonesia
enters this great Organization, dedicated to the freedom and equality of all mankind.
127. Mr. AL-JAMALI (Iraq): In the name of my
country and its delegation, I wish to express our feeling
of deepest pleasure and satisfaction in welcoming the
Republic of Indonesia among us. The people of Iraq
have much in common with the people of Indonesia. In
the first place, the people of Iraq are freedom-loving
people, like the people of Indonesia, and they fought
their way to independence. My country, with other
members of the Arab League, watched with deep sympathy the fight of the people of Indonesia for thei.r
independence and for their freedom. We were among
the earliest to recognize the Republic of Indonesia.
128. In this connexion, I wish to congratulate the
statesmanship both of Indonesia and of the Netherlands

late the great wisdom, prud
the United Kingdom and
with their colonial territori
other such happy conclusion
130. The people, of Iraq,
world, have ha.d cultural r
Indonesia for generations
very \'vell that before the wa
were in our schools and co
looked upon them as broth
in humanit'j.
131. "Ve are especially gla
len1 country and as an Asi
great world body. For tha
co-operation between Mos
tween eastern and western w
here for. We are here to s
East and 'West meet and
diverse religions and faiths
each other and listen to ea
132. I wish to join those
referred to their hope and
tions which are waiting to
Organization may join us
are very happy that Indon
hope that very soon we sha
the Hashimite Kingdom of
Italy, Spain and many othe
be among us.
133. I sincerely hope tha
donesia, by j oining thi~ Or
strength and co-operation th
for the welfare of mankind
in the world.
134. Mr. Abdul Hamid A
lated from French) : I take
first appearance on this rost
behalf of my Government, M
tion to the high office of P
sembly. My delegation is pa
in your person the represen
which we are bound not on
history, lacguage and religio
sincere spirit of nei.ghbourli
late the Assembly on its ch
and statesman, a man of b
pray that God may bless
that your decisions may be
135. As representative of
shown its sympathy for na
ments, and is itself passio
national independence, I am
tunity of bidding welcome
Indonesia. My delegation
this accession to our ranks;
followed the Indonesian
keen interest and sincere s
the proceedings of the Ne
played so ~appy a part i
United Nations. We now e
relations with that great co

289th Meeting-28 September 1950

~d in ln~

; us.

i

will ~mu.

htednessol
in dealln!
may rearn

f the Ara~

e people 01
. reU1em~t
an studenu
ad, and we
Ild brotneli

as aMOljoining Int!
rnprove tne

I,

foslem, [-(.
,vhat we ale
: peoples 01
t people 01
tlnderstan~

5 who have

Lt lUany na·
Jers of thi!
lossible. We
lay, but we

Ldmission o[

Ion, lrelan~,
e waitingto

1l1try of In-

add to tne
)rganization
and stabililf

tan) (trolls,
r of this, 01f
ulate yOU on
)11 your eleci august Asfled to salule

:er 1\ationlo
wn bonds 01

friendly an~
so congratll'
ent diplomat
ttelligence. I

wisdom an~

divine ligllt.
.t has ahvaj\

dence 1ll0V~
I to its own
~ this oppOI'
independent

gratified al
lanistal1
rement
took part,
:rence whlc~
dons of tl!f
ly diplolllaltc
l tHyi ng to III

to see so courageous a nation and government take its
place among us. We wish the Indonesian nation prosperity and happiness, and pray that those other nations
which are also struggling for their independence may
achieve that independence by peaceful means under the
aegis of our Charter and of justice and equity.
136. Mr. ANZE-MATIENZO (Bolivia) (translated
from Spanish) : My delegation considers that a day on
which a new Member is admitted is a day of rejoicing
for the United Nations because it represents a further
step towards the universality of the Organization.
137. It is a very great privilege for me to congratulate
this great new country which will work with us. I offer
that country the co-operation of my delegation in dealing
with the serious problem which we are required to
solve.
138. Mr. HENRIQUEZ URENA (Dominican Republic (translated from Spanish) : The Dominican Republic is pleased to welcome the Republic of Indonesia
into the legally constituted.international community,
whose highest expression is the United Nations.
139. I should merely like to say that the Government
and people of my country appreciate and welcome this
event with the same joy which we felt at the time of the
declaration of independence of the Republic of Indonesia,
which marked the rise of a new and brilliant star in the
constellation of free peoples.
140. Mr. MICHELOWSKI (Poland): On behalf of
the Polish delegation I should like to voice a hearty
welcome to the Republic of Indonesia in the United
Nations.
141. I am proud to recall that Poland supported
Indonesia's just cause in the Security Council. Almost
immediately following the creation of the new State,
Poland extended it official recognition; in addition,
Indonesia's first trade agreement with a European
country was concluded with Poland.
.
142. At this time we welcome the introduction of this
gallant nation into our Organization, because we know
that although young in years this nation is mature in
experience and rich in ancient culture.
143. Indonesia has travelled over a difficult road to
independence, a road that was marked by a relentless
struggle against a cruel foreign yoke, an insurrection
against colonial exploitation. For many centuries the
people of Indonesia, as those of other nations of Asia,
have been subjected to armed oppression because of
the policy of certain great Powers and big financial
interests which have tried to hold these people down
to the lowest level of economic, social and educational
development. But history's logical course shows that
wherever nations were waging a battle for their freedom, that fight was a relentless one and one that invariably resulted in the big colonial systems of imperialist exploitation tumbling down like a house of
cards.

144. Yes, the State of Indonesia won its independence
through sacrifice and bloodshed. The dangerous appetites of certain countries which are eager to enforce the
system of colonization upon the peoples of Asia give us
reason to think that there are still further difficulties
ahead. We believe, however, that Indonesia's experience
of the past will be a source of sufficient wisdom and

183

strength to enable it to avoid the pitfalls and overcome
the dangers.

145. We hope that our Organization is acquiring today a truly peace-loving Member, and that Indonesia
will contribute a fresh, strong determination for peaceful co-operation among nations and for international
justice. Our duty, the duty of the United Nations, therefore, is to welcome our new Member by assistance,
unselfish and sincere.
146. Mr. ARUTIUNIAN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) : On behalf of
the Soviet Union delegation, I have the honour to
welcome the Indonesian Republic as a Member of the
United Nations.
147. The USSR delegation wishes the Indonesian
Republic every success in its activities within our Organization for the welfare of the world and co-operation
among nations. It also wishes success and prosperity
to the Indonesian people in building an independent,
democratic State,
148. Mr. COUVE DE MURVILLE (France)
(translated from French): The French delegation is
especially glad to welcome the Republic of Indonesia
as the sixtieth Member of the United Nations. We
regard this election as a particularly important and
fortunate event for several reasons. In the first place,
it is the crowning point of negotiations that have been
conducted by both parties in a spirit of understanding
and political wisdom for which they are to be congratulated. It also marks the completion of a constructive task flllillled by the United Nations. Finally, it
represents a new stage in the awakening of Asia, that
great continent which is being called upon to play an
increasingly important part in world politics. It is also
a step forward towards universality f01' our Organization. In this connexion, the French delegation wishes
to emphasize that, by admitting the Republic of Indonesia today, we are merely establishing a precedent for
a measure which should and could be generalized.

149. I should like once again to express my satisfaction at this election and to wish the Republic of Indonesia prosperity and greatness.
150. Mr. SIMIC (Yugoslavia) (translated from
Fre1tch) : The Yugoslav delegation is glad to have this
opportunity of extending a welcome to the representative of the Repnblic of Indonesia and to t1;e free p~ople .
of Indonesia, now a Member of the Ul11ted NatIOns.
151. My Government and the peoples of Yugoslavia
have always been the most fervent supp.orters o~ the
principle of the universality of the Dmted NatIOns.
We therefore rejoice sincerely at th~ wholeheart~d and
unanimons acceptance of the .Republic of Indone~ta ~nd
the free people of Indones~a 111tO our Orgal1lzat~on.
Yugoslavia has always been tn f~vottr of the emanCipation and liberation of peoples; It has therefore always
supported the struggle of the people of Indonesia for
its independence and freedom.
152. Mr. IZZADDIN (Yemen): On behalf of my
country, Yemen, I take this opportttnitJ:' to extend o~r
heartiest congratulations to the Repu~llc of In~on~sia
on its admission as a Member of thiS OrganIzatIOn.
As the representative of Egypt has just mentioned,
the member States of the Arab League were the first to

153. We earnestly hope that the Hashimite Kingdom
of the Jordan, as well as several other States which aspire
to membership in this Organization, ,'Till be· admitted
before long.

154. Mr. HAJDU (Czechoslovakia) : The Czechoslovak delegation welcomes the Indonesian Republic to the
United Nations. We consider that it has merited this
place not, as· was said here by several orators, as a
magnanimous gift but through a hard fight for independence by its people. As a result, they threw off the
colonial yoke, gained their independence and so proved
themselves to be a major nation which should be admitted into the United Nations:
155. The unanimous vote of the General Assembly
shQwed that all the Member States for once, contrary
to the case of the representation of the Chinese people,
bad taken the realities of the situation into account. The
Czechoslovak delegation therefore welcomes this de.cision and greets the great people of Indonesia.
156. Mr. PALAR (Republic of Indonesia) : On behalf
of the Government of the Republic of Indonesia, I wish
to thank the President for his generous words and
warm welcome and to express my deep appreciation
for the valuable assistance which he, as the permanent
representative of Iran, gave to us in the dark days of
our struggle for freedom when the Indonesian question
was brought up in the United Nations three years ago.
I am also deeply appreciative of the kind and encouraging words of welcome and fellowship expressed by the
representatives of the Netherlands, our own union
'partner, India, Australia, Turkey, Iran, Syria, Greece,
Pakistan, Chile, the Philippines, Burma, Egypt, Thailand, the United States, Belgium, the United Kingdom,
Saudi Arabia, Israel, Iraq, Afghanistan, Bolivia, the
Dominican Republic,Poland, the Soviet Union, F,ance,
Yugoslavia, Yemen and Czechoslovakia.
157. In the name of my Government and my people
-in Indonesia, may I also express to all the members
:gathered in this august Assembly our very sincere
thanks and deep appreciation for your decision to accept Indonesia as the sixtieth Member of the United
Nations.
158. It was on 17 August 1945, following the surrender of Japan, tho.t the Indonesian people proclaimed
their irrevocable decision to be a free and independent
-nation. On that day they took their sacred oath to sec·t.lre
-their. freedom in word as well as in fact and to preserve
it for all time. That day ushered in a new era in the
destiny of my peopie. Many things have taken place
since then in the l1istory of our national struggle. Right
from the very beginning of our struggle for the exist.ence of Indonesia as a free nation, never for one moment
.did the people of Indonesia, men, women and children,
waver in their determination to attain their cherished
goal, whatever the cost in terms of suffering and sacrifice of life and treasure.

159. At long last our unrelenting struggle has been
rewarded. Today, slightly over five years after our
proclamation of independence, we, as a free nation but
:in deep humility. t.tand here before you to accept this

160. On this memorabl
Indonesia tb membership
to recall that my people h
cannot forget all the· sta
viduals and organizations
have consistently champio
invaluable assistance to o
their promptitude in ext
recognition to us as a nati
grateful to the governme
Australia, supported by t
Burma, who have taken
Nations by bringing it fir
and, later, before the G
carried it on through thic
goal was achieved.
161. We are indebted to
Middle East, whose leade
us their wholehearted sy
port and assistance, both
we are deeply appreciativ
Powers, permanent mem
which, in considering our
membership of the Unit
differences and gave us t
162. I wish to recall fur
nesia highly appreciated th
and the people of the Ne
the cessation of bloodshed
wisely sought a peaceful
the Round Table Confe
rrinated in the transfer o
ber 1949 by the Govern
the Government of the R
Government of the Unit
reconstituted as a united
public of Indonesia.
163. Last, but not least,
recall with deep and warm
. to the United Nations. F
Council took up the dispu
phases, until the trar.sfe
Nations, through its orga
General Assembly, the Se
mittee of Good Offices, w
Nations Commission for
and impartially endeavour
high degree in injecting
reason into the discussion
dispute, so that on more
atmosphere, previously c
trust, suspicions and dis
placed by one more con
towards .reaching constru
Indeed, the United Nation
tions in very generous m
nesian independence and
nesia as a free nation.

164. The Indonesian peo

It is convinced that peace
nations are free and if
among mankind. In assum

for the defence and preservation of world peace and
security. Indonesia will always be prepared to contribute
its share towards bringing about a proper understand;ng and co··operation among the nations.
165. In the economic and social field, it is needless to
add, Indonesia will participate with enthusiasm and
determination in helping to promote jointly the economic prosperity and soci.al progress of the peoples of
the world. My country has rich but hitherto only slightly
developed natural resources. With our teeming millions
of manpower and large territories spread over the seas
of South-East Asia much could still be done to realize
"~le economic development of Indonesia. We hope that
in our desire to work out the economic and social development of Indonesia we may be benefited by the assistance of the United Nations and its Members.
166. We have to increase the productivity of Indonesia fi-om the available sources of production and from
new, additional sources to be tapped in the future as
the process of development progresses. We are determined to raise the standard of living of the common man
in Indonesia. We shall have regard to the equality of
status of men and women, without discrimination as to
religion or creed. In conjunction with other Members
of the United Nations, we pledge ourselves to maintain
the dignity of man and to protect the fundamental human rights of the individual while alleviating human
suffering and poverty in our country.
167. ,",ve are anxious to make our contribution to the
promotion of the common weal of Asia and of the world.

Printed in D.S.A.

sketches of the economic and social programme which
the Government of the Republic of Indonesia, supported by its Parliament, will try to achieve.
168. Finally, I should like to assure 'Our fellow Members of the United Nations that Indonesia, as a peaceloving and democratic nation, will contribute its share
to the realization of the ideals of the United Nations as
embodied in the Charter. Whatever its shortcomings and
imperfections, tlle United Nations remains today the
only collective instrument with which all nations hope
to defend and maintain peace. It remains today the
effective organ by which the nations of the world can
jointly salvage humanity and set its path towards progress and prosperity. The United Nations, indeed, serves
as an avenue along which mankind can escape from the
catastrophes and disasters of total war.
169. The PRESIDENT (translated fmm French):
This has been a memorable occasion, and I hope, therefore, that the members will agree with me that we
should not now embark upon a new debate. If there is
no objection, I propose to adjourn 'the meeting until
tomorrow at 10.45 a.m., when we shall proceed to the
election of members of the several Councils.
170. I would ask representatives to be punctual. We
shall proceed vd.th the voting immediately after the
opening of the meeting and any members who are absent may lose the opportunity to exercise their voting
rights.

The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

A-40464-0ctober 1950-3-700
