J.

K. Application of the Republic of Slovenia

Application of the Republic of Croatia

Decisions

Decisions

At its 3073rd meeting. on 14 May 1992, the Council,
following the adoption of its agenda, decided to refer the
application of the Republic of Croatia394 for membership in the
United Nations to the Committee on the Admission of New
Members for examination and report. as provided in rule 59 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

At its 3074th meeting, on 14 May 1992, the Council,
following the adoption of its agenda, decided to refer the
application of the Republic ofSlovenia397 for membership in the
United Nations to the Committee on the Admission of New
Members for examination and report, as provided in rule 59 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

At its 3076th meeting, on 18 May 1992, the Council
discussed the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members395 conceming the application of the Republic of
Croatia for admission to membership in the United Nations.

At its 3077th meeting, on 18 May 1992, the Council
discussed the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members• conceming the application of the Republic of
Slovenia for admission to membership in the United Nations.

Resolution 754 (1992)
Resolution 753 (1992)

of 18 May 1992

of 18 May 1992

The Security Council,
The Security Council,
Having examined the application of the Republic of
Slovenia for admission to the United Nations,m

Havingexaminedthe application of the Republic ofCroatia
for admission to the United Nations,394

Recommends to the General Assembly that the Republic
of Slovenia be admitted to membership in the United Nations.

Recommends to the General Assembly that the Republic
of Croatia be admitted to membership in the United Nations.

Adopled withouJ a vote al the 3077th
meeting.

Adopted withouJ a vote al the 3076th
meeting.

Decision
Decision

At the same meeting, following the adoption of Security
Council resolution 753 (1992), the President made the following
statement on behalf of the members of the Council:396

At the same meeting, following the adoption of resolution
754 (1992), the President made the following statement on
behalf of the members of the Council: 399

"It is a privilege for me, on behalf of the members of
the Council to congratulate the Republic of Croatia on the
decision which the Council bas just taken, namely to
recommend to the General Assembly the admission of
Croatia to membership in the United Nations.

"I am pleased, on behalf of the members of the
Council, to extend our congratulations to the Republic of
Slovenia on the occasion of the Council's recommendation
to the General Assembly that Slovenia be admitted to
membership in the United Nations.

"Croatia's solemn commitment to uphold the Purposes
and Principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
include the principles relating to the peaceful settlement of
disputes and the non-use of force, and to fulfil ail the
obligations contained in the Charter is noted with great
satisfaction by the members of the Council.

"We note with great satisfaction Slovenia's solemn
commitment to uphold the Purposes and Principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, which include the principles relating to the peaceful settlement of disputes and
the non-use of force, and to fulfil all the obligations
contained in the Charter.

"'The members of the Council are confident that
Croatia will contribute fully and effectively in ail areas of
the Organization's activities."

"Ail the members of the Council are confident that
Slovenia will make a significant contribution to the work of
the Organization."

115
