A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/187
12 February 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 94
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/53/609/Add.6)]
53/187. Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, by which it decided to establish the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme,
Also recalling the results and decisions of the nineteenth special session of the General Assembly,
convened for the purpose of an overall review and appraisal of the implementation of Agenda 21,1 and,
in particular, paragraphs 119 and 122 to 124 of the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda
21,2
Further recalling the Nairobi Declaration on the Role and Mandate of the United Nations
Environment Programme,3 adopted by the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme at its nineteenth session,

1

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
2

Resolution S–19/2, annex.

3

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/52/25), annex,
decision 19/1, annex.

99-76819

/...

A/RES/53/187
Page 2

Having considered the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme on its fifth special session,4
1. Welcomes the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme
on its fifth special session and the decisions contained therein;4
2. Recognizes, in particular, the Governing Council decision on the revitalization, reform and
strengthening of the United Nations Environment Programme,5 including the areas of concentration of
the activities of the Programme as proposed by the Executive Director in keeping with the spirit of the
Nairobi Declaration on the Role and Mandate of the United Nations Environment Programme,3 as well
as other priority areas of the Programme, as established by the Governing Council at its nineteenth session;
3. Welcomes the adoption by the Conference of Plenipotentiaries, at Rotterdam, Netherlands, on
11 September 1998, of the Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for Certain Hazardous
Chemicals and Pesticides in International Trade, and takes note of the fact that the functions of the
secretariat of the Convention are jointly performed by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the United Nations Environment Programme as an interim arrangement pending the final
decision to be taken by the parties to the Convention on the location of the secretariat;
4. Also welcomes the holding of the first session of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee
for an International Legally Binding Instrument for Implementing International Action on Certain
Persistent Organic Pollutants, which took place at Montreal, Canada, from 29 June to 3 July 1998, and
further welcomes the positive role played by the United Nations Environment Programme in the field of
environmental management of chemicals and especially the efforts undertaken by the Programme, as the
secretariat of the convention, for the negotiations on a convention on persistent organic pollutants;
5. Emphasizes that the United Nations Environment Programme has been and must continue to be
the principal United Nations body in the field of environment and that its role is to be the leading global
environmental authority that sets the global environmental agenda, that promotes the coherent
implementation of the environmental dimension of sustainable development within the United Nations
system and that serves as an authoritative advocate for the global environment;
6. Welcomes the Governing Council decision,6 as well as the decisions taken by the Assembly of
the Global Environment Facility at its meeting held at New Delhi from 1 to 3 April 1998 and by the
Global Environment Facility Council at its meeting held in Washington, D.C., from 14 to 16 October
1998, regarding the role of the United Nations Environment Programme in the Facility, and also welcomes
the collaboration with the Facility on freshwater resources, as in the global international water assessment,
and on activities aimed at combating land degradation as they relate to the focal areas of the Facility;
7. Encourages the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme to continue
with the ongoing reform of the Programme, and recognizes, as stated in the Nairobi Declaration, that, in
order to operationalize its mandate, a revitalized Programme needs adequate, stable and predictable

4

Ibid., Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/53/25).

5

Ibid., annex I, decision SS.V/2.

6

Ibid., decision SS.V/6.
/...

A/RES/53/187
Page 3

financial resources, and in this regard also recognizes the interrelationship between excellence, relevance
and cost-effectiveness in programme delivery, confidence in the organization and a consequent increase
in the ability of the Programme to attract funding;
8. Also encourages the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme to
intensify his efforts to mobilize additional financial resources from other donor sources, as appropriate,
in order to support the implementation of the priority areas of the Programme in line with the Nairobi
Declaration and subject to the agreement of the Governing Council.
91st plenary meeting
15 December 1998
