Resolutions adopted on reports of the Fourth Committee

council, with a view to devising satisfactory procedures
for the election of representatives to the council;
6. Recommends that the Administering- Authorities,
in consultation with the representativl':; of the peoples
concerned, extend the functions and powers of the joint
council to enable it to consider all aspects of the Ewe
and Togoland unification problem ancl to make recommendations thereon :
7. Recommends, in view of the urgency of this
problem, that the Trusteeship Council devote more intensive attention to all aspects of it affecting the two
Trust Territories;
8. Recommends further that the Trusteeship Council, at its tenth session, arrange for the dispatch to the
Trust Territories concerned of a special mission, or
alternatively, for its next periodic visiting mission to
these two Trust Territories to de·vote sufficient time to
the problem to study it thorougl. 1.". including the functioning of the proposed joint co111 ·ii, and to submit to
the Trusteeship Council a deta ilt,, report thereon, including specific recommendatiun~; 11 · :eh shall take full
account of the real wishes and 11,;,·, ,'.',1s of the peoples
concerned;
9. Requests the Trusteeship Council to instruct the
mission so dispatched to submit its report to the Council for consideration at its eleventh session;
10. Requests the Trusteeship Council to submit to
the General Assembly at its seventh regular session a
special report covering all aspects of the problem.
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.
556 (VI). Dissemination of information on the
United Nations and on the International
Trusteeship System in Trust Territories

The General Assembly,
Considering that it is essentia1 that the peoples of
Trust Territories should receive adequate information
concerning the p11rposes and operation of the United
Nations and of the International Trusteeship System
in particular,
Noting that the Trusteeship Council has instructed 13
the visiting missions to investigate on the spot the best
means of disseminating such information,
1. Recommends that the Administering Authorities
of Trust Territories take all appropriate steps to disseminate information on the United Nations, and on
the International Trusteeship System in particular,
among the population and in the schools, and report to
the Secretary-General details of such steps;
2. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council include in its annual reports to the General Assembly all
particulars supplied on the subject, together with its
remarks.
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.
557 (VI). Educational advancement
Territories

in

Trust

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the speedy educational advancement
of the inhabitants of Trust Territories is essential for
11

See Trusteeship Council resolution 311 (VIII).

57

the attainment of the objectives of the International•
Trusteeship System,
Recognizing that the United Nations has a ~pec_ial
responsibility towards the inhahitanb of the Terntones
under the International Trusteeship System,
Desirous of giving all possible assistance to the edt!cational advancement of the illhabitants of these Terntories,
Recalling that, by resolution 110 (V) of 19 J_uly
1949, the Trusteeship Council urged that all possible
steps be taken to make available to qualified s_tudents
from Trust Territories fellowships, scholarships and
internships which have been or may be establi~hed by
the United Nations or by its specialized agencies, and
recalling that by the same resolution the Council invited the Administering Authorities to give full publicity with rega_rd to all fell?wshi_ps, schola1~ships and
internships available to the mhab1tants of 1 rust Territories,
1 Invites Member States of the United Nations to
make available, to qualified students from Trust Territories fellowships, scholarships and internships, and to
notify the Trusteeship Council concerning the avai_lability of such fellowships, scholarships and internsh1ps
in public as well as private institutions;
2. Invites the Trusteeship Council to request the
Secretary-General, having in mind the procedures of
the Expanded Programme of Tech~ical Assista1;c~ and
the machinery of the Technical Assistance Admm1stration, to make such arrangements as may be necessary
to ensure the efficient administration of all offers of
scholarships, fellowships and internships for inhabitants
of Trust Territories that may be made;
3. Requests further that the Trusteeship Counc!l
invite the Administering Authorities concerned to avail
themselves of such scholarships, fellowships and internships in accordance with procedure to be devised ~nd
give full publicity with regard to such fe!lowsh1ps,
scholarships and internships in their respective Trust
Territories;
4. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to give all appropriate
assistance in the implementation of the present resolution;
5. Requests the Trusteeship Council to report with
regard· to these matters to the General Assembly at its
next regular session.
361st plenary mreting,
18 January 1952.
558 (VI). Attainment by the Trust Territories
of the obj~tive of self-government or independence

The General Assembly,
Considering that in the case of only one Trust Territory, namely Somaliland under Italian administration,
the Trusteeship Ag-reement provides, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 289A (IV) of 21
November 1949, for a specific period of ten years at
the end of which the Trust Territory shall be an independent sovereign State,
Considering that under Article 76 b of the Charter
one of the basic objectives of the International Trustee-

58

General Asaemhly-Slxth Senion

i;l ,,· S,11stem is L!l(: progressive development of the in: .: ,i,..mt~ of the Tru'.,t Territ,lries towards self-governu,,·111 or independence as may he appropriate to the
pan1cular circumstauces of each Territory and its
peoples a111l the freeiy expressed wishes of the peoples
co1;, erncd, and as 1n;iy be provided in the terms of
1:ac,1 Trusteeship Agrr.:cnicnt,
1. Notrs, that i11 the case of no Trust Territory
other than that of 5ornaliland has the Administering
Autho1ity conn:rned :,ubmitted information as to the
time and manner in which the Territory is expected to
attain the objective of self- government or independence; and accordingly,
2. Invites the Administering Authority of each
Trust Territory other than Somaliland to include in
each annual report ,1n its administration information
in respect of :
( <•) The measures, taken or contemplated, which
are intended to lead the Tru"t Territory, in the shortest
possible time, to the objective of self-government or
independence ;
( b) The manner in which, in these respects, the
particular circumstances of the Territory and its people and the freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned are being taken into account;
(c) The adequacy of the provisions of the existing
Trusteeship Agreement in relation to all the foregoing
factors;
(d) The rough estimate of the time which it considers, under existing conditions, may be needed to
complek one or more of the va1;ous measures which
are meant to create the pre-conditions for the attainment by the Trust Territory of the objective of selfgovernment or independence :
( e) The period of time in which it is expected that
the Trust Territory shall attain the objective of selfgovernment or independence.
361st plena,ry meeting,
18 January 1952.

559 (VI). Report of the Trusteeship Council
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the report of the Trusteeship
Council 14 covering its third special session and its eighth
and ninth sessions ;
2. Expresses its confidence that the Trusteeship
Council, in a spirit of genuine undertaking and cooperation, will continue to contribute--and with increased effectiveness-to achieving the high objectives
of the International Trusteeship System;
3. Recommf?nds that the Trusteeship Council consider at its next sessions the comments and suggestions
made during the discussion of the report at the sixth
session of the General Assembly, including the valuable
discussions in the Fourth Committee on various specific
trusteeship problems, with a view to arriving at a
speedy solution of those problems.
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.

560 (VI). Information on the implementation of
Trueteeahip Council and General AHembly
resolutions relating to Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resoluliuns 436 (V) and 433 (V) of
2 December 1950 coocerning information on the implementation of Trusteeship Council and General Assembly resolutions relating to Trust Territories,
Havi.ng considered the Secretary-General's memorandum15 regarding information on the implementation
of Trusteeship Council and General Assembly resolutions relating to Trust Territories,
1. Takes note of the Sccretary--General's memorandum regarding infonnation on the implementation
of Trusteeship Council and General Assembly resolu·tions relating to Trust Territories;
2. Observes that in certain cases effect has not yet
been given to all Trusteeship Council and General Assembly recommendations and resolutions applicable to
Trust Territories;
3. Observes that the action thus far taken by the
Trusteeship Council does not give effect to the wishes
of the General Assembly as expressed in resolution
433 (V), paragraph 1 ( d);
4. Expresses the hope that the Administering Authorities which have not yet given effect to all such
recommendations and resolutions will implement them
as speedily as possible and inform the Trusteeship
Council of the steps which have been taken or which
it is supposed to take in that respect ;
5. Requests the Trusteeship Council, in order to
enable the General Assembly to have clearly at its disposal all the knowledge necessary for the fulfilment of
its duties with regard to the International Trusteeship
System, to include in each case in the appropriate section of its report to the General Assembly such conclusions as it may deem necessary regarding the action
taken by the Administering Authority and regarding
the measures which, in its opinion, should be adopted
in view of those conclusions.
361st plenary meering,
18 January 1Y52.

561 (VI). Rural economic development of the
Trust Territories
The General Assembly.
Noting the action taken by the Trusteeship Council 18
in respect of General Assembly resolution 438 (V) of
2 December 1950 on the rural economic development
of the Trust Territories,
Noting, in particular, the complex and exacting technical nature of the study in question,
Recommends that the Trusteeship Council consider
inviting the appropriate specialized agencies, particularly the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and the International Labour Organisation, as well as other experts if necessary, to assist it
in its study on the rural economic development of the
Trust Territories.
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.
11

"See Official RectwdJ of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Supplement No. 4.

See documents A/1903 and Adds. 1 and 2.
See Official Rec01'ds of the Gmn-al Asstmbly, Sixth Session,
Sut;lrmmt No. 4, part I, chapter VI, section 2.
1
•
