S/PV.7173

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7173rd meeting

Tuesday, 13 May 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oh Joon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Republic of Korea)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Gálvez
Mr. Cai Weiming
Mr. Araud
Mr. Omaish
Mrs. Kazragienė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. McKell
Mr. Simonoff

Agenda
The situation in Libya

14-01541 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1401541*

S/PV.7173

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: It is just over three years since my
Office started interacting with the Security Council on
Libya following the Council’s adoption of resolution
1970 (2011), referring the situation in Libya to the
International Criminal Court (ICC). The opportunity
to once again engage with the Council as I present
the seventh report regarding developments in Libya is
welcome, as always.
In March this year, Libya marked the third
anniversary of its revolution. We continue to witness
the strong determination of the Libyan people to
consolidate their freedom and build a modern democratic
State that upholds the rule of law and respects human
rights. Notwithstanding those aspirations, Libya
continues to face serious security challenges and
a deep political crisis that undermine its ability to
effect much-needed meaningful judicial and other
changes. The steady decline in the security situation
has hampered my Office’s investigative activities and
hindered possibilities for effective interaction with the
Government of Libya.
Strengthening Libya’s ability to assume its security
responsibilities remains key to the success of our joint
endeavours to bring lasting peace to Libya. Increased,
well-coordinated international efforts to provide
support to Libya therefore remain essential. Libya
should heed the Council’s call on all parties to support
the democratic transition in Libya, including agreement
on its immediate next steps, and to engage in political
dialogue and refrain from violence and actions that
challenge the stability of the State.
2/16

13/05/2014

Reports of torture and mistreatment, as well as
deaths by torture in illegal detention centres, are
worrying. While the number of detainees requiring
transfer to proper Government-controlled detention
facilities has reportedly dropped from 8,000 to 7,000,
the process of transfer of prisoners to State-controlled
detention centres has to be speeded up. Illegal
detentions and torture should have no place in modern
Libya. Those alleged to be responsible for these crimes
must be investigated, prosecuted and face the full force
of the law. My Office stands ready to work with the
Libyan Government to bring this scourge to an end.
The time has also come for the Libyan Government
to resolve the Tawergha issue. Steps taken by the
Government of Libya, together with the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, to plan a national conference
on internal displacement and to organize meetings
with the exiled Tawergha Local Council, as well as
between the Tawergha Local Council and the Misrata
Local Council are very much welcome. The national
conference has yet to take place, however, and these
efforts have yet to bear fruit. They must be intensified.
It is important for the Government of Libya to bring
all relevant stakeholders together to address alleged
crimes in Tawergha. The participation of key partners
from the international community in these discussions
will be a clear message to the Tawerghans and
Misratans that the situation of Tawergha is of concern
to the international community. This will also bring to
bear the resources of the international community to
help resolve the situation of Tawergha once and for all.
There is no doubt that Libya needs help to succeed
in its aspirations to transition to democracy and the
rule of law. Justice is key to lasting peace, and justice
should therefore be at the forefront of international
efforts to help Libya. The key partners of Libya should
seriously consider forming a contact group on justice
issues through which material and legal support could
be provided regularly to enhance Libya’s efforts to
bring justice to the victims. The Government of Libya
has repeatedly expressed its commitment to meeting its
international legal obligations and has sought help in
order to do so. That help should be forthcoming as soon
as possible.
Individuals alleged to have committed serious
crimes in Libya must be brought to justice either in
Libya or at the International Criminal Court; this is
not negotiable. It is regrettable that progress has been
slow in the case of Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi since the
14-01541

13/05/2014

The situation in Libya

Chamber’s ruling that the case was inadmissible before
the ICC and that he should be tried in Libya. We urge
the Government of Libya to ensure that the case against
him is proceeded with without undue delay and with
full respect for his due process rights.
It is even more regrettable and indeed a source of
great concern that, despite the Chamber’s order for the
Government of Libya to surrender Mr. Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi to the custody of the ICC, to date he has not
been surrendered to the Court. While the admissibility
decision is currently under appeal, Libya still has a
positive legal obligation to fully cooperate with the
Court and to comply with the Chamber’s orders, as
the admissibility decision and the order to surrender
Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi are not suspended by the
appeal process, as confirmed by the Appeals Chamber
in its July 2013 decision. To be absolutely clear, the
Government of Libya should immediately surrender
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the Court. National
judicial proceedings can never be an excuse for failure
to comply with the Chamber’s order. It is incumbent
upon the Government of Libya to fully engage with
the judges and to provide assurances that its domestic
proceedings against Mr Al-Qadhafi will not impede its
obligation to surrender him.
Following the conclusion of the memorandum of
understanding on burden-sharing with the Government
of Libya last year, on 29 January my Office held
fruitful and constructive discussions with Libyan
Prosecutor General Abdel Qader Radwan on practical
aspects of the implementation of this memorandum of
understanding and strategies for further investigations,
prosecutions and possible arrests. These discussions
will be continued during the next meeting with the
Attorney General’s investigators, scheduled for 15 May.
The support of the Council and of all States is
critical to these joint endeavours to bring to justice,
either in Libya or at the ICC, those responsible for
serious mass crimes. In particular, and as I have said
before, such support is crucial to the colossal task of
collecting evidence to untangle the modus operandi
of the networks responsible for committing crimes.
Among other things, we will require telephone
intercepts and sustained follow-up on transfers of funds
to establish the whereabouts and movements of persons
under investigation. This is all information that we can
access only through the assistance of States.
Above all, we hope we can count on the cooperation
of States in facilitating the smooth arrest and surrender

S/PV.7173

of those against whom warrants will be issued.
This is key to sending a clear message to would-be
Libyan perpetrators, and indeed all other wouldbe perpetrators, that the international community is
watching and will no longer allow impunity to reign
unchecked. I again stress that the memorandum of
understanding is intended to foster cooperation and
reinforce both parties’ obligations to investigate and
prosecute crimes, and that it does not apply to or affect
the ongoing judicial proceedings in either the Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi or the Al-Senussi cases.
Let me conclude by encouraging the Government of
Libya to be fully transparent about its justice activities.
It is my Office’s sincere hope that the proposal for
establishing a contact group will be followed up as
soon as possible. This will send a clear message to
the Government of Libya that its key partners intend
to follow through on their pledges to support justice
initiatives and to support the evolving relationship
between the ICC and the Government of Libya.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I take this
opportunity to warmly welcome Ms. Fatou Bensouda
among us and to thank her for her briefing on the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in Libya.
I wish to encourage the member and non-member
States of the ICC to cooperate with the Court in the
cases involving crimes committed in Libya in 2011.
We also thank and encourage the Libyan Government,
and more specifically the Prosecutor General of Libya,
for their cooperation with th ICC in the framework of
the memorandum of understanding signed between
the parties on the conduct of investigations and
prosecutions.
The report of the ICC Prosecutor notes the
commission of serious crimes that have gone unpunished
and whose perpetrators have yet to be prosecuted. More
than 7,000 individuals have been detained without due
process, and the Tawergha community, which seems to
have been forcibly displaced, has not yet been able to
return home. In those circumstances, the involvement
of international and domestic justice is an absolute
necessity. We also encourage the ICC to continue its
investigations within and outside Libya, both with
regard to the Government and militias alike. With

14-015413/16

S/PV.7173

The situation in Libya

regard to current cases, we take note of the Abdullah
Al-Senussi case and hope that the ICC will pursue its
efforts in a fully transparent and objective manner.
As in all wars, the conflict in Libya has caused
thousands of deaths and entailed very serious violations
of international humanitarian law and humans rights
law. Those responsible for the crimes must answer for
their actions. As we know, however, the political and
social situation in Libya remains precarious and quite
volatile. The ICC and the Government of Libya must
bear in mind the need for justice and security. The
Council will have to provide the necessary assurances
and support for the Libyan Government in resolving the
issue surrounding Saif Al-Islam. His country’s courts
should provide a fair trial, if the conditions allow.
Otherwise, the ICC should provide such a trial.

13/05/2014

against whom there is no evidence for prosecution,
as well as to refer to national courts cases of persons
against whom there is evidence for trials in line with
due process and established legal rules. That will serve
to generate confidence in the Libyan judicial system.
With regard to the investigations carried out by the
Office of the Prosecutor into the approximately 30,000
persons displaced from Tawergha, we support the
conclusion of the Prosecutor’s Office that this is a case
of forced displacement. In that regard, we commend the
efforts of the Libyan Government to hold consultations
and meetings with the inhabitants of Tawergha. We
hope that the Government will succeed in resolving
this situation and ensuring the return of the displaced
to their homes.

The international community must help Libya to
put in place the rule of law, which is a prerequisite for
the return of peace and stability.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate
its thanks to Ms. Bensouda for the information she has
provided us in the cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi.

Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her briefing to us
this morning and for her presentation to the Security
Council of the Prosecutor’s seventh report. Jordan
underscores the role of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in combating impunity. We reiterate our ongoing
support for the efforts of the ICC in that regard.

Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina wishes to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
for introducing her seventh report to the Council as
required by resolution 1970 (2011). We also welcome
the presence among us of the Permanent Representative
of Libya.

Successive Libyan Governments since 2011 have
pledged to continue to enshrine the principles of the
rule of law and accountability for the crimes committed
during the conflict. We accept that there continue to
be challenges, obstacles and several security problems
facing Libya, which could undermine the progress made
thus far. We commend the efforts of the Government
to cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor and
with the ICC. We welcome references in the seventh
report concerning the imminent implementation of
the memorandum of understanding signed last year
between the Libyan Government and the Office of the
Prosecutor with regard to burden-sharing in carrying out
additional investigations and trials of suspects outside
Libyan territory. We also call on the Government to
expedite its conclusion of an agreement with the ICC
Registrar with regard to privilages and immunities, so
as to facilitate the work of ICC staff.

The referral of situations to the International
Criminal Court attests to the Council’s recognition
of the Court’s role with regard to justice and the fight
against impunity for crimes of international concern, as
well as of the contribution of the Rome Statute and the
International Criminal Court to that end.

We are concerned about the slow progress in
dealing with the issue of detainees in Libya. We call
on the Government to work closely with the United
Nations to put an end to the crisis and release detainees

4/16

Libya faces many challenges in building the
institutions of the rule of law. However, the constructive
dialogue between the Libyan authorities and the
Office of the Prosecutor continues to evolve. Last
year, we were informed that the limited contact with
the Libyan Government had been overcome, that the
Office of the Prosecutor had renewed its contacts with
the new Administration following the 2012 elections
and that the Prosecutor and the Attorney General of
Libya had signed a memorandum of understanding on
burden-sharing with regard to future investigations
and proceedings, which did not affect the cases of Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. Today we
have been informed that the Office of the Prosecutor
has already begun discussions with Libya in connection
with priority suspects and that it will imminently meet

14-01541

13/05/2014

The situation in Libya

with the Libyan authorities to discuss further details.
We encourage the Libyan Government to continue to
cooperate with the Court so that it, in turn, can support
effective accountability for the crimes committed in
Libya.
With regard to the cases of Saif Al- Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi, which the Office of the
Prosecutor had suspended owing to the admissibility
challenge raised ​​
by Libya, Argentina has always
emphasized that this is about a judicial evaluation that,
pursuant to article 17, sub-paragraphs 1 (a) and (c),
is solely up to the Chambers of the Court. Argentina
hopes that Libya will initiate proceedings against
Abdullah Al-Senoussi. With regard to the admissibility
challenge pertaining to Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, the
Appeals Chamber has rejected the Libyan request for
suspension while the appeal proceeds with regard to
the Court’s ruling on the admissibility of the claim
regarding the request for handing over the defendant.
As the Prosecutor has done in her report, Argentina
reminds Libya that it has an obligation to surrender
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the court. We are aware
that there is a trial in Libya against Al-Qadhafi, but
Libya must ensure that this trial does not interfere its
obligations to the International Criminal Court.
Argentina acknowledges the concern of the
Prosecutor at the continuation of the situation described
in the report entitled “Torture and death in detention in
Libya,” published in October 2013 by the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, to
which the Security Council referred in resolution 2144
(2014). Although the Prosecutor points to a decrease
in the number of detainees being held without due
process, there are still approximately 7,000 detainees
who have not been transferred to State custody. The
Libyan Government recognizes the problem; however,
Argentina urges the central Government and local
authorities, in particular in Misrata, to guarantee
detainees due process under the transitional justice law
and to release all detainees who have not been found
guilty or who have served a sentence.
We would also like to reiterate the appeal to Libya
to effectively enforce its law criminalizing torture,
discrimination and forced disappearances, since we
are concerned by the Prosecutor’s report that so far it
seems that not one State official or militia member has
been brought to justice for those crimes. In addition,
without prejudicing the assessment of the situation

S/PV.7173

of the civilians displaced in Tawergha as a crime
under the Rome Statute, it is essential that a strategy
be implemented to ensure the return of the 30,000
displaced people to their homes.
This is another report from the Prosecutor that
highlights Libya’s willingness to cooperate with
the Court. Like the Prosecutor, Argentina fully
understands the extent of the challenges facing the
Libyan authorities, and commends the Office of the
Prosecutor for its willingness to continue to support the
Government in its efforts to deal with as many of the
cases under its jurisdiction as possible. We also believe,
however, that Libya’s need for democratic, legitimate
legal institutions in the area of the rule of law clearly
exceeds the competence of the International Criminal
Court. The cooperation of the international community
is essential if we are to achieve a secure Libya with
reliable, sustainable institutions and respect for its
citizens’ human rights.
There are some additional aspects that my
delegation wishes to emphasize, as we do every time
the Prosecutor presents a report to the Council. The
referrals that the Council makes — and the situation in
Libya is one of them — include an obligation to follow
up responsibly on those referrals. Argentina believes
that the Council cannot merely take note of these
reports and that it is therefore essential that it put into
practice the commitment expressed in its presidential
statement S/PRST/2013/2, either through the Working
Group on International Tribunals or a specific working
group dedicated to the ICC.
We would also like to reiterate that Argentina
considers the clause that seeks to exempt nationals of
States that are not party to the Rome Statute from the
Court’s jurisdiction to be unacceptable. An exception
for nationals of States that are not party to the Statute
constitutes an attempt to alter the Statute’s provisions
and could affect the credibility of the Court and of the
Security Council itself.
Another aspect that Argentina finds inexplicable
is that the Council has determined that the costs of
referrals will be borne not by the United Nations but
by States parties to the Statute. Besides the fact that
this violates the Rome Statute and the relationship
agreement with the Court, the fact of the matter is that
pressure on the resources available to the Court has
grown with the increasing numbers of its cases. Because
of this, making referrals without considering how they
are financed could well jeopardize the Prosecution’s

14-015415/16

S/PV.7173

The situation in Libya

activities and the Court’s long-term viability. The fight
against impunity is a goal not just of States parties to
the Rome Statute but of the United Nations, and the
two referrals made so far are proof of that. However,
that goal must also be backed by a commitment to
providing the Court with the resources it needs to
fulfil its functions. If the Organization could provide
those resources for the two Ad Hoc Tribunals, we do
not understand what is preventing it from the doing the
same for the ICC.
As we do every time we discuss the International
Criminal Court, my delegation would like to emphasize
its belief that the Court represents a remarkable
contribution to achieving accountability for crimes of
international concern, and that it is as essential today as
when it was founded. I commend the Prosecutor for her
efforts, dedication and courage in our common cause,
the fight against impunity, and I once again urge the
Government and people of Libya to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court.
Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): I would
like to begin by thanking Prosecutor Bensouda of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for her informative
briefing on Libya, and especially for her contributions
to ending impunity for the most serious crimes in Libya.
Three years ago, with the adoption of resolution 1970
(2011), the Security Council called for accountability in
Libya. Today, we see real steps towards that at both the
international and domestic levels. We welcome reports
of collaboration between Libya and the Office of the
Prosecutor in connection with ongoing investigations,
and we note that they have signed a memorandum of
understanding that we hope will facilitate collaboration
going forward. Cooperation is key. We know, of course,
that the admissibility proceedings in the cases against
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi are
ongoing. Those proceedings have presented novel and
important questions for both the Court and the Libyan
Government. As the proceedings continue in the Libya
situation, we continue to urge Libya to cooperate with
the ICC and to take steps to ensure that the perpetrators
of the worst crimes are held to account.
In addition to the Court’s proceedings, we know
that Libya still faces many challenges in its efforts to
support justice and accountability. The Government
can only benefit from continuing to work with the
international community to bolster its own domestic
capacity in the justice system and to ensure that both
high-profile figures from the former regime and the
6/16

13/05/2014

thousands of conflict-related detainees are held only in
accordance with the applicable international obligations.
All detainees should be promptly transferred to
Government-controlled facilities and must be treated
humanely. Within the context of a transitional justice
strategy, the Libyan authorities may have to prioritize
prosecutions focusing on those who bear the greatest
responsibility for the crimes.
Beyond prosecutions, we encourage Libya to
explore other accountability measures such as those
envisioned in its transitional justice law. Additionally,
we underscore how important it is that Libya conduct
domestic investigations and prosecutions in a
manner consistent with its international obligations.
Prosecutions that respect the rights of defendants,
including those who were members of the former
regime, and that provide them with proper guarantees
of a fair trial, will also contribute to strengthening
public confidence in the judiciary and the rule of law
in Libya.
As we look at the bigger picture, the United States
remains very concerned about the rising instability
in Libya. It threatens to undermine the revolution for
which Libyans fought so dearly, and to jeopardize
Libya’s transition to a democratic and prosperous State
in which all Libyans can participate. Together we must
be clear about what is at risk. The United States will
continue to support Libya in its efforts to guarantee
security and protect all its citizens and democratic
institutions. We also applaud the seating of Libya’s
Constitution Drafting Assembly. We remain committed
to supporting the Libyan Government and institutions
through this difficult phase.
Finally, we look forward to the ongoing work and
partnership with the United Nations, Libya and Libya’s
international partners, and to exploring appropriate
ways whereby we can advance critical initiatives for
a peaceful democratic transition and vital national
reconciliation efforts, including the assistance pledged
in Rome at this year’s Ministerial Conference on
International Support to Libya.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our thanks
to Prosecutor Bensouda and her Office for the work
they have done to advance the cause of justice for the
people of Libya.
Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her informative and valuable briefing to the Council

14-01541

13/05/2014

The situation in Libya

on the work of the Office of the Prosecutor in relation
to the situation in Libya.
Australia remains concerned about the volatile
political and security situation in Libya. We recognize
that delivering effective justice in Libya is dependent
on building stability and security in the country,
and the recent attacks on Libya’s parliament and on
political leaders and security personnel are disturbing
reminders of the challenges the country faces. National
leadership, of course, is critical to addressing the
security situation and keeping the political transition
on track. We urge the Libyan authorities to continue
to support the ongoing constitutional drafting process
and rule-of-law reforms, and to continue their close
cooperation with the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya. Security sector reform is a crucial part of that
and must be a priority. As long as militias rather than
the State retain physical custody of detainees, as long
as witnesses are too scared to testify and as long as
judges are threatened, it will be difficult for justice to
be delivered in a manner consistent with international
standards.
We are concerned about the adoption of amnesty
laws that provide revolutionaries with immunity from
prosecution. We urge Libya to respect the principles
of the equality before the law and to ensure that those
believed to be most responsible for the commission
of serious international crimes are held to account,
regardless of what side they fought on. The Prosecutor
has again drawn our attention to the thousands of
conflict-related detainees who continue to be held
without due process, some of whom have reportedly
been subject to torture and other ill treatment. We
recognize the progress made, but we recall resolution
2144 (2014) and again urge Libya to ensure that the
detainees in question are transferred to effective
State control as swiftly as possible, that the basis of
their detention is judicially reviewed and that those
responsible for arbitrary detention or mistreatment are
held to account.
We acknowledge that the challenges facing Libya
are considerable. Its judicial system was all but
destroyed under the Al-Qadhafi regime. But it is vital
that Libya ensure that the rights of all those defendants
being tried for serious crimes are upheld in full.
Turning more specifically to the activities of the
International Criminal Court, we welcome the fact that
Libya has pursued its challenge to the ICC jurisdiction
in the Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi

S/PV.7173

cases in a manner that is consistent with the Rome
Statute. We are conscious that Libya remains under
a pending obligation to surrender Mr. Al-Qadhafi to
the ICC, notwithstanding its appeal of the Pre-Trial
Chamber’s decision rejecting its admissibility
challenge. We also note that the admissibility decision
in the Al-Senussi case is under appeal. It is essential that
Libya do nothing to frustrate ongoing ICC processes,
pending the decisions of the Appeals Chamber.
We underline the importance of Libya meeting its
obligations to cooperate with the Court, including by
surrendering defendants in accordance with the ICC
decisions.
Australia welcomes the Prosecutor’s advice on steps
taken to implement the memorandum of understanding
concluded between the Office of the Prosecutor and the
Libyan Government on burden-sharing in relation to
investigations, prosecutions and an arrest strategy. We
hope that continued engagement between the ICC and
the Libyan authorities will ensure that their respective
efforts can have a multiplying effect and serve as a
model for a collaborative partnership between the
ICC and States that have the will, but perhaps lack the
capacity, to hold all key perpetrators to account. We
furthermore hope that Libya’s insights into the Rome
Statute system will encourage it to accede to the Statute.
Noting the Prosecutor’s advice that several persons
of interest have fled Libya, Australia calls on other
Member States, particularly Libya’s neighbours, to
cooperate with the ICC to ensure that those most
responsible for the most serious international crimes
committed in Libya are brought to justice.
It is equally essential that the Council continue to
offer its support to the ICC and to the Libyan authorities
as they take steps to end the impunity that for too long
prevailed in the country. The Council must take action
in support of the Court when necessary to help Libya
achieve justice and lasting stability.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her introduction of the seventh report of her Office
to the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011). My comments will address the four main issues
in the report.
On matters pertaining to cooperation, we note
that the Office of the Prosecutor continues to receive
cooperation on the Libyan situation from State parties
as well as non-State parties with a view to strengthening

14-015417/16

S/PV.7173

The situation in Libya

the rule of law in Libya. We welcome the engagement of
the Libyan Prosecutor General with the ICC Prosecutor
and Deputy Prosecutor to discuss the implementation
of the memorandum of understanding of 2013 aimed
at fostering cooperation in the investigation of grave
crimes allegedly committed in Libya. We believe
that the support of the Libyan authorities is crucial in
facilitating the work of the Prosecutor.
Concerning the case against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, while we understand the wish of the Libyan
authorities to prosecute him within the national justice
system, we see the need for Libya’s actions in that
matter to be consistent with the decisions of the ICC.
With regard to ongoing investigations, we urge
the Government of Libya to expedite action on
its negotiations with the ICC Registry on matters
pertaining to the recognition of the privileges and
immunities of ICC staff in order to facilitate the work
of the ICC inside Libya.
On the crimes allegedly committed by the different
parties in Libya since 15 February 2011, we note with
concern that thousands of conflict-related detainees
have not yet been transferred to State authority and are
being held in violation of their basic human rights. We
also note that the Government of Libya missed its own
deadline of 2 March 2014 for charging or releasing all
detainees. We stress that respecting the human rights
of detainees is in itself an important aspect of the
dispensation of justice. We therefore endorse the call
by the Office of the Prosecutor for the Government of
Libya and concerned local authorities, especially in
Misrata, to process all detainees as expeditiously as
possible.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Prosecutor for her briefing. I would also
like to reaffirm our full support to the International
Criminal Court.
There are times in the history of international
relations in which unity may be achieved to prevent or
put an end to those atrocities, addressed in the terms
of the Rome Statute, that offend the conscience of
humankind. The announcement in February 2011, by
the Libyan regime itself, that it was preparing to commit
a bloodbath sparked such unity and the adoption of
resolution 1970 (2011), which was a moment of unity
in the Security Council. We have known other such
moments with the adoption of resolutions on the Central

8/16

13/05/2014

African Republic, and the same issue arises today with
regard to Syria.
The United Nations and regional organizations
together condemned the brutal abuses committed by
Libyan leaders. The International Criminal Court
has been at the heart of the process of rounding up
criminals, whatever their rank or affiliation.
When we take stock of the implementation of
resolution 1970 (2011), there is a question that by its
very nature remains unanswered: How many lives
were saved? Without doubt, there were thousands, and
history must give credit to the unanimity of the Security
Council, the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court.
Have we solved everything so far? Certainly not.
Libya is going through a transition with its difficulties
and uncertainties following 40 years of a mad
dictatorship. Violent acts continue, including against
diplomatic missions. But despite the catastrophic
legacy of Al-Qadhafi-ism, Libyans demonstrate
determination. They must continue to unite around a
common political project to complete the transition
to democracy. We wouldl ike to see a Government of
national unity formed quickly by the elected Prime
Minister, Mr. Ahmed Meitig. The Council has mobilized
to assist Libya, and we must continue that mobilization.
The cooperation of Libya with the International
Criminal Court is crucial to end the era of impunity
in that country, which in 2011 emerged from 42 years
of dictatorship. Despite its difficulties, Libya itself has
requested to try Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi, in accordance with the complementarity
principle of the Rome Statute. The Libyan authorities
have thus expressed their willingness to assume
responsibility. Tripoli’s two inadmissibility challenges
are at the appeal stage, and I will therefore not comment
on them.
Whatever the decision of the Court may be,
Libya, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), must
comply with the judges’ decisions. Libya’s compliance
with its international obligations will be a further
demonstration of its commitment to the rule of law.
There is no competition between national justice and
the International Criminal Court, either in Libya or
elsewhere. Libya has clear obligations under resolution
1970 (2011). It has committed to respecting them, and
it must do so. For other procedures, as Ms. Bensouda
recalled, the signing of the burden-sharing memorandum

14-01541

13/05/2014

The situation in Libya

of understanding between the Court and the Libyan
authorities represents an innovative and positive
approach. The memorandum must be implemented.
Beyond those symbolic cases, other challenges
exist. The Prosecutor mentioned allegations of crimes
committed by supporters of Al-Qadhafi who may today
reside outside of Libyan territory and pose a threat to
the new Libyan authorities. She can be assured of our
support in that regard.
Light must also be shed on allegations of crimes
such as those reportedly committed in Misrata,
Tawergha and in Bani Walid. We regret that the return
of communities in Tawergha to their villages has been
delayed.
We also express our deep concern about the
practice of torture and deaths in the illegal detention
centres controlled by armed brigades. About 7,000
cases remain, including children. Those practices must
end. Like the Prosecutor, we encourage the Libyan
authorities to implement the law adopted in April
2013 criminalizing torture, forced disappearance and
discrimination. The armed groups must be reminded
that the fight against impunity applies to all.
The task today is to follow up that approach,
including beyond the case of Libya. The continuing
process also calls for Libya’s full cooperation with the
Court, as well as the increased responsibility on the
part of the Secretariat and the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya in terms of the activities of the Court’s
bodies, so as to ensure that this Mission effectively
supports the fight against impunity.
We must also again restore unity in the Council
so as to save human lives today in Syria, far beyond
the political wrangling and in the name of humanity’s
conscience, which animated the Council on 26 February
2011 (see S/PV.6491).
Mr. Cai Weiming (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing.
At present, the National Assembly and interim
Government are committed to Libya’s political transition
and economic reconstruction, where progress has been
registered. The recent successful election put in place
the new Prime Minister of the interim Government. At
the same time, the political situation remains unstable,
conomic recovery is sluggish, the security situation
remains fragile and violence continues unabated. On
the whole, the situation is increasingly worrisome.

S/PV.7173

China respects the will and choice of the Libyan
people. We hope that all of the Libyan parties will bear
in mind the interests of the country and its people in
resolving their differences through political dialogue
and address the various challenges of the transition
period, in order to achieve long-term security and
stability. China welcomes the interim Government’s
efforts to achieve justice.
On the question of international judicial organs,
China’s position remains unchanged. We are of the
view that the international judicial organs should
fully respect the judicial sovereignty of the countries
concerned and abide by the norms of international
relations. In exercising jurisdiction, they must comply
with the principle of complementarity and cannot
replace the role played by national judicial systems. It is
China’s hope that the international judicial organs will
act in accordance with the relevant Council resolutions
and facilitate Libya’s reconstruction and political
transition.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I would like to start by thanking you,
Mr. President, for having convened today’s meeting
and to express my gratitude to the Prosecutor for
her participation. My delegation has familiarized
itself with the seventh report of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) on the investigation
of the situation in Libya. We would like to take this
opportunity to draw the Council’s attention to the
benefit of the early circulation of future reports, so
as to ensure a more thorough analysis of the contents
before consideration by the Council.
In our view, the overall situation in Libya continues
to deteriorate rapidly. Moreover, that comment
applies not only to the judicial system. Essentially,
the Government does not control the situation
throughout the majority of the country, where former
revolutionary brigades and anarchy reign. There are
increasing reports of armed clashes among groups
and attacks on representatives of the armed forces and
their infrastructure, political activists, foreigners and
diplomats. The overall situation in terms of criminal
activity is deteriorating. The country has morphed into
a dangerous source for the proliferation of arms, which
are falling into the hands of terrorists and extremists.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/131) expresses his serious concerns regarding
the safety of judicial personnel. It also notes the
continuing practice of attacks, death threats and other

14-015419/16

S/PV.7173

The situation in Libya

forms of intimidation against judges and prosecutors
and contains information regarding their killings. In
resolution 2144 (2014) the Council expressed its serious
concern regarding the lack of an appropriate judicial
process in conflict-related cases and reports of human
rights violations in detention centres, including torture
and sexual and gender-based violence.
We back efforts aimed at holding to account those
individuals involved in committing serious crimes in
Libya. The ability of the ICC to carry out effective and
impartial investigations of country situations referred
to it is highly important in terms of strengthening its
standing and the trust it inspires. Despite that, it is
unfortunate that there has been no major progress in
that area.
We have taken note of the information regarding the
admissibility of the cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi. Clearly, that issue must be
resolved by the Court’s Chambers as it falls within their
jurisdiction.
At the same time, while mindful of the assessment
of Libya’s political situation I have just referred to, we
consider unclear the logic of the conclusion that Libya
is capable of conducting proceedings in the case of
Abdullah Al-Senussi. That is especially so given that, as
the Pre-Trial Chamber itself has noted, there is a lack of
counsel in the case, serious security-related difficulties,
a lack of a witness protection programme, difficulties
in controlling penal facilities and other factors. We
look forward to detailed clarification of future appeals
rulings in those cases.
As it is clear from both the recent and previous
reports of the Prosecutor, the Registry’s work is focused
exclusively on the former supporters of Muammar
Al-Qadhafi. In terms of the actions of insurgents
during the conflict, the report again contains standard
formulas and expressions of general concern. There is
no mention of concrete steps to be taken regarding the
continuing practices of torture and harsh treatment in
the detention centres.
With respect to civilian victims of NATO bombings
that exceeded the parameters of permissible action
under resolution 1973 (2011) and its objectives, the
Prosecutor of the ICC has in effect withdrawn herself
from that investigation. We believe that approach is not
equitable and hold out the hope that it will be corrected.
To achieve the objectives of establishing the truth,
combating lawlessness and achieving the national
10/16

13/05/2014

reconciliation of any country, there is always an
overriding need for impartial and equal attention to
be paid to all sides of a conflict; without which it is
unlikely that international criminal justice will find
itself in demand by Governments.
Mrs. Kazragienė (Lithuania): Let me begin
by thanking Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for her briefing and for
introducing the seventh report to the Security Council.
Lithuania welcomes the efforts undertaken by the
Government of Libya in establishing the rule of law
and bolstering an effective system of justice throughout
the country. Some progress has been made, yet Libya
continues to face complex and serious political,
security and legal challenges. Despite some positive
developments, the system of criminal justice is not yet
fully functional and the security sector requires major
reform.
We believe that the International Criminal Court
is an important and necessary partner of the Libyan
authorities in restoring the rule of law and ensuring
accountability for the serious crimes committed in
Libya. Since the adoption of resolution 1970 (2011), the
Libyan Government has continued to demonstrate its
determination to cooperate with the Court. However,
with regard to the cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi, we would like to stress that
admissibility is a judicial issue under the exclusive
purview of the Chambers of the Court. While both
admissibility decisions remain under appeal, we would
like to remind Libya, as the Prosecutor has states in her
report, that Libya has an obligation to surrender Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the Court. The obligation to
surrender to the Court the persons against whom arrest
warrants have been issued must be respected.
At the same time, we welcome the cooperation
between the Libyan authorities and the Office of the
Prosecutor in implementing last year’s memorandum
of understanding on burden-sharing in further
investigations and prosecutions of persons allegedly
responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanity
in Libya since 15 February 2011.
We note the information provided by the
Prosecutor concerning the ongoing investigations by
her Office of the allegations of crimes committed by
some pro-Al-Qadhafi officials who currently might be
outside of Libya. We join the Prosecutor in encouraging
the Libyan Government to provide all the necessary

14-01541

13/05/2014

The situation in Libya

support to the staff of the Court so they can conduct
investigations promptly and in an unimpeded manner.
Moreover, we believe that the situation of conflictrelated detainees remains a major concern that needs
an urgent solution. We take note of the fact that, despite
some progress made, the deadline set by the Libyan law
on transitional justice for completing the screening of
detainees has expired and, in conjunction with security
issues and capacity constrains, 7,000 people have
not yet been transferred to the State authority. Public
prosecution can hardly cope with the problem. Such a
lack of effective accountability creates an environment
conducive to torture or other ill treatment, including
the deaths of individuals in custody. Therefore, we
would like to stress the importance of the proper
implementation of the law on transitional justice as a
basis for the reconciliation process.
Let me conclude by underlining our support
for, and commitment to the Court and the Office of
the Prosecutor. We hope that they will successfully
continue their thorough investigation of the situation in
Libya.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for introducing her seventh
report under resolution 1970 (2011). Luxembourg
fully supports the objectives that the Prosecutor has
presented. I reiterate to her our full support.
After 40 years of dictatorship, building a democratic
nation in Libya will be a lengthy process. The Libyan
authorities have reiterated their commitment to
continuing to democratize the country. We welcome the
progress made during the transition. We also remain
aware of the enormous challenges that persist, in
particular in terms of security.
Ultimately, it is the Libyan authorities who will have
to ensure respect for the rule of law in their country. We
call on the authorities to redouble their efforts to create
a stable security environment that guarantees freedom,
justice and respect for individual rights. For its part, the
international community must continue to help Libya
in this crucial phase of transition.
We congratulate the Libyan Government on the
constructive engagement that it has maintained with the
ICC. Despite its difficulties, Libya has asked to try Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi itself.
It is to the Libyan authorities’ credit that they want to
shoulder their responsibilities. They complied with the

S/PV.7173

Rome Statute procedures when they raised objections to
admissibility before the Court. However, a trial before
Libyan courts must not obstruct the proceedings of the
Court. We have no doubt that Libya, in accordance with
resolution 1970 (2011), will respect the final decision
of the ICC in the case of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi.
Meanwhile, Libya’s compliance with its international
obligations requires it to deliver the accused to the
Court.
Six months ago, we welcomed the memorandum of
understanding signed between the Libyan authorities
and the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC to
promote cooperation and burden-sharing in terms of
investigations and prosecutions. Today, we commend
the first contacts that took place between the Office and
the Prosecutor General of Libya on how to implement
the memorandum of understanding. Ms. Bensouda
has stated that she is continuing her investigation into
the alleged crimes committed in Libya by Colonel
Al-Qadhafi’s relatives who may be outside Libya and
may pose a threat to the new authorities. We fully
support her in that task.
The Prosecutor’s report notes progress on the
subject of people detained as a result of the conflict.
However, approximately 7,000 people are still being
held by armed brigades without proper trial. Many
of those prisoners have been subjected to torture
and other ill treatment. We call on Libya to ensure
that detainees are under the effective control of the
State, in accordance with the recommendations of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and the
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights. We also urge Libya to ensure that those
responsible for that ill treatment or other crimes, such
as enforced disappearances, answer for their acts in
accordance with the law criminalizing torture, enforced
disappearances and discrimination that was adopted in
April 2013.
More broadly, we encourage the Government of
Libya to develop and implement a comprehensive
strategy to put an end to crimes and impunity in Libya
and that it accept help, when needed, from its main
partners. The Court and the Council should be informed
of progress in that area.
Finally, it is crucial that the Libyan Government
conclude negotiations as soon as possible with the
Court’s Registry on the recognition of the privileges
and immunities of the Court’s personnel in Libya.
Aside from the security challenges, in order for the

14-0154111/16

S/PV.7173

The situation in Libya

ICC investigations to be effective, the staff of the Court
and the Office of the Prosecutor must be able to work
without hindrance or restriction of any kind.
In referring the situation in Libya to the Prosecutor
of the ICC, resolution 1970 (2011) demonstrated
the ability of the Security Council to act in unison
and quickly to fight against impunity. We must now
ensure the process is carefully monitored. The support
of the Council is vital for the Court, especially as
the jurisdiction of the Court stems from a Council
resolution. More generally, constant and active support
by the Security Council to the ICC is required in order
to encourage States to cooperate with the Court and to
ensure that Court referrals achieve their goal, namely,
delivering justice and maintaining international peace
and security.
Mr. Gálvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this meeting and welcome
the presence of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda. We also
welcome her introduction of her seventh report to the
Council.
Chile recognizes the complex security situation in
Libya and the need to continue the work in support of
institutions that respect the rule of law and human rights
while allowing Libya to comply with its obligation
to cooperate with the Court and its Prosecutor, in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 1970
(2011). We reiterate our country’s support to the
International Criminal Court and the work of its
Prosecutor. Its establishment was a major step in the
fight against impunity.
We underscore the work of the Council and its
essential role in the case of Libya. The adoption of
resolution 1970 (2011), under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, makes it possible for
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court to
extend to a State that is not party to the Rome Statute,
in this case Libya, just as it binds all States Members
of the Organization, whether party or not to the Statute.
We acknowledge the cooperation of both categories of
States with the International Criminal Court and Libya
in that regard.
Furthermore, Chile stresses that the responsibility
of the Council should not be understood as coming to an
end simply with the referral of a situation to the Court.
The Council should maintain the dialogue with the
Court and the Prosecutor and respond to their requests.

12/16

13/05/2014

The Council’s silence in response to such requests
would imply a lack of responsibility. That is why Chile
supports the establishment of an effective follow-up by
the Council.
We welcome the signing late last year of the
memorandum of understanding between the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Libyan Government and the contacts
made this year with the Prosecutor General of Libya
in order to implement the memorandum. Coordinated
work, in which the tasks of the investigation, legal
processes and arrest procedures are shared, will make
it possible to duly comply with resolution 1970 (2011)
and to establish the basis for a national reconciliation
process.
With regard to the detainees in the custody of
armed brigades, we are concerned that the self-imposed
deadline of 2 March, set by the Government of Libya to
put an end to the situation, has not been met. The fact
that there are approximately 7,000 detainees while the
Libyan State is not in control of the situation, leaving
them defenceless without charges brought against
them, violates their most basic human rights. We
therefore reiterate the appeal made in resolution 2144
(2014), which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, for all such individuals to be
transferred to State custody.
Chile underscores the fact that last year Libya
adopted legislation that provides for the prosecution
of torture, ill treament and discrimination. However,
we regret the fact that, according the report of the
Prosecutor, to date there have been no reported
prosecutions of the alleged perpetrators of the crimes
of torture and abuse, including sexual and genderbased violence and deaths as a result of the torture that
continues to occur in detention centres in that country.
My country underscores the importance of the Libyan
Government moving forward and sharing with the
Council and the international community its national
policy for responding to such crimes. That would allow
us to reaffirm and recognize Libya’s commitment to a
modern justice system in accordance with international
standards, while determining those areas or needs
to which cooperation should be dedicated in order to
reform the security sector in Libya.
We recognize the work of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court in investigating crimes
committed since February 2011. We urge her to
continue in that vein in order to ensure that perpetrators
of crimes, regardless of their origin, including those
14-01541

13/05/2014

The situation in Libya

responsible for crimes committed against minorities,
shall be brought to justice before the International
Criminal Court or in Libyan courts, in accordance
with the principle of complementarity established
under the Rome Statute. As a result, we call on the
Libyan authorities to comply with their obligation to
transfer Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the International
Criminal Court without further delay. Similarly , in
the case against Abdullah Al-Senussi, we appeal to
the Libyan authorities to refrain from any action that
could impede the Court from reconsidering the case if
the inadmissibility appeal were to be overturned by the
International Criminal Court when it decides.
I conclude by reiterating my country’s support
for and commitment to the work of the International
Criminal Court and the Prosecutor.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her briefing and for presenting the
seventh report on the activities of her Office and on the
implementation of resolution 1970 (2011) on Libya. We
agree with her statement that accountability for the most
serious crimes committed in Libya is not negotiable.
The precarious political and social context in which
Libya was left following the revolution reminds us of
all the difficulties that the Government still faces in
rebuilding its institutions. Only recently, on 28 April,
the Security Council, under the presidency of Nigeria,
organized a debate on security sector reform (see S/PV.
7161), at which many of us emphasized the link between
security sector reform and the rule of law and how
security sector reform should be an integral part of any
overall national strategy, which requires the concerted
commitment of the national authorities, as well as the
sustained engagement of international partners. That
is an important element that should be emphasized as,
with security in place, it is easy to sustain the progress
gained in other sectors — in this case, the judicial
sector. We therefore acknowledge the progress that
Libya has made in rebuilding its judicial institutions
and in establishing mechanisms to address the crimes
against humanity committed during the revolution.
Libya continues to face serious challenges in the
consolidation of its democratic system. The best way
for the international community to assist Libya in
overcoming such challenges is by strengthening the
capacity of Libyan institutions. Both the judicial and
security institutions need to be supported to enhance
their capacity and effectiveness.

S/PV.7173

We therefore note Libya’s commitment as a State
party to the Rome Statute to fulfilling its international
obligations by cooperating with the Court. We
regret the fact that the continued deterioration of the
security situation in Libya was an impediment to the
ICC’s investigation of crimes committed during the
armed conflict. At the same time, we believe that the
complementarity clause is of paramount importance
in the sense that the international community should
rather develop the capacity of Libya’s security
and judicial institutions, which can better address
such cases. The agreement on the memorandum of
understanding on burden-sharing, signed at the end of
last year between the Office of the Prosecutor and the
Libyan Government, could serve as a good base.
The fact that Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi have appeared before Libyan courts to face
the charges brought against them indicates that Libya
remains able and willing to uphold its duty in line with
the complementarity clause of the Rome Statute. It is
important that the Government of Libya continue to
do its part in ensuring that all perpetrators of crimes
committed during the armed conflict be brought to
justice. That involves ensuring that investigations into
the alleged crimes by all parties to the conflict, including
torture and illegal detention facilities, and the alleged
crimes in Tawergha are conducted. We encourage the
international community and the Government of Libya
to work together in ensuring that justice is rendered. In
that regard, we welcome the collaboration of the Niger
in extraditing to Libya Saif Al-Qadhafi, who faces
charges of crimes against humanity.
Lastly, while we recognize the important
contribution of international justice mechanisms to
fighting impunity for the most serious crimes, we
note from our own experience that national judicial
institutions have proved to be effective in reconciling
people and in addressing crimes against humanity
and mass atrocities. Fundamentally, we all stand
ready to accompany Libya as it strives, on the basis
of international standards, to rebuild its institutions,
which should ultimately be accountable to the Libyans
themselves.
The international community should therefore
extend its support in strengthening the Libyan judicial
system by providing technical capacity, which will
ultimately be essential to address the crimes committed
in Libya and for the reconciliation process. We stress
that accountability is a necessary foundation for

14-0154113/16

S/PV.7173

The situation in Libya

a unified and reconciled society committed to the
development of all its citizens and shall therefore not
be negotiable.
Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): I too thank the
Prosecutor for her report and briefing on the situation
in Libya.
The United Kingdom is concerned about the
continued deterioration in security and political
stability, which continues to hamper overall progress
towards a secure, stable and prosperous Libya. Libya
is now at a critical stage in its transition. It is essential
that Libyans work towards agreement on a single and
inclusive national dialogue process and refrain from
destabilizing action that would further set back the
political transition.
While the substance of any settlement must be
worked out by the Libyans themselves, the United
Kingdom is committed to working with Libya and its
international partners to encourage and support a stable
political agreement which can deliver the transition to a
more permanent democratic State. Helping the Libyan
Government to address its security challenges remains
our immediate priority, but supporting progress towards
a stable political settlement in Libya will require broad
and sustained engagement beyond security, including
in the areas of justice and the rule of law.
The United Kingdom welcomes the continuing
efforts to ensure that all those who have committed war
crimes and crimes against humanity since 15 February
2011 are held to account for their actions. There must
be no impunity for the perpetrators of those atrocities.
We welcome the ongoing dialogue between Libya
and the International Criminal Court (ICC), and in
particular the agreement by Libya to support the
Prosecutor’s continuing investigations. We encourage
the Government of Libya to conclude its negotiations
with the Registry on recognizing the privileges and
immunities of Court staff.
The United Kingdom is grateful for the update
from the Prosecutor on the cases of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. We continue
to support the right of Libya to hold national trials
for crimes committed within its jurisdiction. It is
important that any action taken be in line with the
decisions of the International Criminal Court. It is
imperative that all detainees be held in accordance with
Libyan and international law, by a legitimate authority
and that they have access to legal representation and

14/16

13/05/2014

medical care. The treatment and management of high
profile detainees from the Al-Qadhafi regime provides
Libya with an important opportunity to demonstrate
to the international community that it is committed to
ensuring fair trials, to meeting international standards
and the protection of human rights, and to cooperating
fully with the International Criminal Court.
The United Kingdom continues to urge Libya’s
full cooperation with the International Criminal Court.
We recall Libya’s obligation to cooperate fully with
and provide any necessary assistance to the Court
and the Prosecutor pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
The United Kingdom notes that in July 2013 the ICC
Appeals Chamber rejected Libya’s request to suspend
the surrender of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi while its
appeal was pending. Libya is under an obligation to
surrender him to the Court.
The United Kingdom stands with Libya as it works
to return to and strengthen the rule of law throughout
the country. We look forward to future cooperation
between Libya and the International Criminal Court.
The United Kingdom remains ready and willing to
assist the Court with its investigations as it plays its part
in ensuring that individual perpetrators of atrocities are
held to account for the crimes they have committed.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the Republic of Korea.
My delegation thanks Ms. Bensouda for her
briefing. As always, her and her staff’s valuable work
has become an indispensable part of the efforts to put
an end to impunity for those who committed heinous
crimes against humanity. In dealing with the Libyan
situation, the International Criminal Court (ICC) has
made meaningful achievements. In the process the
Libyan Government has been cooperative with the
ICC, although the situation on the ground has not
always been ideal for such cooperation. We appreciate
that cooperation on the part of the Libyan Government
and commend the follow-up consultation between the
ICC and the Libyan Government on the burden-sharing
memorandum of understanding. Such efforts should
continue.
Processing the remaining detainees as swiftly as
possible will be another step in the right direction.
Addressing the issue of the internally displaced persons
will also contribute to the progress of the national
reconciliation and the transition process.

14-01541

13/05/2014

The situation in Libya

With regard to the case against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi, we hope that
a workable solution that meets Libya’s international
obligations and its domestic expectations can be found
through continued interactions between the Prosecutor
and the Libyan Government.
Today’s briefing makes it clear once again that
cooperation between the Libyan Government and
the ICC is what separates the Libyan situation from
the other cases referred by the Council. We hope that
this cooperation will continue until the situation is
addressed to the satisfaction of the Libyan people and
the international community.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate your delegation,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month, and to wish you and your
delegation every success. I also wish to thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her comprehensive briefing.
Following the fall of the dictatorship in Libya on
20 October 2011, successive Libyan Governments have
declared their commitment to establishing justice and
fighting impunity and their determination to work
to ensure respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Although Libya is not a party to the Rome
Statute, it has voluntarily chosen to work with the ICC.
It has requested assistance from the United Nations in
the field of capacity-building, security sector reform
and reform of the judiciary in order to implement the
stated policies and to fully break with the practices of
the previous regime.
Libya has established genuine partnerships with
the International Criminal Court and the Human Rights
Council. Those partnerships are best illustrated by the
memorandum of understanding that was signed in 2013
by the Libyan Prosecutor General and the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, and by Human Rights
Council resolution 25/37, of 28 March 2014, concerning
the provision of technical assistance for Libya. The
memorandum of understanding signed with the ICC is
based on the realization of positive complementarity
between the Libyan judiciary and the ICC through
burden-sharing in regard to further investigations and

S/PV.7173

prosecutions of the perpetrators of serious crimes to
bring them before the courts of justice. It is expected
that both parties will agree on the political measures to
implement the memorandum of understanding during
the expected visit of the Prosecutor General to Libya.
It is worth noting that the Registrar of the Court and
Libyan representatives are now communicating on
drawing up a final agreement on the privileges and
immunities of ICC personnel in Libya.
Within the context of efforts to improve the situation
of detainees, the Minister of Justice has conducted
a census of all those detainees in rehabilitative
institutions, who number 6,186, including 646 who have
been tried and are currently serving their sentences.
Libya’s judicial authorities are doing their best to
expedite the trials of the remaining detainees, but they
are meeting with serious challenges in getting this done
at a rate they would like. In order to deal with some of
those challenges, on 26 March our National Congress
enacted a law amending the criminal procedural code
so as to enable courts, in cases where there may be fear
for the safety of the accused or that the accused may
escape, to use modern communications technology to
connect the accused to the courtroom by video link.
These procedures can also be applied with respect to
witnesses, experts, prosecutors and those responsible
for civil rights if the conditions are suitable to the court.
This amendment to criminal procedure has
enabled the Tripoli Court of Appeals to use a video
link to conduct open trials of 31 officials from the
former regime, including Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi,
Abdullah Al-Senussi and Al-Baghdadi Al-Mahmoudi.
The trials were broadcast on several TV channels from
the chambers of the courts of appeals in three cities,
Tripoli, Misrata and Zintan, since 22 of the accused
were in Tripoli, eight in Misrata and one — Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi — in Zintan. In commitment to
the principle of transparency, the proceedings were
attended by representatives of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, representatives from human
rights and civil society organizations, and mass media
correspondents. In an effort to provide all those on trial
with due process and the right to a defence, the lawyers’
association recruited the lawyer Samiha Al-Kasseh to
defend Mr. Al-Qadhafi, and she has begun her defence
before the Court. The Court allowed Al-Senussi to
hire his own private counsel to defend him after his
previous lawyer declined to continue. Libya’s judicial
authorities hope that the ICC will recognize their

14-0154115/16

S/PV.7173

The situation in Libya

jurisdiction in the case and their right to try Mr. Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, and that it will affirm their right
to try Mr. Al-Senussi as well.
The Security Council is no doubt aware of the
complicated internal situation in Libya and of the
difficulties and challenges the Libyan authorities are
facing during this transitional period. Nonetheless, the
process of transition to democracy is making progress,
albeit slowly. But Libya is determined to succeed, and
indeed it has no option but to succeed, even if that
takes some time, particularly since all the conditions
for eventual success are there. The international
community should not doubt the Libyan people’s ability
to get through this critical stage successfully, and it
should not hesitate to provide assistance whenever the
Libyan authorities need it.
I am very happy that today all the members of the
Council have reaffirmed the importance of ensuring
that the international community continues to assist
Libya. I would like to assure the Council that the Libyan
authorities are committed to pursuing accountability for
every crime, to fighting impunity, to achieving justice
for the victims, and to protecting their citizens and all
who live in our country. They are working to develop a
comprehensive, integrated strategy for bringing to trial
every perpetrator of a crime and all those who have
violated human rights in Libya since 15 February 2011,
regardless of the identities of the perpetrators or the
victims. The transitional justice mechanisms stipulated
in the transitional justice law will constitute a principal
component of that strategy, which, in the final analysis,
seeks not only to see justice done but also to achieve
national reconciliation, as well as to end disputes and
to return the half-million or so refugees and displaced
persons to their homes. The situation of the inhabitants
of the Tawergha region is certainly one of the priorities
of those efforts.
The Government of Libya is working to establish
a balance between achieving justice and maintaining

16/16

13/05/2014

a secure political process. It seeks to prevent
disagreements in political situations between the
authorities and other political actors that could affect
judicial proceedings, destabilize security and put more
obstacles in the way of the democratic transition.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the
cooperation between the Office of the Prosecutor of
the ICC, under the leadership of Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
and the Office of Libya’s Prosecutor-General. I am
confident that justice and our international obligations
will never be abandoned, given the cooperation that
exists between them both.
I also wish to take this opportunity to reiterate our
deep gratitude to the members of the Security Council
for their support to the Lybian authorities at this critical
juncture in my country’s history. The Libyan people
hope to receive more support and urge all Member
States to respect the Security Council’s resolutions
on Libya, assist the Libyan authorities to prosecute
all those responsible for committing crimes in Libya,
and transfer the perpetrators to the Libyan judicial
authorities. They should also investigate the finances
of all persons whose funds or assets have been frozen,
pursuant to the resolution 1970 (2011), and to report
their findings to the Council so that the necessary
measures can be taken to repatriate those assets to the
Libyan people.
I wish to thank the Republic of the Niger for
extraditing Mr. Saadi Al-Qadhafi and Mr. Abdullah
Mansour to the Libyan authorities. We hope that all
countries will pursue steps similar to those taken by
the Niger to extradite all those sought by the justice
system in Libya.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

14-01541
