UNITED

NATIONS

lh
MEETING:

30 JUNE

1977

SJPV.2019
-

NOTE
i

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2019TH

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday,
B&dent:

Mr. William H. BARTON (Canada),

30 June 1977, at 3 p.m.

iVh JeanneMamh Cisst (Guinea), Mr. c: D, Molapo
(Lesotho), Mr. J, h! Garba (Nigeria), Mr, c B, Djigo

f+eseljt: The representatives
of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

(Senegal), Mr. M. Medani (Sudan), Mr, N. M. Malinga
(Swaziland)j Mr. M Allaf (Syrian Arab Republic), bfr, B,
Mkapa (United Republic of Tanzania) and Mr. s, G. Mutale
(Zambia) took the places reserved for them at the tide of
the Council chamber,

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2019)

3. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Swaziland, whom 1 invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

1. Adoption of the agenda

4. Mr. MALINGA (Swaziland): Mr. President, my delegation is most grateful to you and the other members of the
Council for being afforded an opportunity to take part in
this historic debate whose outcome, if positive. will
certainly influence events in my part of the world.

2. Complaint by Mozambique:
Letter dated 22 June 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12350 and Add.1)

5. We are equally gratified that when this august body is
considering a matter vital to the economic survival of our
brothers in Mozambique, the turning wheel of the presidency of the Council is found to have come to rest at
Canada, a country that has, in the past, demonstrated so
clearly its practical commitment to support the developing
economies. Yes, the record shows that your country, like
the Nordic countries of Norway, Sweden and Denmark, is
responsive to the needs of our people in Africa. Allow me
to express, through you, to Canada the appreciation of His
Majesty King Sobhuza 11not only for Canada’s assistance to
Swaziland as a Commonwealth partner in development but
also for its recent pledges of aid to our sister countries of
Lesotho and Botswana, whose requests for support came
recently before the Council.

Tlt~ mectblg was called CL) order at 3.25 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

Complaint by Mozambique:
Letter dated 22 June 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/12350 and
Add.1 )
1, The PRESIDENT:
III
accordance with the decision
taken at the 2014th meeting, 1 invite the Minister for
Development and Econolnic Planning of Mozambique to
take a place at the Council table.

6. Taking into account the fact that our intervention
comes at such a very late stage in the debate. l shall not
repeat at length the in-depth analysis of the Situation so
we]] expounded by the able exponents from our region and
other representatives.

At t/tc imQtatiorl of' tl~e Prcsiderlt, Mr. M. dos Cantos
(~lozambiqric) took a pkwc at the C’uwcil table.
7. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at previous meetings, I invite the representatives of
Algeria, Angola, Botswana, Brazil, Cuba, Egypt, Gabon, the
German Democratic Republic, Guinea, Lesotho, Nigeria,
Senegal, the Sudan, Swaziland, tbc Syrian Arab Republic,
the United Republic of l’anzania and Zambia to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

7. It has been eloquently explained by the speakers Who
have preceded me that the Council is seized of Yet another
complaint by a CoLintry
of southern Africa, and this time it
is the Peop]e’s Republic of Mozambique WhO% territdJl
integrity
and sovereignty have been repeatedly vi&ted by
the rebellious and illegal r6girne of Ian Smith.

At tlrc illvitatiolz of the Pwsiderzt, Mr. A. Rahal (Algeria),
Mr. J, E, das Snmx (Allgola), Mr. D. K. KwelagObe (Batsymlla), Mr. S. Corda da Costa (Brazil), Mr. R. Alarcbn
(Cuba), Mr. A. ,Y, Abdcf Squid (E&pt), Mr. G. Rawiri
(GaboIl), Mr. P. Florin (German Llerwcratic Republic19

8. Other southern African States have suffered aggression,
intimidation and frustration in one way or the Other. ‘TO
give but one example, in January of this year, the Republic
of Botswana brought before the Council a COnlPlaint of
aggression committed by Rhodesia’s rebel Government. As
1

their commitment to the freedom of Zimbabwe is equally
shared by my Government. Mozambique’s support for
majority rule in that country has brought disastrous
consequences for its people and their property. Their
courageousstand againstall odds will surely earn them a
well-deservedplace in the pagesof history.

a result of that aggression, that sister country was forced to
reorganize its development priorities in order to provide for
the maximum security of its people. Lesotho’s difficulties
with South Africa were yet another subject of discussion in
the Council. Swaziland, together with Lesotho and Botswana, brought before the General Assembly last year [see
resolution 31/126/ a request for financial assistance to
enable them to cater for the education and welfare of the
South African student refugees who fled from South Africa
following last June’s tragic events at Soweto, Langa,
Gugulethu and other townships.

13. It is a well-known fact that the successfulstrugglefor
independence waged by the former Portuguesecolonies
increased to fever pitch expectations of independencein
our region. The old men in Zimbabwe, Namibia andSouth
Africa dream dreams of freedom. Their young men see
visions of controlling and influencing the destiny of their
motherlands. Everywhere in my region there is talk of
freedom. It is loud and clear.

9. The list of the grievances of our region goes on and on.
Last Tuesday (2014th rneetb~g], the Honourable Marcelino
dos Santos, Minister for Development and Economic
Planning of the People’s Republic of Mozambique, informed this body of Ian Smith’s escalating acts of aggression against Mozambique. He gave a detailed account,
stating that the arrogant, defiant Smith was launching
large-scale attacks against well-defined objectives that had
come to include vital points in the economic and social
infrastructure of Mozambique. He stated that the villages of
Mapai, Massangena, Mavonde and Chioco had been completely levelled. A large number of Mozambicans and
Zimbabwean refugees had been mercilessly massacred. As
recently as two weeks ago we were informed that the
Espungabera region had been violently attacked and that
many other localities had been left without hospitals,
schools, stores or water supplies and that thousands of
homes had been burned and destroyed. Factories and
bridges had been demolished and thousands of head of
cattle had been slaughtered.

14. Songs and cries of freedom cause panic to the
minority rCgime of Salisbury, so much so that in desperation they wantonly destroy property, massacreinnocent
civilians and violate the territorial integrity of independent
black States. Some say that Smith’s invasion of Mozambique is an attempt to gain a strong negotiating position.
We are inclined to believe that these irresponsibleacts of
aggressionare promoted by panic and desperation.Smith
realizes that his time is up in Africa and that there is no
way he can reversethe risingtide of independence.This is a
normal reaction for a colonial mind that has conditioned
itself to occupy a domineeringposition for so long. Albert
Memmi, the distinguishedTunisian scholar, has ably described and defined the colonialist mind typified by Ian
Smith. He said:
“A colonialist is a foreignerhaving cometo the land by
the accident of history, who has succeedednot merely in
creating a place for himself but also in taking away that
of the inhabitants and granting himself astoundingprivileges to the detriment of those rightfully entitled to
them. He is a privileged being,an illegitimately privileged
one, that is, a usurper,”

10. The Government and the people of Swaziland condemn the use of violence against our brothers in Mozambique, and we abhor and detest the brutal, oppressive
measurestaken by the racist regime against the people of
southern Africa. They are our brothers. An attack against
their countries is indeed an attack on the people of
Swaziland. We are one people. What happens to them in
effect happensto us. Any dislocation or destabilization of
the economy of Mozambique seriously affects neighbouring
Swaziland,

This is what Smith is: a usurper who finds it difficult to
give up his privileged position and who would rather resort
to violence when he seesthe writing on the wall. l-Iistory
repeats itself here. The casesof Algeria and Zaire come to
mind.

11. In spite of the manifold difficulties arising from its
commitment to the liberation of Zimbabwe, the people of
Mozambique has bravely taken up its responsibilitiesas a
Member of the United Nations. The world admired its
courageous sacrifice when it closed its borders with
Rhodesia in order to implement the Security Council
resolutions on sanctions. To confront the calculated aggression of that international outlaw, the Mozambicans
were forced to mobilize their limited resources, which
would have otherwise been channelled into more urgent
and pressingpriorities of economic development. In view of
the setbacks suffered by the Mozambican economy. my
delegation appeals to the international community to
respond favourably to the Mozambican request for assistance and to aid our brothers in reconstructing their
economy.

15. It has been arguedby speakerswho precededme that
the Rhodesian Government’s continued violation of Security Council resolutionsputs at stake the ability of the
Council to deal effectively with future tragic situations of
aggression.That view remainsto be proved or disprovedby
the practical and positive effects of the decision of the
Couhcil on this matter.
16. The statementsmade this week have clearly demonstrated the impatience of the international community
regarding the Rhodesianissue.How long is Smith going to
be tolerated? How long is he going to continue to violate
the territorial integrity of the peoples of Mozambique,
Zambia and Botswana? If there is no speedy solution, my
delegation is afraid that the conflict might escalate and
engulf the entire world community. As of now, it definitely
presentsa threat to international peaceand security.

12. The view expressedby severalrepresentativesthat the
people of Mozambique are subjectedto this kind of wanton
pillage and plunder by the rebel government becauseof
2

17. In conclusion, 1 should like once again to appeal to the
members of the Council to give unanimous support to the
just and eminently reasonable demands of Mozambique
Which Were SO eloqliently expressed by the honourabli
ministers representing the Council of Ministers Of the
Organization of African Unity, in particular: the United
Kingdom, as the administering Power, should negotiate
with the representatives of the people of Zimbabwe On the
means for a transfer of power which would lead to majority
rule and an independent Zimbabwe; the international
community should supplement the efforts of the MOzambicans in their drive for economic reconstruction; sanctions
should be fully applied against the rebel colony of Southern
Rhodesia; Mozambique should be granted special assistance
for the purpose of reconstructing
areas destroyed by
Smith’s aggression.

conflicts which have lasted too long and which irlvolve
serious risks for the entire area. It is in that Same spirit
that France endorses the decisions of the United Nations
on Rhodesia and will see to it that they are strictly
applied.”
22. The increase in the number of Rhodesian attacks of1
Mozambique inevitably leads the latter to divert its energies
from the primary objective, development, In the face of
such dangers, my delegation believes that the security of
the African States must be fully protected as they exercise
their legitimate rights. The Security Council recognizes the
inherent right of Mozambique, in the exercise of its
sovereignty, to appeal for outside assistance to StreJ@then
its defensive capacity. It is only natural in the circumstances that the Council should call on Member States to
extend the necessary material assistance to MoZamhiquc so
that it may pursue its development policy in spite crf the
undue burdens that have been placed on it in the defence of
its independence and sovereignty. It is in that spirit that
France will lend its support to the draft resolution which
has been submitted to the Council (S/12353/.

18. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France)
(iutupretation
j&n
J?‘c\~(‘/I~: First of all, I wish to bid a warm welcome to the
Minister for Development and Economic Planning Of
Mozambique, Mr. Marcelino dos Santos, whose statement
/2014th meeting/ marked the high point and the most
impressive moment in the work of the Council. My
country, which, in a spirit of mutual respect, has friendly
relations with Mozambique, is familiar with the difficult
situation which has been imposed on it and neighbouring
countries, in particular, Botswana and Zambia. The repeated incursions and destruction perpetrated by the illegal
Salisbury rEgime have, month after month, caused fresh
damage and further suffering to the people of Mozambique,
already sorely tried by a long struggle, the significance of
which was stressed by my predecessor, Mr. de Guiringaud,
during the Council’s debate in November 1972 (see 1677th
mectiug/,

23. The statements we have heard, like the draft resolureflect the growing concern of the international
community. Therefore, we believe it more itnperativc than
ever that the efforts under way should be pursued SOas to
achieve through peaceful means a settlement of the
RhOdesian problem, which would imply the speedy establishment of majority rule.
tion,

24. Mr. von MASSELL (Federal Republic Of Germany):
The complaint of Mozambique with which this august hod!
is dealing today once again draws the attention uf world
public opinion to the untenable situatian in southern
Africa. For the second time within the span of a feu
months, we are faced with a catalogue of complaints
conveying the pictui’e of an illegal regime Which, in view of
the hopelessness of its political situation, feels fewer and
fewer scruples about resorting to military aggression.
violating the sovereignty of other States and opposing with
the means of destruction all efforts at a peaceful settlement
of tensions in the area.

19. My Government is aware of the difficulties which
Mozambique has imposed on itself; we know that it is
prepared to sacrifice even more for an objective which goes
beyond its national interests, since it is the cause of
freedom and independence for the Zimbabwe people. That
cansc is familiar to us; it is a common cause; it concerns the
Council. Indeed, as stated by the representative of France
on 1I March 1976 (1892rd nzrc!ti~7gj, it is only fair that
the international community should give assistance to
Mozambique, which has been the victim of constant attacks
by the illegal regime at Salisbury.

25. The Federal Republic of Germany is following these
developments with grave concern. It is grieved by the losses
which the populations of the States bordering on Rhodesia-lately, above all, Mozambique-have had to suffer.
and it strongly denounces the action of the illegal Smith
rkgime.

20. My delegation has listened most attentively t0 the
information provided by the Minister for Development and
Economic Planning. We have also paid close attention t0
the arguments of the ministers of front-line and other
countries to which the OAU Council of Ministers gave the
important task of supporting here the legitimate CoInPlaint
of A4ozambique.

26. In its concern at what is so far the largest and most
brazen incursion of Rhodesian troops into the territory of
Mozambique, the Government of the Federal Republic of’
Germany declared, in an official statement of 7 June of this
year, that:

2 1, As WC have constantly recalled, the problem before us
is :I political one. At stake are the authority of the
international community and the dignity of Africa. The
I’resident of the French Republic himself repeated this
during the recent visit of President Kaunda, when he said:

“The Federal Government most emphatically denounces this act of aggression of the Salisbury rkgime
against Mozambique and considers the action on the Part
of Rhodesia as a violation of the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.

“France condemns those who refuse to accept incvitable change, ~1x0 impede the implementation of
peaceful solutions and there by contribute to aggravating

“The Federal Government is fOllOWing developments
with particular concern because the incursion of Rho3

from joint funds of the United Nations Development
Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations.

desian troops into Mozambique is a step further towards
the brink of a military conflict in southern Africa.
“The Federal Government is concerned that this development will jeopardize the efforts for a peaceful settlement of the Rhodesian question, efforts in which it
shares.

30. All efforts of the kind I have just described are
reactions to a situation of political tensionthat is becoming
more and more of a burden on the nations in the region of
southern Africa. Such efforts can mitigate the negative
repercussionsof that situation.

“The Federal Government therefore calls on the Salisbury regime to withdraw without delay the Rhodesian
troops from Mozambique and to abstain from all aggressive acts against the neighbouring countries in the
future.”

31. At the sametime, however, we have to go to the root
of the evil and combineour efforts to reshapethe situation
fundamentally. Our policy aims at independenceunder
democratic majority rule in Zimbabwe and in Namibiaand
at the eradication of all racial discrimination in southern
Africa. This necessarilyimplies our determination that
Mozambique, which is in the very heart of that region,
should be a stable and prosperous country with safe
frontiers.

27. The externally aggressive attitude of that rCgime is
closely related to its reckless internal policy of racial
discrimination
and violation of the political and basic
human
rights of the majority of the population of
Zimbabwe. Even before acceding to United Nations membership, the Federal Republic of Germany from the very
beginning had refused to enter into any form of cooperation with that minority rCgime and had actively
supported the Security Council’s policy of sanctions fully
to isolate Rhodesia militarily and economically. Only
recently, in this august body, the Federal Republic of
Germany endorsed the resolution extending the sanctions
to all capital transfers [resolution 409 (1977)], and also
during the Maputo Conference, the Federal Republic of
Germany put its rejection of that racist regime unequivocally on record. We consider the sanctions an
important instrument of the United Nations which brings
economic pressure to bear on the minority r6gime in
Rhodesia, weakening it and reinforcing the determination
to resist of the overwhelmingmajority of the population of
the country.

32. With those considerationsin mind, my Government is
prepared to support the draft resolution now before us
[S/123.53/. My delegationwould like to thank the sponsors
of this draft for their endeavoursand spirit of compromise.
Our support of this draft resolution is basedon our deep
and repeatedly expressedconviction that a solution of all
disputes and of the questionof Southern Rhodesiamust be
sought through peaceful means. Every State has the
inherent right to individual or collective self-defence.At the
sametime, the Federal Government reiterates its opinion
that Africa must not become the scene of a political
conflict between non-African Powersor ideologies.It is in
that context that we see the provisions of the draft
resolution. We hope that this draft will be helpful in
deterring the Smith regimefrom committing aggressive
acts
and in bringing it along the road of negotiations for a
peaceful settlement.

2s. In developing its bilateral relations with the front-line
States, my Government has demonstrated for many years
that the problem of Rhodesia must be tackled in a
two-pronged approach. It is a matter not only of responding to the political attacks of the Smith rbgime by enhanced
Tolitical and economic pressurebut at the same time of
assisting those States that particularly suffer from the
situation of conflict in southern Africa to develop their
economic potential. In that connexion, I should like to
refer to our statementsin the debateson the complaints of
Botswana /2008tk meeting] and Lesotho f2009tk meeting] in May of this year,

33. Mr. President, this is the last day of your term as
President of the Council. I should hesitate, therefore, to
end my statement without having thanked you, on behalf
of my delegation, for the effective and successfulway in
which you have carried out your complicated task. The
positive outcome of the debateon this difficult and serious
problem will be largely due to your efforts. For this we are
all indebted to you.
34. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): We have listened
carefully to the speeches
madeover the last three days to
the Council. In particular, we have paid heed to the
statement of Mr. Marcelino dos Santos, the Minister for
Development and Economic Planning of the People’s
Republic of Mozambique [2014tk meeting/, and to those
made by the representativesof those neighbouring States
which are so vitally involved in the problemsof southern
Africa, We have noted, too, the seriousnesswith which
Africa has approached this debate, as is evidenced by the
presencehere of somany ministers.

29. The Federal Republic of Germany is prepared to assist
the population of Mozambique in the same spirit of
solidarity. This preparednesshasalready been proved in the
very recent history of bilateral diplomatic relations in the
humanitarian field on severaloccasions.In December 1976,
ihe Federal Republic of Germany made a contribution of
30,000 Deutschmarks towards the aid programme of the
United Nations High Commissionerfor Refugees(UNHCR)
for Rhodesian refugeesin Mozambique. In January of this
year, it granted a cash contribution to mitigate the
consequencesof a flood catastrophe. It is prepared to
contribute with a special payment of $200,000 to the
UNHCR aid programme for southern Africa. Through its
membership, it contributes to the food programmeof the
European Community and to aid programmes financed

35, It is obvious that Mozambique has suffered, and
suffered substantially, as a result of its geographical
proximity to Southern Rhodesia.It -has suffered in economic terms from the fact that there was a considerable
economic and trading relationship between the two coun4

tries, which made the decision to impose sanctions a
particularly hard one for the newly independent State of
Mozambique. It has also suffered, both economically and
militarily, from the repeated attacks mounted by the illegal
Salisbury rkgime. As the Council responded in January to
attacks against Botswana, so it will respond now, if we
adopt the draft resolution before us (S/123.53], to the
attacks against Mozambique. The United Kingdom will
therefore support the current draft.

ashamed of our, record in supervising the application of the
embargo and in prosecuting those traders under our
jurisdiction who have broken the law in this respect. As I
have said before in the Council, if any Government has
evidence which leads it to believe that there has been any
sanctions-breaking,
it has a duty to bring that information
to the attention of the Security Council’s Sanctions
Committee so that action may be taken. If allegations are
not so conveyed to the Committee, we have to assume that
they cannot be substantiated. In this regard, my own
Government has brought to the attention of the Committee
over 200 cases of suspected sanctions violations involving
many Member States.

36. My Government’s position on the question of incursions by Rhodesian armed forces is unequivocal and
should by now be well known. We have condemned
unreservedly those aggressive acts.

39. I do not propose on this occasion to embark on a
lengthy account of United Kingdom policy towards Rhodesia. As many speakers have reminded us-some in harsh
terms-we
have accepted the continued legal responsibility
for our colony which is in a state of rebellion and we have
not wavered from our intention to grant independence only
when the will of the people has been freely expressed
through majority rule. We have not abandoned this hope.
As the United Kingdom Secretary of State said at the
Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting earlier this
month, it is easy to be depressed and sceptical about the
prospects for early change in southern Africa; but we
remain convinced that majority rule can still be brought
about by negotiation. While recognizing the increasing
frustration
of the majority of the population who live
under that minority rggime, we believe that so long as the
prospect of a negotiated settlement exists-and we believe
that it does exist-it
is the inescapable obligation of the
British Government to continue to search for peace. We
shall therefore continue to do all we can to achieve this.

37. We are mindful of the toll in life and the destruction
of those incursions. My Government wishes to express to
the Government of Mozambique its deep sympathy for the
loss of life. But Mozambique needs sympathy and understanding to be expressed in practical forms. My Covernment has already shown that it is prepared to act in a
material way to assist the Government of Mozambique, as,
indeed, we have shown our sympathy in a comparable way
in respect of incursions into Botswana. The facts speak for
themselves. Members of the Council will recall the appeal
contained in Council resolution 386 (1976). In response to
that appeal, the United Kingdom pledged total aid amounting to 515 million by way of assistance, of which the first
85 million was programme assistance that has been mostly
committed for the purchase of vehicles and machinery. An
agreement is expected to be signed shortly for the
remaining El0 million by way of project aid. I can also
inform the Council today that we hope very shortly to
offer further development assistance IO Mozambique and to
make an announcement about the precise level of that aid
in the near future. Such assistance as we have given is
designed to assist in meeting Mozambique’s development
needs, including the offsetting of the adverse effects of
sanctions. Any further aid will be designed to help to
overcome the serious economic difficulties faced by MOzambiquc to which the Rhodesian incursions have clearly
contributed. We believe that sympathy and solidarity speak
loudest when they are expressed in such material terms, and
we shall in this way seek to meet the appeals conveyed in
operative paragraphs 9 to 11 of the draft resolution. We
shall not, of course, in this regard do anything that could
serve to increase tension in the area. Our objective is quite
the opposite.

40. May I perhaps
note.

be

allowed to conclude on a personal

41. I totally and unreservedly reject any allegationwhether expressly stated, as in the case of the representative of Benin, or impliedly hinted at, as in the case of the
representative of the German Democratic Republic-that
the attempts to find a peaceful settlement of the Rhodesian
issue are diplomatic manoeuvres concealing an ignoble
motive. Not only do I reject them on behalf of my
Government but I do so personally. They are quite simply
and plainly untrue. I am, however, somewhat encouraged
when 1 observe the identity of those countries which make
such allegations, From the Soviet Union to Benin, via Cuba,
they possess a certain similarity in their style of government. We note the origin of those statements and we will
treat them accordingly.

38. There have been many references during this debate to
sanctions imposed by the Council against the illegal rCgime
in Rhodesia, With few exceptions, all have recognized that
sanctions, with all their imperfections, have provided the
international community with a significant source of
pressure on the illegal regime at Salisbury. Indeed, many of
the critics of sanctions have made clear their belief in the
system itself by calling for further extensions. My delegdtion fully accepts that every effort should be made to
tighten and intensify existing sanctions. Greater vigilance
on the part of all Governments would be of immeasurable
assistance. Few of the developed countries which have
extensive trading interests throughout the world can be
complacent on this matter, The United Kingdom has tried
honestly and hard to enforce sanctions, and we are not

42. As for the representative of l-‘akistan, I was a little
surprised to read his remarks. Unfortunately, I could not be
here this morning to observe the fervour, or the lack of it,
with which he spoke; but I have studied his remarks since,
as indeed I always study the remarks of a country with
which we are supposed to have friendly and amicable
relations, His remarks were ill-considered, inaccurate and
untimely. If the United Kingdom is indeed a country to
which can be ascribed “weakness and vacillation, commercialism and political expediency and, yes, racial sympathies” /2018th meeting, para. 66/, I can only say I am
5

astounded at the vigour and the energy with which so many
people from Pakistan have come to live in Britain and
thereby have risked exposing themselves to such pernicious
influences.

the African peoples which have been victims of aggression
and injustice at the hands of the Smith and Vorster rbgimes.
48. How long will we go on witnessing
the shortsightedness of these r&gimes and Powers that are swimming
against the current of history’? How long will this contumacy, this indifference to the moral values of humanity,
continue? There are many examples in history which
should serve as a lesson in this regard.

43. The situation in southern Africa is far too important
for the sort of rhetorical mischief-making we have unfortunately heard too much of in the Council during the
last three days. Such talk-if 1 may say so-is unworthy of
the Council and of the seriousness of the subject-matter of
this debate; but then the passage of the draft resolution is
perhaps much more important than the speeches which
have been made in support nf it.

49. All colonial situations-if they are not resolved by the
peaceful means that civilized societies have available to
them-will,
from one moment to the next, lead to more
tragic situations. That is true not only of Africa, but also of
other places. Let us remember the example of Suez in
1956. At that time, many people thought that that was an
ideal system that could endure for years. But the shortsightedness which prevailed at that time led to the violent
destruction of the memorial to Ferdinand de Lesseps, the
monument to capitalism represented by the Suez Canal.
Similarly, in Latin America we hope that the shortsightedness of certain reactionary circles will not prevent
the achievement of solutions to other colonial situations,
such as the one in the Panama Canal Zone. We hope that
that situation will not one day lead to an explosion for
liberation that will demolish, violently and with bloodshed,
the statue of Theodore Roosevelt and this monument to
colonialism which exists there.

44. Mr.
ILLUEC A (Panama)
(interpretation
from
@ani&]: My first words are words of greeting and tribute
to His Excellency Mr. MaFcelino dos Santos, member of the
Permanent Political Committee of FRELIMO and Minister
for Development and Economic Planning of the People’s
Republic of Mozambique, whose noble cause he so worthily
represents.
45. As a co-sponsor of the draft resolution submitted by
Benin, India, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius,
Pakistan and Romania (S/123.53], I think it is my duty to
make some brief comments on the just reasons that prompt
the sponsors to hope that the draft will be unanimously
adopted and will receive the support of all the prestige and
authority of the Security Council,

50. We wish to see an end to the colonialist situations in
Africa, in Latin America, in Asia and wherever else they
exist, for these are elements of tension, of conflict, of
regression,

46. The Latin American Group, of which I am Chairman
this month, designated the representative of Brazil,
Mr. Sdrgio Corr&a da Costa, to speak on behalf bf the
regional group in the discussion of the complaint of
Mozambique. Like other regional groups, the Latin American Group has unanimously expressed its solidarity with
and its active support of the cause of the People’s Republic
of Mozambique, headed by that great leader of Africa and
the third world, President Samora MoisCs Machel. The
magnificent speech expres?i?g the position of the Latin
American Group made this morning by Ambassador Corr&a
da Costa [201&h meeting] makes it unnecessary for my
deligation to go into any further detail, because that
expression of the views of the Latin American Group
reflects the thinking of my own country,

5 1. We express the wish that this problem of Mozambique,
which is a problem not only for Africa but also for Latin
America, will be solved, and that it will be solved by the
achievement of freedom and independence and majority
rule for the peoples of Zimbabwe, Azania and Namibia.
52. Mr. YOUNG (United States of America): Mr. President, I should like to take this opportunity
to say how
much 1 have enjoyed your lea’dership and direction, not
only in this debate but also during the months that I have
been privileged to serve with you on the Council.

47. The draft resolution has been prompted by the
outrageous acts of aggression recently committed by the
illegal regime of Southern Rhodesia against the People’s
Republic of Mozambique and by repeated acts of aggression
and constant threats made by that reprehensible rBgime
against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
peoples of Botswana and Zambia, forming part of a chain
of events that considerably increase the gravity of the
threat to the security and stability of the region. That
reprehensible situation has only arisen because of the
support given by South Africa to the illegal rCgime of
Southern Rhodesia, the principal consequence of which is
to deprive the people of Zimbabwe of their right to
self-determination
and independence. There is wide justification, therefore, for insisting that the most energetic
measures be adopted by the Security Council to put an end
to this distressing drama of blood and tears and to avert
further bloodshed, loss of life and suffering on the part of

53. I should like also to thank the Minister for Develop
ment and Economic Planning of Mozambique, Mr. Marcelino dos Santos, for attending these meetings. We appreciate, too, the concern demonstrated by the other
ministers who have taken time from the deliberations of the
Organization of African Unity to be with us for these
important discussions.
54. The first speaker on the problem now before the
Council, Mr. Marcelino dos Santos, gave a grim recital of
the destruction and killing which have been directed against
his country and his people in recent months [2014th
meeting],
SS. Human suffering always evokes deep sadness-the
more so when it is unnecessary, as in the present case. The
folly of the Rhodesian rCgime in lashing out against its
neighbours cannot save that rCgime. It can only lead to
6

more death, to intensified hatred, to even more bitter
armed conflict and greater ruin in southern Africa. No
rCgime built on racism and tyrannical rule by a minority
can endure in today’s world. Freedom will come to
Zimbabwe because that is what the people of Zimbabwe
want.

63. Each Member State should redouble its efforts to
ensurethat sanctionsare fully enforced.

56. The United States Government deplores’ Khodesia’s
actions for a number of reasons: because of the tragic loss
of life and property that was so eloquently described by the
Minister for Development and Economic Planning of
Mozambique, and because it diverts attention from the true
imperatives of the fundamental necessities of arriving at a
negotiated settlement in Zimbabwe and the urgency of
establishing majority rule in that country.

65. Ten years ago a world leader,Martin Luther King, Jr.,
wrote prophetically of the responsibilitiesof this international institution. “The United Nations,” he said, “is a
gesture in the direction of non-violence on a world scale.
There, at least, States that ophoseone another have sought
to do so with words instead of with weapons.” And,
speakingof the world-wide ferment of our time, he wrote:

64, We must all encourageour Governments to address
themselvesto the request of the Mozambique Government
for assistanceto repair the damageresultingfrom the raids.

“All over the globe, men are revolting against old
systemsof exploitation and oppression,and out of the
womb of a frail world, new systemsof justice are being
born; the shirtlessand barefoot people of the earth are
rising LIP as never before, ‘The peoplewho sat in darkness
have seen a great light.’ WC in the West must support
these revolutions.”

57. The immediatequestionbefore the Security Council is
the violation of the territorial integrity of the nation of
Mozambique. It is clearthat the people of Mozambique will
resist this attack against their land; it should be equally
clear that Members of the United Nations will speak out
against these incursions and provide whatever material
assistanceis appropriate for the relief of the suffering
imposedon Mozambique.

Thus did King lay down a challengeto the United Nations
and to the West, a challengeI find to be still relevant.

58. There is also a broader question that urgently addressesitself to the Council. The question is not whether
Zimbabweshallbe free, but how all the peoplesof southern
Africa shall becomefree, Will they be engulfed in massive
death and destruction? Or can there be a peaceful path to
independenceandjustice?

66. So, in confronting the issuesat hand, let us take the
bold stepsthat are necessaryto promote changewithout
violence, with a minimum of killing, throughout southern
Africa.

59. For those who still might wonder about the poticy of
my country, I would recall our repeated emphasison our
support for majority rule,

67. Additionally, it is the necessary businessof the
Member States to commit themselvesto the development
funds for an independentZimbabweand for the neighbouring States which have paid such a heavy price already for
the liberation of that potentially great nation.

60. Southern Africa has reached a historic crossroads.
That area of the continent is proceeding towards majority
rule. Unfortunately, the situation is one in which time is
the enemy of humanlife and a productive socialorder. And
yet if there is a way to expedite the peaceful negotiation of
an
honourable settlement in Rhodesia through aggressive
application of economic pressuresand diplomacy, there is
still hope that untold lives will be sparedin that region and
the people there will be ableto build and progresswith the
resourcesand facilities which are not yet destroyed.
01. Shortly before his death, President John F. Kennedy
wrote that “those who make peaceful revolution impossible
make violent revolution inevitable”. I do not argue today
for violent revolution, for armed struggle,becauseI believe
that peaceful changeis attainable in southern Africa if it
comes rapidly enough.It is clear that changeis on the way
and that change will be achieved. That is why it is now
urgent that the United Nations,which hasthe responsibility
and so much hope for just and peaceful change in the
world, shouldbecomemorepersistent in the various efforts
to find peacethrough peace,to savelives and to help build
a prosperousand free southernAfrica.

68. The PKESIDENT: As no other representativeswish to
speak at: this stage, I shall now make a statement in my
capacity asthe representativeof CANADA.
69. The Security Council has met at the request of the
Government of the People’sRepublic of Mozambique to
consider the situation of tension which exists asa result of
numerous acts of aggressionagainst Mozambique committed by the illegal minority regimeof Southern Rhodesia.
His Excellency Mr. Marcelino dos Santos, Minister for
Development and Economic Planning of Mozambique, has
described /2014th meeting/ clearly and forcefully the
chain of increasingly serioustransgressions
by that illegal
rigime against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Mozambique. These have resulted in the deaths of more
than 1,400 persons and material destruction of great
magnitude.
70. Minister dos Santosand the distinguishedministersof
other African countries who have travelled to New York as
a demonstration of their support for the casepresentedby
Mozambique have underlinedthe need to deal with the root
of the problem, namely, the continued existence of an
illegal racist regime in Southern Rhodesia.It is clear to us
all that only with the independenceof Zimbabwe under
majority rule will conditions be created in that area to
ensure full respect for the national sovereignty and ter-

62. My Government wishesit clearly understood that the
Smith rCgimecan expect no assistancefrom the United
States now or ever to rescueit from that position in which
it has placeditself.
7

--

ritorial integrity of Mozambique, as well as of Botswana
and Zambia. The Canadian Government, as I indicated
previously in the Council, will continue to encourage the
initiative of the United Kingdom and the United States,
now in progress, designed to achieve rapidly the independence of Zimbabwe under majority rule.

happened to be a representative at the time. The resolution
[1883(XVIII)/
invited the Government of the United
Kingdom not to transfer armed forces and aircraft to its
colony of Southern Rhodesia. That is what I meant by my
reference to this particular matter.
78. Certainly sanctions have played an important role.
Pakistan is a member of the Sanctions Committee and I had
the privilege of being its Chairman last year. We do not
belittle sanctions, but they have not achieved the purpose
for which they were applied. There may be many reasons
for this. We know how very meticulous the United
Kingdom Government is and how it has pressed other
Governments in the matter. But none the less, the fact is
that sanctions have not produced results-after
12 years,
Why‘? It is because they were adopted in small doses. For
three years, there was strong resistance to applying mandatory sanctions. Nine years have passed, and yet today the
most important commodity, petroleum, is still flowing in.
We know why that is happening. We know the role of
South Africa and so forth. There are difficulties, certainly.
But one cannot simply ignore the fact.

71. The difficult
situation
in which Mozambique
now finds itself has been fully elaborated upon in this
debate and 1 shall not, therefore, comment at length. What
is significant, I believe, is that the Council is responding to
the request made of it by the Government of Mozambique
and will in a few moments, I hope, be unanimously
adopting a draft resolution which effectively meets those
requests [S/12353]. An important element of the draft we
are about to vote upon is the request directed to the
international community embodied in operative paragraphs
9 to 11 to provide Mozainbique with assistance to cope
with the economic needs engendered by its faithful
implementation of sanctions against Rhodesia, to overcome
the economic loss and destruction of property brought
about by the acts of aggression committed by the illegal
rCgime and to provide the material resources to enable
Mozambique to strengthen its defence capability and
thereby safeguard its sovereignty and territorial integrity. It
is our hope that the international community will respond
generously to this appeal.

79. Finally, I spoke of negotiations. We are certainly in
favour of negotiations; I personally know the role Ambassador Ivor Richard has played in them. 1 have paid him
tribute and do so again for the constructive role he played
in a most difficult and thankless situation. Yet negotiations
have not produced results. Why? I think it is plain for all to
see that Mr. Smith is interested in transferring the forms of
power and not the substance of power. And that is at the
heart of all the difficulties. Basically that is why there are
problems in getting the negotiations started.

72. Canada, for its part, in 1976, in response to resolution
386 (1976), provided substantial assistance to the Government of Mozambique in the form of food aid, and we
anticipate that the present needs of Mozambique will again
be given early and sympathetic consideration by the
Canadian Government.

80. As for the questions of weakness, vacillation and racial
sympathies, racial sympathies do exist and are a factor in
the situation. They add to the difficulties of the problem.
We know that there are people who rise above them, but
there are others who say “These are our kinfolk. How can
you expect us to take military action against them? ” Such
sentiments may be deplorable morally but one can understand. They exist.

73. Resuming in my capacity as PRESIDENT
of the
Council, 1 now call upon those representatives who wish to
speak in exercise of their right of reply.
74. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): I am sorry my statement
made such a poor impression on the representative of the
United Kingdom. He thought it was ill-considered, inaccurate, untimely and full of rhetorical
rnischiefmongering. Rarely has any statement of mine been greeted
with so many adjectives. I am inclined almost to be
flattered.

81. In referring
to commercialism and political expediency, 1 did not have the United Kingdom specially in
mind. The people from my country who have gone to the
United Kingdom have not done so because it is a land of
purity and virtue; they have gone there for a variety of
reasons.

75. Indeed, it is not usual that discussions on southern
Africa lead to polemics between the United Kingdom and
Pakistan. I am sure that if my friend and colleague from the
United Kingdom will read my statement in tranquillity he
will find that I really said nothing startling or even new. All
of it has been said before, and much better than I said it.

82. Finally, after 12 years we are exactly where we were
in regard to Southern Rhodesia. We do consider that this is
a reflection, among other things, of weakness and vacillation of policy.

76. One could of course confine oneself simply to the
actual incidents that have occurred repeatedly in Mozambique in the last few weeks. But it is really difficult, in
considering such a situation, not to go back to the origins
of this sad and unnecessary situation.

83. Mr. HOUNGAVOU
(Benin) (interpretation
~90177
I;razclz): I shall not make a long statement, nor shall 1
engage in polemics with Ambassador Richard. He is an
Ambassador for whom we here have great respect. But I
should just like to tell him that he should have the courage
to accept the justified and legitimate expressions of
disappointment caused by the decolonization policies in
Africa. Short-sighted imperialist calculations by the United
Kingdom are responsible for the powder-keg in southern

77. I referred to three main central points. I said that,
when the unilateral declaration of independence was made,
it met with no resistance. I can recall a draft resolution that
was adopted by the Fourth Committee in 1963, where I
8

Africa. Responsibility for that must be accepted,as,indeed,
must honestcriticism.

strengtheningenforcementproceduresin their respective
countriessoasto prohibit the export, by their corporate
entities and nationals, of petroleum and petroleum
products which might find their way to Rhodesia.They
further undertook to persuadeother countries to take
similarsteps.MoregenerallyHeadsof Governmentagreed
to take action at the internationallevel for the reinforcement and extensionof sanctions.In approvingthe report
of the CommonwealthSanctionsCommittee,Headsof
Government paid tribute to the sacrificesmade by
Mozambique in applying sanctionsagainst Rhodesia.
They also authorized the Committee to keep under
review developmentin SouthernAfrica asa wholeand to
work in closecollaborationwith the United Nations in
this regard.”

84. AmbassadorRichardhasmadea numberof statements
of a kind to which we havegrown accustomed.I shouldlike
to say that Benin is non-alignedand hasdecidedto build an
independent State. Benin dependson no other country,
either ideologically or intellectually. Benin hasdecidedto
build scientific socialism,whether or not that is to the
liking of the imperialists.
85. My coudry will not forget the aggressionof 16
.lanuarY 1977, nor will it forget that its independenceand
the independenceof the progressivecountries of Africa
dependclosely upon the liberation of southernAfrica.
86. AS the leadersof Benin have said on a number of
occasionsat international meetings, my country is not
opposed to X~YOIICS’S initiative. But what it might object
to
and object strongly-and no one could convince it to
change its mind-are the well-known manoewres of the
imperialistsin thesenegotiations,

I shouldlike to addthat thiscommuniquewasissuedunder
the chairmanshipof no less a person than Mr. James
Callaghan,PrimeMinister of the United Kingdomof Great
Britain and NorthernIreland.
90. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): I shall be very
brief. With respect to the last point, of course the
communiquewas issuedunder the chairmanshipof the
PrimeMinister of the United Kingdom,ashe waspresiding
over the CommonwealthHeadsof Governmentmeeting,
and we subscribeto it.

87. History is before us and hastaught us a great dealand
it is on the lessonsof history that Benin has basedits
arguments.If those in the West are moved by goodwill in
this direction, then their activities will be supportedby
Benin. But their activities must be aimed at the unconditional transfer of power to the majority in Namibia,
Khodcsiaand Azania. It is a matter of trust; and, in the face
of history, Benin demandstrust, And the trust of Benin
must be earned.

91. I listenedwith greatinterestto what the representative
of Benin saidabout hisown country, andindeedwouldnot
wishto enterinto a discussion
with him about it.
92. The PRESIDENT: I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution sponsoredby Benin, India, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya,Mauritius,Pakistan,PanamaandRomania
and containedin documentS/12353.

XX. Returning to what Ambassador Richard said with
regard to Rhodesia, I wish to ask, on behalf of my
delegation, why, if his country and his Westernfriends are
sincere,do they not accept the application of Article 41 of
the Charter to Rhodesia,if they wish a peacefulsettlement
of the question.

A vote wastakenby showof hands.
The draft resolutionwasadoptedunanimously.
1

89. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): I am not sure whether
this is a right of reply or under what categoryit would fall.
Since AmbassadorRichardof the United Kingdomspokeat
length on the questionof sanctions,I feel that I shouldread
out for the record the passage
of the London communique
of CommonwealthHeadsof Government of June 1977 on
the questionof sanctions,Paragraph16 reads:

93. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof
Mozambique.

“Heads of Government consideredthe report of the
Commonwealth Sanctions Committee. They noted that
massiveevasionscontinue to take place which enablethe
Rhodesianecommy to surviveand in somesectorsalsoto
expand. There were particularly concernedthat these
evasionsare being systematically facilitated and their
prevention inhibited by the policies and legislation of
various countries maintainedin defianceof the Charter of
the United Nations. They recognisedthat ways must be
found of frustrating these subterfuges.They recognised
that the breach of sanctions,particularly in reSpeCtof
petroleum and petroleum products, is a crucial factor in
the survival of the illegal rkgime. Headsof Govemmt
requestedthe Committee tq undertake urgently a study
on the matter and make recommendations.They also
undertook to re-examine legislation with a View to
9

94. Mr. dosSANTOS(Mozambique)(interpretationfrom
Fjetick): Mr. President, on behalf of our delegation,1
shouldlike to thank you for havingonceagaingivenmethe
opportunity to addressthis augustCouncil. Lshouldlike to
take this opportunity to express,on behalf of the Central
Committeeof FRELIMO, on behalf of the Governmentof
the People’sRepublic of Mozambique,on behalf of the
peopleof Mozambiqueandon behalfof my delegation,our
satisfactionat the conclusionsreachedby the Council,not
only
becauseof what those conclusionsmean for our
country but above all becauseof what they representfor
the international community.
95. Here, in the Council, referencewas madeby one of
the membersto a meetingof this body in 1972. At that
time too we had occasionto address
the Councilto express
the feelings of the people of Mozambique and their
aspirationsto freedomand independence,
andwe found all
1 Set resolution

411 (1977).

Pagt

contained in previous resolutions will make it possible to
forge even more solidly the unity of the international
community against a rCgime which has become for everyone a criminal rkgime, an enemy of mankind. The existence
of a rCgime like that of Jan Smith, the existence of racist
and Fascist rhgimes, is today an affront to reason and
human dignity.

the understanding we could desire on the part of the
international
community.
That understanding was LIIIanimous. At that time we were able to say to the
international community how appreciative we were of such
unanimity and how much importance we attached to it. At
the time we said that we were happy that the international
community had been able to reach unanimity with regard
to the problems of freedom and human dignity in southern
Africa. And that is what we are repeating today, because
for us, for FRELJMO, for the people of Mozambique and
for the Government of the People’s Republic of Mozambique, the Fighting going on in southern Africa is essentially
a fight for liberation and human dignity. It is for this reason
that we say that the Council’s decision is a matter of great
satisfaction, particularly in terms of what it represents for
the international community.

101. Mr. President, we should like to extend our congratulations to you on the manner in which you have
conducted the work of this series of meetings of the
Council. We know of your long experience, which constitutes for us a lesson and an example. We are aware OF the
fact that it was thanks to your enlightened conduct of OLII
proceedings that this series of meetings of the Council was
able to take place in a climate of tranquillity and calm, of
co-operation and mutual understanding, which was reflected in the effectiveness of the proceedings.

96. The resolution which has just been adopted reflects a
general heightening of conscience among peoples with
regard to the inherent problems of freedom and dignity,
particularly freedom and human dignity in southern Africa.
It shows an awareness of the fact that the conquest and the
defence of freedom are not the problem of one people
aIone or of a group of peoples but of mankind as a whole.

102. We wish to thank the representatives of all members
of the Council, Their active participation and untiring
dedication during the course of these debates, both inside
and outside this chamber, has made clear to LIS the
importance they attach to problems affecting international
peace and security. Their commitment is a guarantee and
proof of the confidence of peoples in our world Organization as a bastion for the defence of mankind’s most
cherished interests and aspirations.

97. We are satisfied because the decisions taken here
constitute an important contribution to the destruction of
the Ian Smith r&gime--an essential condition for the
restoration of peace and security in southern Africa. They
represent firm support for the ongoing struggle in southern
Africa against colonialism and racism, against exploitation
and oppression. They also signify that there is a genuine
awareness of the fact that without the eradication of these
evils it will be impossible to achieve peace, security or the
actual exercise of democracy in southern Africa.

103. Through its Ministers here, the Council of Ministers
of the Organization of African Unity wished to be
represented in the Council. In our statement at the
beginning of this series of meetings /2Ol#th meeting/, WC
spoke of the great significance of that OAU decision for
FRELIMO, the Mozambican people and the Government of
the People’s Republic of Mozambique. We shall therefore
not repeat it, particularly since we too form an integral part
of OAU. However, we would venture to congratulate the
member countries and representatives of the African Group
at the United Nations, who have unselfishly abided by the
decisions of the OAU Council of Ministers, which is
meeting at this very moment at Libreville, in Gabon.
Indeed, our brothers representing the African Group
conveyed to the entire international community Africa’s
message of freedom and friendship; they also made clear
the fact that the struggle for freedom and dignity affects
everyone in the world. We Mozambicans are proud of the
work accomplished by the representatives of the African
Group in this world Organization. Their efforts and
commitment are clear evidence of the active solidarity of
our continent when it comes to the struggle of peoples
against colonialism and racism, They reflect a firm determination to broaden the frontiers of liberty and to uproot
colonial and racist rCgimes from our world.

98. We are convinced that an important step has been
taken towards the setting up of a system of appropriate
measures aimed at helping in the destruction of the odious
regime of Ian Smith. Further steps will inevitably follow
the resolution just adopted here, which aims at the
implementation of resolutions already adopted and particularly the adoption of new measures to support the just
struggle of the people of Zimbabwe as well as the total
isolation of the Jan Smith rCgime.
99. The conquest of freedom and independence will be
the work of the people of Zimbabwe, but the decisions
taken here today and those which will undoubtedly bc
taken in the future will always represent an important
contribution
for our brothers in Zimbabwe. They will
demonstrate that all the peoples are always behind the
struggle of the people of Zimbabwe.
100. We should also like to express our satisfaction at the
unanimity with which the resolution was adopted. It is our
feeling that any other resuft would have constituted an
encouragement to the Ian Smith regime and acquiescence in
its existence. The unanimous decision taken here reveals the
almost total isolation of the Smith regime; what is more, it
is a clear demonstration of the will of the international
community to continue waging a consistent struggle against
the racist regimes of southern Africa. The implementation
of the measures advocated and laid down here and of those

104. We know that the representatives of a number of
countries wanted to address the Council but that, perceiving the interests of the world community, they agreed not
to speak. To those countries and to all States Members of
this world Organization we wish to say that we very much
appreciate their solidarity and are aware of the depth of
their commitment to the solution of the problem before
the Council.
10

105, We shall confidently be returning to our country,
secure and firm in our decision to pursue the struggle for
the reconstruction of our country and the building of
genuine independence which will allow our people to
achieve the necessary progress in order to eliminate hunger,
poverty and the vestiges ol colonial oppression. Today,
more than ever before, we know that we are not alone, that
we erljoy the support Of thC international conlmunity. We
are certain that the international community will actively
contribute to the practical implementation of the decisions
contained in the resolution just adopted by the Council. We
shall return to our country with cunfidcnce and we assure
you that the Mozambicnn people, under the leadership of
FRELIMO, will co1lti1llle
to
give
its
whole-heurteci
and
tireless support to the people r)l’ Zimbabwe and that we
shall do everything in our power to continue to act as a
reliable Member of the Ilnitcd Nations in its efforts to
contribute effectively to the liberation of the people of
Zilnbabwe and to the pursuit OF its armed national
liberation struggle. We shall be returning home with the
knowledge that the Member States of this Organization
have created new conditions tbr effective assistance to
allow the People’s Republic or Mozambique to strengthen
its defence capability and to pursue the work of national
reconstruction, particularly 01‘ the areas destroyed and
devastated by the criminals of la11 Smith.

Mozambique will aIways do both their national and their
international duty. The struggle continues.
109. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): On behalf of the SpOllsors, I wish to thank the members of the Council for having
adopted unanimously the draft resolution in document
S/12353. I wish also to express my appreciation for the
friendly, courteous, understanding and constructive manner
in which they co-operated with us during the negotiation of
the draft.
110. An English judge-who
was, I believe, of Welsh
descent-once said that it was trite learning to read the
minds of men, so perhaps members should not read into the
resolution what is not actually there. On the other hand, it
would be naive to believe that Africans, and possibly their
friends, would remain idle while their brothers and sisters
were being murdered by an outlaw. There are indications
that Africa will act effectively, and act soon, unless a
peaceful solution is found, and found very soon. After all,
we have waited for tnore than a decade.
I1 1. Mauritius stands shoulder to shoulder with the
people of Mozambique, as it does with all the peoples of
Africa, indeed, with aI1 peace-loving peoples of the world
who put into practice the principles of truth, justice and
freedom and do not just talk about them. Thus, limited as
are its resources, Mauritius contributed in June 1976 a sum
of $20,000 to the Commonwealth Fund for Mozambique
soon
after that country closed its borders with Southern
Rhodesia in keeping with the application of sanctions. I
understand that, at the meeting of the Organizalion of
African Unity currently being held at Libreville, Mauritius
initiated the establishment of an African solidarity fund for
Mozambique and has already pledged another contribution.

106. Here, during these meetings of the Council, it was
with emotion that we heard the various speakers rcfcrring
to Mr. Samora Machcl, I’rcsiclcnt ol‘ F’IIELIMC) and of the
People’s Republic of Mozambique, in terms of sympathy
and friendship. We heard the representatives using the same
terms of friendship and Sytll[X\tlly
with regard ta the
People’s liepublic of Mozambique.
107. I should like to say to you, Mr. Prcsidcnt, and to the
members 01’ the C’ouncil, :lllll. indeed, tl) illt tllose WI10 IlaVc
expressed such feelings about our pci)plc ;~ild Goverrlnlent,
that we consider those words ;I tribute to our people, to
their sacrifices during tile period of the armed national
struggle for liberation. ;lnll to tile silcrificCs
llliltle
by then1
since independence to achieve their aspirations which are
moreover illS1) those 01’ iIll pe0plcs: 011 the one hand, to
rorge their own llil}~pillCSS
illlll, 011 the other- and this is
intimately connected- .to build 3 lilturc for the whole of
mankind.

112. Finally, Mr, President, 1 wish to express to you
personally our deep appreciation and gratitude for the
elegant and effective manner in which you have conducted
the work of the Council, We regret that we have taken up
so much of your time during this month, If it is any
consolation to you, your reward is that you may well go
down in the history of the United Nations as being the first
President of :I meeting of the Security Council which
sanctioned substantial material assistance to strengthen the
defensive capability of a country. I am glad that it is an
African country.

108. That is how wc interpret the words wc heard uttered
IEW, and WC ~h~ltl like to say tllat !:RELlMO and the
Government and pct~plc of the l%~)plc’s Republic of

The meeting rose at 5.05 p. rn.

11

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
depositaires
du mondo entier. Informer-vous
aupres de votre libraire
6 : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIES
et 10s ngences
ou adressez-vous

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
est.&n en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S,

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-April

1978-2,200
