Re11olution1 adopted on tbe report, of the Third Committee

Taking into account that, under the Secretary-General's proposals• for the reorganization of the Secretariat, the Division of Narcotic Drugs is to be transferred to Geneva,
Decides to establish a United Nations Narcotics
Laboratory in Geneva.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
835 (IX). United Nations Children's Fund

The General Assembly,
Recalling that by its resolution 802 (VIII) of 6
October 1953 it decided to continue the activities of the
United Nations Children's Fund without time limits,
Taking note of resolution 543 (XVIII) adopted by
the Economic and Social Council after consideration
of the reports made by the Executive Board of
UNICEF on the work of the Fund,
Being of the opinion that the work of UNICEF
is developing with success in the various parts of the
world, especially in under-developed areas,
1. Congratulates the United Nations Children's Fund
on its work;
2. Considers that further efforts are desirable to
familiarize the public with the needs of children and
with the work of UNICEF;
3. Invites all States Members and non-members of
the United Nations to continue their efforts to expand
the resources of UNICEF.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
836 (IX). Universal Children's Day

The General Assembly,
Considering that the obligations of the United
Nations to succeeding generations can only be fulfilled
by increased efforts on behalf of the children of the
world, who are the citizens of tomorrow, and that the
world-wide observance of a children's day would contribute to human solidarity and co-operation between
nations,
Believing that the objectives of the Charter can best
be realized if they inspire and are shared by the children
of the world,
Recalling the increased interest in the work of and
the support given to the United Nations Children's
Fund and its acceptance as an integral part of the
United Nations, and that various resolutions relating
to children adopted by the General Assembly have
shown the Organization's concern for children in all
parts of the world,
Considering the increasing attention given by States
and peoples to a better observance of the rights of
mothers and children, as well as the action of civic,
social, professional and cultural institutions, national,
international and regional, on behalf of children,
Expressing its appreciation of the work done by
governmental and voluntary organizations for the
children of the world, including the observance in a
certain number of countries of a Universal Children's
Day,
8

Ibid., agenda item 53, document A/2731.

Zl

Considering that the observance of Universal Children's Day should be used for a concrete and effective
expression of the support of Governments for the
purposes of UNICEF,
1. Recomends that, with effect from 1956, a Universal Children's Day shall be instituted by all countries,
to be observed as a day of world-wide fraternity and
understanding between children and of activity devoted
to the promotion of the ideals and objectives of the
Charter and the welfare of the children of the world,
and to the strengthening and broadening of the efforts
made by the United Nations in favour and on behalf of
all the children of the world ;
2. Suggests to the Goyernments of all States that
Universal Children's Day be observed on the date ancl
in the way which each considers appropriate;
3. Also-invites the cultural, professional, trade union,
workers' and social welfare organizations, for men and
women, to support and co-operate actively in the ot>sen·ance of Universal Children's Day;
4. Requests the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund, in co-operation with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to take steps in accordance with the present
resolution and to include in its annual reports a report
on progress achieved in accordance with the above
recommendations.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
837 (IX). Recommendations concerning international respect for the right of peoples and
nations to self-determination

The General Assembly,
RecaUing its resolutions 637 (VII), 648 (VII) and
738 (VIII),
Noting the recommendations 7 of the Commission on
Human Rights to the Economic and Social Council,
Noting, further, resolution 545 G (XVIII) adopted
by the Economic and Social Council,
Considering that the preparation of recommendations
on measures for promoting the right of self-determination is a matter of immediate concern,
I. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
complete its recommendations concerning international
respect for the right of peoples and nations to selfdetermination, including recommendations concerning
their permanent scvereignty over their natural wealth
and resources, having due regard to the rights and
duties of States under international law and to the
importance of encouraging international co-operation
in the economic development of under-developed countries, in order that the General Assembly may give
those recommendations full and due consideration at
its next regular session;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
transmit these recommendations to the General A~
sembly for consideration at its next regular session.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
7
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Eighteenth Session, Supplement No. 7, annex IV, draft resolution F.
