S/PV.8201

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8201st meeting

Monday, 12 March 2018, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Van Oosterom. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Netherlands)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-06756 (E)
*1806756*

S/PV.8201

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I would like to warmly welcome the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and to
give him the floor.
The Secretary-General: I am here to report on the
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018), which the
Council adopted unanimously on 24 February. But I am
keenly aware that I am doing so just as the bloodletting
in Syria enters its eighth year. I would like to highlight
just one stark fact on this grimmest of anniversaries,
which is that in 2017, more children were killed in Syria
than in any other year since the war began. I am deeply
saddened by the immense loss and cascading suffering
of the Syrian people. And I am deeply disappointed by
all those who, year after year, by action or inaction,
design or indifference, have allowed this to happen.
My grief and frustration are compounded by all that
I know of the people of Syria. As United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in the aftermath of the
Iraq war, I saw the remarkable hospitality of the Syrian
people in hosting 1.5 million Iraqi refugees — not in
camps, but in their communities across the country.
Syria was a place where refugees could live in security
as they tried to rebuild their lives and raise their
families. Today, so many of those generous Syrians
who shared so much have themselves been forced
from their homes, becoming refugees or internally
displaced. In neighbouring countries — whose
enormous hospitality I have also witnessed, but who are
burdened by overwhelming needs — the vast majority
of Syrian refugees live below the poverty line. Many
of the Syrians who journeyed even farther from home
in search of safety have found the doors that they once
opened to others in need shut in their faces. A country
known for its ancient civilization and a people known
for their rich diversity have been betrayed, and Syria
2/23

12/03/2018

is bleeding inside and out. There should be one agenda
only for all of us — ending the suffering of the Syrian
people and finding a political solution to the conflict.
And the Council has a particular responsibility in
that regard.
Let me now turn to the implementation of resolution
2401 (2018) and the issue of the compliance of all the
relevant parties in Syria. I do so with a caveat. The
United Nations is following developments closely, but
we do not have the full picture, owing to our limited
presence and restricted access on the ground. Resolution
2401 (2018) demands that all parties “cease hostilities
without delay, and engage immediately to ensure full
and comprehensive implementation ... for a durable
humanitarian pause for at least 30 consecutive days
throughout Syria”, while still countering Da’esh and
other groups designated as terrorists by the Council.
It is true that in some areas, such as Deir ez-Zor and
Douma, where there has been a recent ceasefire that
I will address later, the conflict is diminishing in
intensity. Yet there has been no cessation of hostilities.
Violence continues in eastern Ghouta and beyond,
including in Afrin, parts of Idlib and into Damascus
and its suburbs. In eastern Ghouta in particular, the air
strikes, shelling and ground offensives have intensified
since the resolution’s adoption and have claimed
hundreds of civilian lives. Some reports even put the
toll at more than 1,000.
The resolution further demands the enabling
of “the safe, unimpeded and sustained delivery of
humanitarian aid and services”. Despite some limited
convoy deliveries, the provision of humanitarian aid and
services has been neither safe, unimpeded or sustained.
The resolution calls on “all parties to immediately
lift the sieges of populated areas, including in eastern
Ghouta, Yarmouk, Fo’ah and Kafraya”. No sieges
have been lifted. The resolution demands medical
evacuations of the critically sick and wounded. To our
knowledge, not one critically sick or wounded person
has so far been evacuated. But I will come back to
that later in relation to a recent announcement. The
resolution reiterates its demand “reminding in particular
the Syrian authorities, that all parties immediately
comply with their obligations under international law,
including international human rights law, as applicable,
and international humanitarian law, including the
protection of civilians”. And I remind all involved that
even efforts to combat groups identified as terrorists by
the Council do not supersede those obligations. Yet we
18-06756

12/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

see egregious violations, indiscriminate attacks and a
failure to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Since the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018), my
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and I have been
focused on helping to create the conditions for a
cessation of hostilities in eastern Ghouta, where, as I
said to the Council two weeks ago, people have been
living in a hell on Earth (see S/PV.8185). As the Special
Envoy told the Council a few days ago, eastern Ghouta
is the most urgent situation, because it is where we have
the clearest potential to try to support the de-escalation
in concrete ways, and because we have been concretely
approached. On 26 February, the Russian Federation
announced a five-hour daily humanitarian pause in
eastern Ghouta. I will speak to that later in my remarks.
On 27 February, the President of the Security
Council and I received a letter from the Syrian National
Committee conveying another letter from the three
armed opposition groups in eastern Ghouta — Jaysh
Al-Islam, Faylaq Al-Rahman and Ahrar Al-Sham. They
expressed their commitment “to the full implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2401 (2018)”, and to expelling from eastern
Ghouta “the armed groups of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham,
the Al-Nusra Front and Al-Qaida and all of those
belonging to them”. They also promised to ensure
humanitarian access and the facilitation of the work
of United Nations agencies. On receiving the letter,
the Office of the Special Envoy opened channels
with all three groups, inside and outside the enclave.
The respective commanders issued further letters,
expressing the groups’ readiness to negotiate with the
Russian Federation in Geneva.
In parallel, both I and my Special Envoy engaged
with the relevant authorities of the Russian Federation.
My team on the ground did likewise, and also engaged
with the Government of Syria. We offered the good
offices of the United Nations to facilitate and observe
any meeting between the representatives of the armed
opposition groups, the Syrian Government and the
Russian Federation. Despite our best efforts over the
course of a few days, it was not possible to schedule
any meeting.
Meanwhile, on 6 March, the Syrian Government
addressed a letter to me and to the President of the
Security Council. That letter stated that Syria positively
welcomed resolution 2401 (2018), as it

S/PV. 8201

“stresses firm commitment to the Syrian State’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
in accordance with the provisions of the United
Nations Charter and calls for implementing
a humanitarian truce across Syria to ensure
a safe, sustainable and unhindered access of
humanitarian aid.”
That same day, my Special Envoy informed the
Russian Federation of his intention to invite the three
armed opposition groups to a meeting with the Russian
Federation in Geneva three days later. On 7 March, his
interlocutors replied that they did not think a meeting
in Geneva was the best option and were pursuing
contacts on the ground with the relevant armed
opposition groups.
As those diplomatic efforts were taking place,
fighting went on. The Syrian Government and its allies
intensified air strikes and launched a ground offensive,
progressively gaining control of parts of eastern Ghouta
from about 10 per cent of the enclave on 3 March to
more than 60 per cent today. The offensive initially
took place in less populated areas, steadily moving to
urban centres and forcing large-scale displacement.
In the follow up to the efforts I have described,
it was possible on 8 and 10 March to convene two
meetings between Russian officials and Jaysh Al-Islam
in the outskirts of eastern Ghouta, with the United
Nations as an observer. In those meetings, progress
was made in relation to the removal of a number of
members of the Al-Nusra Front, as well as other aspects,
including the potential for a ceasefire and improved
humanitarian access. The first group of Al-Nusra Front
fighters and their families were since evacuated from
eastern Ghouta.
Nevertheless, it has not been possible to facilitate
contact between the Russian authorities and Faylak
Al-Rahman. The group insisted that the meeting take
place in Geneva. The Russian Federation insisted that
the meeting take place on the ground. On 10 March,
Government forces intensified their offensive, capturing
the city of Misraba in a movement aiming at dividing
the enclave into three separate areas. On the evening
of that same day, the Russian Federation informed the
United Nations that a unilateral ceasefire would take
place at midnight, in relation to Jaysh Al-Islam in
Douma. It was agreed that a meeting would be held on
11 March with the facilitation of the United Nations. On
that day, with the ceasefire between the Government

18-067563/23

S/PV.8201

The situation in the Middle East

and Jaysh Al-Islam forces largely holding in Douma,
the meeting took place, followed by a meeting today.
As I speak to the Council now, I have not yet
received a full report on the results of today’s meeting.
But I was informed by our people in Damascus as I was
entering the Chamber that there has been progress with
regard to civilian evacuations and humanitarian aid.
Furthermore, I take note of a statement issued today by
Jaysh Al-Islam:
“[i] n the context of Security Council resolutions
2254 (2015) and 2401 (2018), an agreement was
reached with the Russian side through the United
Nations for a humanitarian medical evacuation of the
wounded for treatment outside of eastern Ghouta.”
We are also hearing reports of tentative initiatives,
both by tribal leaders and the Russian Federation, for
contact with other groups on the ground. I wish to
underscore the urgency of seeing medical evacuations,
civilian protection and full, sustained and unimpeded
humanitarian access as soon as possible.
Meanwhile, attacks on other parts of eastern
Ghouta continue, with the enclave now split into three
separate pockets. During this whole period, the shelling
from eastern Ghouta to Damascus was also ongoing,
causing dozens of civilian deaths and injuries, with
some reports putting the number close to 100.
My Special Envoy and I have remained apprised
at each step of the diplomatic engagement, offering
support and guidance to ensure the implementation in
letter and spirit of the resolution. In short, as my Special
Envoy has said to the Council, we are leaving no stone
unturned in trying to bring all major stakeholders
to the table and contribute in a concrete fashion to
find a sustainable solution for the implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018).
As the situation continues to unfold, the Turkish
offensive in Afrin — pursued with armed opposition
group allies — intensified with air strikes and ground
advances against Partiya Yekitiya Demokrat/People’s
Protection Units fighters, reinforced, in turn, by
elements coming from eastern Syria, where they were
combating Da’esh. Pro-Syrian Government forces have
also deployed inside of Afrin. The fighting resulted
in significant civilian displacement, with reports of
numerous casualties and damage to infrastructure.
With the cooperation of Syrian armed opposition
groups, Turkish forces established a so-called buffer
4/23

12/03/2018

zone inside Syrian territory, linking northern rural
Aleppo and Idlib, and surrounding Afrin from three
sides. The offensive is now pushing ever closer towards
the city, with its large civilian population.
Allow me to now turn to our efforts to address
the humanitarian crisis. When resolution 2401 (2018)
was adopted, the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners stood ready to deliver. Plans were in place
for multiple convoys each week to agreed-upon
locations, in response to independently assessed needs.
Unfortunately, the actual delivery did not match our
plan. Let me describe what it was possible to do in the
past two weeks.
On 1 March, humanitarian organizations delivered
assistance to some 50,000 people in the hard-to-reach
areas of Afrin and Tell Rifaat, north of Aleppo. On
4 March, a convoy of 19 trucks organized by the United
Nations, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and partners
reached Dar Kabira, in northern Homs. It provided
assistance to 33,500 people of the requested 40,250.
However, the Government of Syria did not allow the
delivery of life-saving medicines, such as insulin,
nor key items, including solar lamps, syringes and
paediatric scales.
As I mentioned earlier, in eastern Ghouta, the
Russian Federation unilaterally announced a daily
five-hour humanitarian pause in the fighting, starting
from 27 February, to prevent civilian victims and to
enable civilians to leave the enclave. In reality, few
civilians left. On the one hand, sufficient protection
standards were not in place for voluntary movement.
Moreover, armed groups prevented others from leaving.
In that context, even though the five-hour window
was insufficient to enable the safe, unimpeded and
sustained delivery of humanitarian aid and services,
as demanded in the resolution, on 5 March the United
Nations sent an inter-agency convoy of 46 trucks
to Douma, in eastern Ghouta, with food for 27,500
people, along with health and nutrition supplies. Yet
those 27,500 represented only a third of the requested
beneficiaries, all in desperate need. And most of the
health supplies were removed by the Syrian authorities,
including basic medicines, dialysis treatments and
trauma and surgical materials, such as burn dressings
and adrenaline, despite the provisions of paragraph 8 of
resolution 2401 (2018).
According to the World Health Organization, only
about 30 per cent of medical supplies in the convoy
18-06756

12/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

were allowed in. United Nations personnel from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
accompanying the convoy were also denied access
to eastern Ghouta. Violence rendered the operation
extremely perilous, despite prior assurances from the
parties to the conflict. The insecurity forced the team
to reluctantly halt unloading and to return to Damascus
with a large share of the food aid still on the trucks.
On 9 March, a convoy of 13 trucks reached Douma,
delivering the remaining food assistance that could not
be offloaded four days earlier. Once again, shelling
occurred nearby, despite assurances having been
provided by all parties. In those difficult circumstances,
I commend the valiant humanitarian workers risking
their lives to provide assistance and protection to
people in need.
But we are obviously far from safe, unimpeded and
sustained delivery of humanitarian aid, as demanded
in resolution 2401 (2018), as well as other relevant
Security Council resolutions. And so the humanitarian
and human rights situation is becoming more desperate
by the day. In Douma, relief workers who reached the
city last week described conditions as shocking and
overwhelming. People are sheltering in overcrowded
basements. Access to food, water and sanitation is
limited. In relation to Douma, we have a convoy ready
that I hope will be allowed to proceed in the coming
days, especially after the results of today’s meeting.
As in all conflict settings, the specific needs of
women are not receiving sufficient attention, including
access to safe spaces, critical health services, medicine
and baby formula for their children. In eastern Ghouta,
health partners on the ground advise that more than
1,000 people are in urgent need of medical evacuation.
The United Nations is ready to support these medical
evacuations, in cooperation with the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent and other partners. A prioritized list of those
in greatest need, mostly children, has been shared
with the Syrian authorities. I urge a positive response,
hoping that today’s meeting will allow these actions to
take place in the immediate future.
The Syrian Arab Red Crescent has announced
its intention to send a relief convoy to Afrin as soon
as security conditions allows. A United Nations
humanitarian mission is awaiting Government
authorization to immediately deploy to Raqqa for
assessments of security and needs. There are also new
disturbing allegations of the use of chlorine gas. Even

S/PV. 8201

if we cannot verify them, we cannot ignore them. I
continue to urge the Council to find unity on this issue.
Having said what I said, I believe that despite all
the difficulties, lack of trust, mutual suspicions and
cold calculations, it should be possible to implement
resolution 2401 (2018). It should be possible to have
a cessation of hostilities. It should be possible to
deliver aid. It should be possible to evacuate the sick
and wounded. It should be possible to lift the sieges.
It should be possible to accelerate humanitarian mine
action throughout Syria. It should also be possible to
remove Security Council-listed terrorist fighters from
conflict zones without massive and indiscriminate
attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure.
We cannot give up, for the sake of the Syrian people.
I appeal to all parties to ensure the full implementation
of resolution 2401 (2018) throughout the whole of
Syrian territory. The United Nations is ready to assist in
any effort to make that happen. I call on all States with
influence to exercise it in support of the efforts of the
United Nations and the implementation of the resolution.
I hope that this week’s Astana ministerial meeting,
which will gather the guarantors of de-escalation, will
concretely restore de-escalation arrangements, and take
real steps on detainees, abductees and missing persons.
The dramatic situation I have described — the calamity
across the country, the rivalries, the cynicism, the
cruelty — highlight the need for a political solution.
My Special Envoy continues to work towards the full
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
On Thursday, the conflict will enter its eighth year.
I refuse to lose my hope to see Syria rising from the
ashes. To see a united, democratic Syria able to avoid
fragmentation and sectarianism and with its sovereignty
and territorial integrity respected, and to see a Syrian
people able to freely decide their future and choose
their political leadership.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Recalling the Security Council’s latest note 507 on
its working methods (S/2017/507), I wish to encourage
all participants, both members and non-members of
the Council, to deliver their statements in five minutes
or less.

18-067565/23

S/PV.8201

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I deliver
this speech today on behalf of Kuwait and Sweden.
At the outset I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting at the request
of the delegations of Kuwait and Sweden, pursuant to
resolution 2401 (2018). I also thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his presence here today and for
his briefing about the implementation of this resolution.
Fifteen days have passed since the Security
Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2401
(2018), which demands that all parties implement a
30-day ceasefire throughout Syria without delay in
order to deliver humanitarian assistance to those in
need and to end the siege of residential areas. It is
with great regret that we continue to witness a clear
failure to implement the resolution’s provisions while
military operations across Syria continue to prevent
humanitarian and medical assistance, particularly in
eastern Ghouta and specifically on the part of the Syrian
authorities. This has prevented United Nations teams
and their humanitarian partners from safely providing
humanitarian assistance to eastern Ghouta, which has
been a primary locus among Syrian areas in need of
assistance ever since its siege began in 2013, and which
is home to about 400,000 people. In this regard, we
would like to make a number of observations, as follows.
First, we have followed with deep concern the
inability of the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners to enter the besieged areas, and the obstacles
and impediments that they have faced during their
operations in some areas. In that regard, we would refer
to events in Douma, eastern Ghouta, on 5 March, which
proved to be the deadliest day since the adoption of
resolution 2401 (2018), with at least 100 people having
been killed on that day alone. On that day, the hopes of
civilians hinged on receiving lifesaving humanitarian
aid, and we looked forward to that first positive
initiative reaching 90,000 people in need of assistance
in eastern Ghouta.
However, what happened was that the number of
beneficiaries dropped to less than half due to the Syrian
authorities having removed necessary medical supplies
from the convoy’s load without clear justification,
despite the fact that they had been given prior
notification, based on standard operating procedures, of
the entirety of the humanitarian convoy’s content. It is
also a matter of deep concern that convoys administered
by the United Nations and its partners were compelled
6/23

12/03/2018

to cease their operations before completely unloading
their cargo due to continued aerial bombardment on
Douma. We demand that the Syrian authorities give
immediate permission for two convoys per week to
eastern Ghouta and other destinations, at the request
of the United Nations. We call on all parties to provide
appropriate security guarantees for these convoys and to
permit United Nations staff to accompany the convoys.
In this regard, we reaffirm the need for all parties,
in particular the Syrian authorities, to assume their
responsibilities to protect all humanitarian workers,
including United Nations agencies and their relevant
partners. We welcome the entry of the remaining
humanitarian convoys provided by the Red Cross and
the World Food Program into Douma on 9 March to
deliver the remaining food assistance. This was the
second time such convoys had been allowed to enter
Douma in one week. There is a need to build on this so
as to increase the number of weekly convoys to eastern
Ghouta in a sustainable manner.
Secondly, we reiterate the Council’s demand for
immediate unconditional medical evacuations based on
medical need, starting this week, and we call on the
Syrian authorities to give permission and work with
the United Nations and its implementing partners to
that end.
Thirdly, the continued fighting in eastern Ghouta,
particularly the incessant air strikes, prompts us to
again call specifically on the Syrian authorities to
comply with the provisions of the resolution and of
international law in order to facilitate humanitarian
assistance to reach those in need. We believe that a daily
five-hour truce in eastern Ghouta does not support the
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018).
Fourthly, the United Nations has confirmed that
the number of combatants associated with terrorist
groups designated by the Security Council in eastern
Ghouta does not exceed 350. We cannot accept
continued military operations under the pretext of
combating terrorism when they effectively prevent
the delivery of humanitarian assistance, contrary to
the requirements of the resolution. Resolution 2401
(2018), which was adopted unanimously, took effect
immediately and is applicable to all parties. In that
regard, we note the willingness of certain opposition
groups in eastern Ghouta to abide by the provisions of
the resolution and to expel terrorist groups designated
by the Security Council. We express our support for the
18-06756

12/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to operationalize this matter
without delay.
Fifthly, listening to the Secretary-General’s briefing
today on the status of the implementation of resolution
2401 (2018) constitutes one of the monitoring tools
included in the resolution. But the main mechanisms
remain the existing ceasefire agreements between the
parties to the conflict, most notably the Astana accord
with Russia, Turkey and Iran as its guarantors, and
the agreement supervised by the United States and the
Russian Federation that emanated from the International
Syria Support Group. The resolution stresses the need
to activate those agreements in order to reach a 30day ceasefire aimed at allowing sustainable access to
humanitarian assistance in all regions in Syria. We call
again on the parties to those agreements to redouble
their efforts in order to implement the provisions of
resolution 2401 (2018).
The unanimous position that the Security Council
conveyed to the Syrian people and to the world by
adopting resolution 2401 (2018) on 24 February must
be built on in a speedy and effective manner, especially
as the resolution is primarily of a humanitarian nature.
There is a collective responsibility on us as members
of the Security Council, specifically on influential
parties, to maintain our credibility before the world and
work to implement the provisions of resolution 2401
(2018). We would like here to stress that the provisions
of the resolution are valid even after 30 days from the
date of its adoption.
We affirm our full commitment to continue to
closely follow the status of the implementation of the
resolution in the Council monthly reports. We will
spare no effort to make progress on its implementation.
This month marks the beginning of the eighth year
of the conflict in Syria. Sadly, there is still a need
for the violence to cease, for sustained humanitarian
access through weekly cross-line convoys, for medical
evacuations, for the protection of civilians and hospitals
and for lifting the siege. We cannot let the Syrian people
down, and we will continue to strive to implement the
joint demands that we have set out.
Finally, we recall that the lack of a political
settlement to the conflict in Syria based on resolution
2254 (2015) will lead to further deterioration of the
humanitarian situation.

S/PV. 8201

Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to congratulate the Netherlands and your team,
Mr. President, on having assumed the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I also want to thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing and for all
of his efforts on behalf of peace in Syria
Sixteen days ago, we sat around the negotiating
table with our Security Council colleagues and agreed
to a 30-day ceasefire in the brutal bombardment
of civilians in Syria. The negotiations were long
and difficult. Every minute we delayed meant more
innocent people were killed. But the Russian delegation
stalled and drew out the talks. They had conditions
they insisted on before they would allow the killing to
stop. The United States was reluctant to accept those
conditions. But, in order to stop the killing in Syria, we
accepted them. We attempted to work with Russia in
good faith to end the violence in Syria.
As a result, 16 days ago we came to an agreement.
Russia cast its vote in favour of the agreement (see
S/PV.8188). With that vote Russia promised its support
for a 30-day cease-fire, as did the rest of the members
of the security Council. With that vote Russia said
that it too wanted to create the conditions for food
and medicine to reach starving Syrian families. With
that vote Russia told us it would use its influence with
the Syrian regime to silence the guns in Syria. It told
us that the Russians would themselves honour the
ceasefire they voted to demand. With that vote Russia
made a commitment to us, to the Syrian people and to
the world — a commitment to stop the killing in Syria.
Today we know that the Russians did not keep their
commitment. Today we see their actions do not match
those commitments, as bombs continue dropping on the
children of eastern Ghouta. Today we must ask whether
Russia can no longer influence the Al-Assad regime
to stop the horrific destruction of hospitals, medical
clinics and ambulances and to stop dropping chemical
weapons on villages. Has the situation in Syria
reversed, and Russia is now the tool of Al-Assad — or
worse, Iran?
We must ask those questions because we know
the Russians themselves have continued their own
bombing. In the first four days following the ceasefire,
Russian military aircraft conducted at least 20 daily
bombing missions in Damascus and eastern Ghouta.
The Russians negotiated the wording of the ceasefire
down to the commas and the periods. They voted for the

18-067567/23

S/PV.8201

The situation in the Middle East

ceasefire. And they immediately disregarded it. In the
past 16 days, over 500 civilians have died. Some reports
put the death toll even higher. That is unacceptable.
Thousands of Syrians are in desperate need of
medical care. But none of the United Nations list has
been evacuated. We have heard the conversations are
ongoing with the regime to medically evacuate 25
people in the coming weeks. While those civilians
should be rushed to medical care, we ask why it took
so long. When will the more than 1,000 identified
medical cases be evacuated? There have been almost no
deliveries of medicine or surgical equipment, because
the Al-Assad regime remove them from the United
Nations humanitarian convoys.
The convoy that made it to eastern Ghouta on
5 March had to navigate around constant regime
airstrikes. The bombing was so severe that the United
Nations could barely unload the food the trucks were
carrying. And in the past 16 days, there have been three
separate allegations of chlorine-gas attacks. This is no
ceasefire. This is the Al-Assad regime, Iran and Russia
continuing to wage war against their political opponents.
And there is another reason we know the Syrians
and Russians never intended to implement the ceasefire:
they planned for it. Over the past two weeks, the
Russian and Syrian regimes have been busy labelling
every opposition group in eastern Ghouta a “terrorist
group”. Why? So they can exploit a provision in the
ceasefire resolution (resolution 2401 (2018)) that allows
for military operations against the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria and Al-Qaida. There are terrorists in Syria,
but the Russian and Syrian regimes label anyone as
terrorists who resist their absolute control.
In the eyes of Russia, Iran and Al-Assad, the
neighbourhoods of eastern Ghouta are full of terrorists.
The hospitals are full of terrorists. The schools are full
of terrorists. The Syrian and Russian regimes insist
that they are targeting terrorists, but their bombs and
artillery continue to fall on hospitals and schools and
on innocent civilians. They have deliberately and with
premeditation exploited a loophole they negotiated
in the ceasefire to continue starving and pummelling
hundreds of thousands of innocent Syrian civilians.
They have made a mockery of this process and this
institution. For the sake of the Syrian people and
the integrity of the Council, we must respond and
take action.
8/23

12/03/2018

During the negotiations, the United States put all
parties on notice that we needed to act if the ceasefire
was not honoured. Members of the Security Council
agreed. Now that day has come. The ceasefire has
failed. The situation of the civilians in eastern Ghouta
is dire. The United States is acting. We have drafted a
new ceasefire draft resolution that provides no room
for evasion. It is simple, straightforward and binding.
It will take effect immediately upon adoption by the
Council. It contains no counter-terrorism loopholes for
Al-Assad, Iran and the Russians to hide behind. And it
focuses on the area the Secretary-General has identified
and that the world can see holds the greatest urgency for
the lives of innocent civilians, that is, Damascus city
and eastern Ghouta.
If Russia, Iran and Al-Assad cannot agree to stop
the bombing in that limited part of Syria for that limited
amount of time, they will not agree to anything that is
worthwhile. If they will not keep their word once they
have agreed to a ceasefire, then how can we trust them?
In the end, that is what makes the work of the Council
possible: trust. If we cannot count on the members of
the Council to honour their agreements, we cannot
accomplish anything. If we cannot act when children
are dying, we have no business being here. If we cannot
save families that have not seen the sun for weeks
because they have been hiding underground to escape
barrel bombs, then the Security Council is as impotent
as its worst critics say it is.
Almost a year ago in the aftermath of the Syrian
regime sarin gas attack on Khan Shaykhoun, the United
States offered a warning to the Council. We said that
when the international community consistently fails
to act, there are times when States are compelled to
take their own action. The Security Council failed to
act, and the United States successfully struck the air
base from which Al-Assad had launched his chemical
attack. We repeat that warning today.
We welcome all nations that will work together
to finally provide relief for the Syrian people, and we
support the United Nations political process that seeks
to end the war in Syria. However, we also warn that
any nation that is determined to impose its will through
chemical attacks and inflicting human suffering, most
especially the outlaw Syrian regime, the United States
remains prepared to act if we must. It is not the path we
prefer, but it is a path we have demonstrated we will
take. We are prepared to take it again.
18-06756

12/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and, through him,
may I thank all of those trying to supply the desperately
needed humanitarian response on the ground. They are
indeed valiant.
Sixteen days ago, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2401 (2018). We did so because
we and the world were sickened by the slaughter of
innocents in Syria, particularly in eastern Ghouta.
Russia used every tactic in its playbook to weaken
the resolution and buy time for its ally, the Al-Assad
regime, to bomb indiscriminately. But when it raises
its hand in support, we hope that Russia and its clients
would keep their word and implement the resolution.
Sadly, as the Secretary-General’s briefing has made
clear, our resolution has not been implemented. What
has happened? First, has there been a ceasefire? No.
The violence continues and civilian deaths continue
to rise. In those 16 days, 607 people have reportedly
been killed, including 99 children and 79 women. The
opposition armed groups committed to implementing
resolution 2401 (2018) in full, but the Al-Assad regime’s
air strikes continue.
Despite voting for a ceasefire, between 24 and
28 February, Russian military aircraft conducted 20
bombing missions in eastern Ghouta and Damascus
every day. Russia has failed to confirm that it is only
conducting air strikes against groups that are listed as
terrorist groups by the Council. During the so-called
daily humanitarian pause, over 56 air strikes hit eastern
Ghouta between 27 February and 7 March, including
at least six air strikes by Russian aircraft, according to
monitors on the ground.
Let us recall that only last year Russia declared the
whole area to be a de-escalation zone. It has claimed
that its bombardments are about fighting terrorists.
That is manifestly not the case. There is one terrorist
group recognized by the Security Council in eastern
Ghouta, which accounts for less than not even 1 per cent
of the population of the enclave. The other fighters are
members of the opposition armed groups, which Russia
has itself invited to the Astana meetings. Those groups
have written stating their readiness to expel Al-Nusra
Front from the enclave. Instead, Russia bombs them,
undermining the political process that it is a part of. We
are pleased that the members of the High Negotiations
Committee of the Syrian opposition will be able to
discuss the situation in Syria with Council members

S/PV. 8201

later today. I repeat my consistent condemnation of
attacks against Damascus.
What about our resolution’s second demand, that is,
safe, unimpeded and sustained access for humanitarian
convoys, including medical and surgical supplies?
Only one convoy has been able to enter besieged
eastern Ghouta in the past 16 days, in two movements
following shelling. They delivered supplies for 27,500
people — a fraction of the 400,000 civilians besieged
in eastern Ghouta.
What is stopping the aid from getting to the people
that so desperately need it? Again, it is the regime. The
ongoing violence that it perpetrates is an important
factor, and its failure to grant access is another. On
5 March, the regime removed nearly 70 per cent of the
medical supplies from a humanitarian convoy destined
for 90,000 people. That happened at a time when the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is
warning that malnutrition and disease are so prevalent
that people will soon die from hunger and sickness even
more than from air strikes. Finally, have there been
any medical evacuations for the approximately 1,000
people who need them? Not a single one. Again, it is
the regime that will not permit its civilians to reach
urgently needed medical care.
Some may point to an aid convoy or an announced
pause in air strikes as a sign of improvement, and claim
that those actions implement the resolution. They do
not. Our resolution was clear: a ceasefire without delay,
humanitarian access and medical evacuations. None
have happened. Instead, the truth is that the regime will
continue to pound eastern Ghouta until it has a complete
military victory there, and Russia will continue to
protect its ally, whatever the cost to the people of Syria
and its own reputation.
As we sit here, watching Al-Assad inscribing
eastern Ghouta, again, on the roll call of atrocities and
war crimes that he has committed over the eight years
of the bloody conflict, let me say clearly that there will
be future accountability for those crimes, and Russia’s
role, bombing alongside him and protecting him from
accountability, will never be forgotten. There is still
time. If Russia is able to announce a five-hour ceasefire,
it can announce a full ceasefire. If it can get one aid
convoy through, it can get more through. I urge Russia to
give its unconditional support to resolution 2401 (2018)
and a ceasefire to enable the delivery of humanitarian

18-067569/23

S/PV.8201

The situation in the Middle East

12/03/2018

assistance, respect international humanitarian law and
protect civilians.

Russia, which has so far been unwilling, or unable, to
exert sufficient pressure on the regime.

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the Secretary-General for his strong
and particularly enlightening briefing, as well as for his
personal commitment, in addition to that of the staff of
the Secretariat and Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to spare no
effort in implementing resolution 2401 (2018). Allow
me, on behalf of France, to especially commend the
United Nations teams and all the humanitarian actors
working under extremely difficult conditions in Syria.

Two weeks after the adoption of resolution 2401
(2018), we are here in the Chamber to face the facts. First,
what has happened since the adoption of resolution 2401
(2018)? In the light of the inexorable worsening of the
humanitarian situation in eastern Ghouta, the Security
Council has rallied around a cessation of hostilities and
made every effort to seek consensus, and finally did
reach consensus on 24 February. We knew then, and we
said so, that this result was only a precondition, and that
the longest and most difficult part of the path towards a
humanitarian truce was still before us. However, every
day since 24 February the fighting has continued. In
the days that followed, despite Russia’s unilateral
announcement of a daily five-hour truce — well below
what resolution 2401 (2018) requires — the intensity of
the fighting has increased. Since resolution 2401 (2018)
was adopted, there has not been a single day when
eastern Ghouta, an enclave that has been starved and
besieged for months, has not been bombed by the regime
and its supporters. The fight against terrorism — and
this cannot be repeated enough — cannot be used as
a pretext for such a bloodbath of civilians or for such
contempt for international humanitarian law.

Two weeks ago, we unanimously adopted a text
calling for an immediate cessation of hostilities of at
least 30 days, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian
access and medical evacuations in Syria. I would remind
those present that those demands apply to the whole of
Syria and all parties. We negotiated the text together
for several weeks and, I repeat, unanimously adopted
it. Each member of the Council around this table has
therefore endorsed the content by deciding to assume
responsibility. That responsibility fell particularly on
Russia, as a permanent member that voted for resolution
2401 (2018), sponsor of the Astana talks and a Power
engaged in the Syrian situation, as it claims to be.
We had agreed to a clause to meet 15 days later
to review its implementation. The Secretary-General
has just provided us with a very clear picture of that.
Since 24 February, civilian casualties have continued
to climb into the hundreds every week. The regime is
pursuing, in defiance of its people and the Council, an
air and land offensive that it has never intended to halt,
with the support of Russia and Iran. However, let us
not be deceived that civilians are not the “collateral
victims” of those military operations. Rather, they are
themselves being targeted by the regime, deliberately
and methodically to starve and rape, destroy their
health centres, kill and sow terror and death. The hell
on Earth experienced by eastern Ghouta is not just the
effect of the regime’s policy; it is the very purpose of
the regime’s murderous madness, with its daily tally of
war crimes and crimes against humanity, for which the
regime will have to answer.
Let us call a spade a spade: Who can stop the Syrian
regime? Everyone knows that, apart from a military
operation, it is Russia that is in the best position to
do so today. It is therefore legitimate that today, more
than ever before, everyone looks expectantly towards
10/23

Eastern Ghouta is now a textbook case of war
crimes, and even of crimes against humanity. It cannot
be ignored: the Syrian regime, with the support of Russia
and Iran, is engaged in a war of total submission against
its people. Violations of the ceasefire by the Damascus
regime, with the support of Russia and Iran, have been
massive and ongoing, and I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for clearly exposing those violations.
Let me briefly review some of these violations.
Between 24 and 27 February, 72 attacks by the
Syrian regime and its Russian and Iranian allies, from
more than 14 locations, were reported. Between 24 and
28 February, Russian military aircraft carried out no
fewer than 20 bombing missions in Damascus and
eastern Ghouta. Between 27 February and 2 March,
field observers documented at least 25 air strikes by the
regime and Russia during the five-hour humanitarian
breaks declared by Moscow. Since 18 February, more
than 29 hospital have been hit, and few health facilities
are still in operation. On 8 March, a health care facility
in Mesraba was completely destroyed by bombardments.
According to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights,
as of 11 March, 607 people, including 99 children and 79
women, had been killed since the adoption of resolution
18-06756

12/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

2401 (2018). I would repeat: 607 people have been killed.
In addition to the dead, there are many injured persons,
arbitrary detentions, enforced disappearances, rapes
and many other intolerable violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law. Finally, further
credible allegations of the use of chemical weapons
have been made since the adoption of resolution 2401
(2018). As the highest French authorities have pointed
out, France will brook no compromise when it comes to
the use of those abject weapons.
The humanitarian needs are immense, yet the
regime deliberately continues to block the entry of aid,
despite the presence of Russian soldiers at the crossing
points, as what happened to the convoy on 5 March
shows. Indeed, the population continues to be deprived
of relief and of any possibility of medical evacuation,
even if more than 1,000 people need it.
Still, we cannot give up. On behalf of France, I
would like to make a new and urgent appeal to those
who can make a difference on the ground, starting with
Russia. France is not posing; it is taking action. My
country has been and remains one of the countries most
committed to the implementation of resolution 2401
(2018). Right after the resolution’s adoption, France
stepped up its contacts and efforts at the highest level so
as to contribute to the resolution’s swift implementation,
so that the Astana guarantors would assume their
responsibilities and so that the commitments made
collectively would be respected. President Macron has
met with Presidents Putin, Erdoğan and Rouhani, as
well as with the Secretary-General on several occasions.
Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian visited Moscow
and then Tehran. To Russia, we proposed concrete
measures for implementing resolution 2401 (2018).
Although our efforts aimed at reaching out have been
ignored, we stand by our proposals. Let us not deceive
ourselves: without an immediate implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018), the worst is yet to come. After the
regime has conquered the rural zones of eastern Ghouta,
the worst would be a conquest — street by street, house
by house — in a torrent of fire, for the urban zones
of the region, which are by definition the most densely
populated areas. It is of the highest urgency, therefore,
for us to come together to ensure that the resolution is
fully implemented before the street battles promised by
the regime’s military planners begin. I would like to
highlight three essential elements in that regard.

S/PV. 8201

The first is implementing a monitoring system
to ensure maximum pressure on the parties. The
main reason resolution 2401 (2018) has not been not
implemented is that the Syrian regime has been engaged
in its murderous folly and the regime’s supporters
have been unable or unwilling to stop it and prevent a
worsening of the humanitarian situation. But the failure
to implement resolution 2401 (2018) is also the result of
our not being able to put in place a sufficiently targeted
follow-up mechanism to the resolution in the Council.
This must be our priority, and I am convinced that it is
our only chance to compel the Syrian regime to comply
with its international obligations. France therefore calls
for appropriate decisions to be taken in the coming days.
It is essential and urgent that humanitarian convoys
reach eastern Ghouta in adequate security conditions
and carry out their delivery of aid, and that medical
evacuations be allowed. For that to happen, the truce must
be sustainable and flexible in order to take into account
delays in the delivery, discharge and distribution of
aid. Medical authorizations must not only be delivered
in an expedited manner; they must also come with
all the security guarantees needed by patients, their
families and the humanitarian actors who assist them.
Indeed, the protection due them under international
humanitarian law must be unconditionally guaranteed.
The second element I would like to highlight is the
departure of terrorist fighters from Ghouta as proposed
by armed groups. In their letter to the Security
Council, the three armed groups in eastern Ghouta,
upon the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018), indicated
their commitment to upholding the resolution, made
concrete proposals for a comprehensive cessation
of hostilities and committed themselves to taking
combatant members of their groups out of Ghouta. The
United Nations offered its assistance in those exchanges
and carried out important work along those lines, to
which the Secretary General just referred. I call on
Russia today to conclude and implement the relevant
agreements without delay. This is one of the keys to
implementing the resolution.
The third element is political negotiation. A lasting
cessation of hostilities in Syria requires a political
process consistent with the terms of resolution 2254
(2015), our shared road map for ending the conflict.
Staffan de Mistura has our full support in bringing
this mission to a successful conclusion and swiftly
convening negotiations in Geneva, which is the only
legitimate forum for a credible solution. In order to

18-0675611/23

S/PV.8201

The situation in the Middle East

achieve results, United Nations mediation requires
that necessary pressure be exerted on the parties. We
therefore call once again on Russia, as well as Iran, to
fulfil their responsibilities, as we are fulfilling our own.
Collectively we have the capacity, if we so
wish, to stop the endless descent into the abyss that
characterizes the Syrian tragedy, and finally create a
real political dynamic. On behalf of France, I therefore
call once again for all members of the Council to
finally rally their words and action in the service of
this shared objective, which matches to our interests
and responsibilities. It is never too late to save lives,
and it is our responsibility — if we accept it — to end
the tragedy of Syria, on which our generation, and the
credibility of the Security Council, will be judged.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and his detailed information on what we
asked for. We particularly appreciated his words when
he said that there should be only one agenda for all of
us — ending this crisis.
Russia supported the Security Council’s adoption
of resolution 2401 (2018), guided by the priority of
improving the humanitarian situation in various
parts of Syria. We not only believe that its effective
implementation is extremely important, we have also
proposed concrete ways of achieving that, something
that was discussed in today’s briefing. And that is
unlike various capitals whose representatives have
settled comfortably for doing nothing while vilifying
the Syrian regime, as they call it, and making endless
accusations about Russia. In out last meeting on the
subject (see S/PV.8188), I promised to count the number
of times that Ambassador Haley mentioned Russia
in the next meeting. The answer is 22. France came
second, with 16 mentions, and the United Kingdom
was third, with 12. This matters not just for the record
but for the context in which it occurs. What is going
on is a political policy, and it does not have to do
merely — indeed, not much at all — with concern for
Syrians’ humanitarian needs.
It is important that everyone understands that
resolution 2401 (2018) is not about an immediate
ceasefire, which is a utopian notion, but a preliminary
agreement between the parties as a condition for
achieving sustainable de-escalation in all the contested
areas of Syria, not just eastern Ghouta. That is the only
realistic way. The resolution contains an unequivocal
12/23

12/03/2018

demand in that regard, and we are trying to make that
happen. The Council has heard about that today and
will hear more.
The authorities in Damascus have expressed their
satisfaction with the resolution and their willingness
to implement its provisions. However, they have also
rightly demanded an immediate cessation of attacks
on the capital and of all infringements on Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. The counterterrorist operation that the Syrian armed forces are
conducting does not contradict resolution 2401 (2018).
The Government of Syria has every right to work to
end threats to its citizens’ security. The Damascus
suburbs cannot continue to be a breeding ground for
terrorists. It is the terrorists’ persistent attempts to
disrupt the ceasefire that serve to maintain the tensions
in Syria, and of course the most problematic area is in
eastern Ghouta.
The July 2017 Cairo agreements on the eastern
Ghouta de-escalation zone gave the militants a chance
to be included in the political settlement. They did
not take advantage of it and have still not dissociated
themselves from the terrorists. Even now the groups’
activities are coordinated from the joint headquarters
run by Jabhat Al-Nusra. We have reliable information
that they are in active radio contact, discussing plans
for shelling the humanitarian corridors, among other
things. Why are they only now talking about being
willing to drive Al-Nusra’s members out of eastern
Ghouta? And why are we the only ones asking that
question? We have answered it a number of times
ourselves when we have spoken about suspicions that
Al-Nusra is being preserved for particular political
purposes, in this case to maintain a dangerous hotbed
of armed resistance in the immediate vicinity of Syria’s
capital.
Even now they continue to lull us with fairy
stories about how few terrorists there are in eastern
Ghouta. And who is going to monitor the armed
groups’ implementation of the resolution? Who will be
responsible for that? Just please do not keep saying the
so-called regime, and Russia, and Iran. Such ideological
attitudes are simply not serious in the context of the
professional discussions that we conduct in the Security
Council. What responsibility will the members of the
Council take for the implementation of the resolution?
How will they implement it? How will they influence
the militias they support?
18-06756

12/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Following the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018),
with Russia’s participation, daily five-hour humanitarian
pauses were established and the Muhayam-Al-Wafedin
checkpoint was opened for use by both civilians and
militants with families. They were guaranteed security,
transportation and protection along the entire route.
The Syrian authorities then opened another checkpoint,
Jisreen-Mleha, in the southern area of eastern Ghouta.
Medical posts have been set up, distribution points
organized for hot meals, buses are standing by. However,
the insurgents continued to subject the central areas of
Damascus and its outskirts to massive shelling. Dozens
of mines have been laid for days, resulting in deaths
and injuries as well as major damage. Since the day the
resolution was adopted more than 100 people have died,
and many more been injured, as a result of the shelling
in the capital. The Tishrin and Al-Biruni hospitals and
a medical centre in Al-Rihan have been hit more than
once. These are real hospitals, not the militants’ field
offices that are frequently disguised as hospitals. They
are making active use of snipers. We know this for
a fact.
It is a tragedy when any civilians die during an armed
conflict. But my delegation has always been interested
in the origin of the statistical information being used in
the United Nations. In a highly politicized situation this
subject is extremely important. Frequent assessments
are pronounced about civilian losses in eastern Ghouta.
We hope that future reports will be required to indicate
where their data is from, how reliable it is and who
exactly is meant by “reliable sources on the ground”.
Every day that has passed, the extremists have
forbidden civilians to leave the areas they have
blocked and have severely suppressed attempts to
resist arbitrary action, including through exemplary
executions. We have reliable information about that too.
Strikes on corridors and exit checkpoints are constant,
including during the humanitarian pauses. On 9 March
a convoy of refugees was shelled, once again disrupting
an evacuation. Tunnels are being used for attacks on
the Syrian army, and the exits from underground
installations are located in neighbourhoods where there
are public institutions, mainly mosques, hospitals and
markets. They have inflated food prices and at the
same time have been taking away the people’s food,
water, medicines and mobile phones. They are setting
up firing positions in residential buildings and using
people as human shields. They are laying mines in
neighbourhoods that are adjacent to the line of contact.

S/PV. 8201

They are conducting searches and confiscating permit
papers distributed by Government forces.
The residents are trying to resist this repression,
organizing spontaneous rallies and clashing with
the militias. On 1 March, in north-eastern Douma,
Al-Nusra terrorists shot four people who participated in
such a demonstration. Today there was a major protest
in Kafr Batna. The first major exodus of civilians took
place on the night of 11 March, when 52 people, 26
of them children, left the village of Misraba with the
assistance of the Russian Centre for the Reconciliation
of Opposing Sides and the Syrian army.
There are also militants who want to leave eastern
Ghouta, but their field commanders threaten potential
defectors with reprisals. For the first time, on 9 March,
after long and tense negotiations, with the participation
of officers from the Russian Centre for Reconciliation,
13 militants were evacuated from the enclave through
the humanitarian corridor at their own request. Talks
have been held with Jaysh Al-Islam on reaching an
agreement on the withdrawal of a second group of
fighters. A meeting was also held with the leaders of
Faylaq Al-Rahman, at which it was demanded that
they dissociate themselves from Jabhat Al-Nusra
immediately. However, according to information
received, the militants of the group decided to continue
their armed resistance, forcibly recruiting ordinary
citizens into their ranks.
To turn to the subject of the humanitarian convoy
entering Douma on 5 March, the convoy received
comprehensive support from the Syrian Government
and the Russian military. A humanitarian corridor was
established, security ensured for its passage and the
situation was monitored. However, there was a great
deal of evidence of disorganized activity on the part of
the humanitarian actors. According to our information,
United Nations staff needlessly delayed the convoy
operations, creating real security risks. While the
convoy was being put together, they attempted to
load it with undeclared medical supplies — and the
fact that not all of them were declared was mentioned
today — and wasted around two hours in a meeting
with the leaders of the so-called local councils. They
spread unreliable information about aerial strikes in
the trucks’ unloading area, and today some delegations
seized on that joyfully, although what actually occurred
was one instance of mortar fire from the armed groups’
positions. They did not respond to local residents’

18-0675613/23

S/PV.8201

The situation in the Middle East

request to help them leave the enclave. Nonetheless, 13
people, five of them children, were evacuated.
Afterwards, it was curious to read a report that one
of Ahrar Al-Sham’s field commanders had, in a tone of
irony, expressed his appreciation for the humanitarian
pause on 5 March, which enabled the militias to regroup,
recover their strength and a number of lost positions
and prepare ambushes for the Syrian military.
A 9 March action was successfully carried out with
the Russian military providing a truck convoy with
safe conduct.
However, the scope of resolution 2401 (2018) is
not limited to eastern Ghouta. We should note that
in the past two weeks, the terrorists of Al-Nusra and
associated militia groups have repeatedly shelled
villages in Hamah province. As a result of new strikes
there are been deaths and injuries in blockaded Fo’ah
and Kafraya in Idlib. Armed clashes between illegal
groups in that province have led to threats of a number
of medical facilities being closed. Al-Nusra has become
more active in the southern de-escalation zone, which
could be related to the fact that they continue to be
supplied with weapons from outside. The situation in
Afrin remains very difficult.
The Syrian authorities have given permission
for humanitarian aid to be delivered to the residents
of Rukban camp, in the area illegally held by the
Americans around the Al-Tanf military base. We would
like to know what the United Nations is doing about
that. Needless to say, we assume that the distribution
of humanitarian assistance will be undertaken by a
trustworthy entity such as the International Committee
of the Red Cross or the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
We are also awaiting the speedy dispatch of a United
Nations humanitarian needs assessment mission to
Raqqa, which was bombed out by the coalition. There
should be no pointless delays with this, so I would
like to ask the United Nations when that mission will
take place.
We understand very well the unspoken motives for
the current disinformation campaign, whose aim is to
create a public perception that the Syrian authorities use
toxic substances. In fact, both we and the Syrians have
well-founded fears that provocations are being planned
with the aim of accusing the Syrian authorities of
carrying out chemical attacks. According to information
received, Al-Nusra used a chlorine-based substance in
eastern Ghouta on 5 March, affecting more than 30
14/23

12/03/2018

local residents. This is all being done in order to prepare
the ground for unilateral acts of force against sovereign
Syria. We heard hints of that in the statements made
by some delegations today. Essentially, steps are being
considered that could deliver yet another heavy blow
to regional stability. Meanwhile, on territory formerly
controlled by illegal armed groups, there have been
more new discoveries of stores of chemicals, but the
relevant bodies of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons have been very slow to react to
the appeals of the Syrian authorities.
Russia will continue its efforts to implement
resolution 2401 (2018), but we demand that some of
our colleagues do their part and exert genuine pressure
on the groups that they support or sponsor, instead
of constantly calling on Russia and creating the false
impression that the resolution applies only to us.
In conclusion, I would like to say that this afternoon
four Security Council will be holding an unofficial
Arria Formula meeting with the declared intention of
making opposition voices heard on the humanitarian
issue in Syria. This is going to be widely covered in
the media. First and foremost, we want to point out
the fact that is unacceptable to use United Nations
resources for politicized purposes, and that is certainly
not what Arria Formula meetings were conceived for.
This event conceals the desire of its organizers to exert
informational pressure on the Syrian Government and
those who are helping it fight terrorism. In our view,
to get the full picture, it would not be a bad idea to
listen to the residents of Raqqa and Rukban camp, not
to mention eastern Ghouta, where there are quite a few
people who would be glad of the opportunity to appeal
for their deliverance from the presence of extremists.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I should
like at the outset to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his briefing. China appreciates the positive
efforts made by the United Nations and the SecretaryGeneral to alleviate the humanitarian situation in the
Syrian regions affected. China sympathizes with the
suffering of the Syrian people and has consistently been
working hard to help them. Last month we channelled
assistance through the International Committee of the
Red Cross, sending water, food, medical services and
shelter to internally displaced persons in Syria.
We are extremely concerned at the fact that the
people of Syria are suffering from the conflict. No act
18-06756

12/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

of violence against innocent civilians can be tolerated.
This situation must end.
On 24 February, the members of the Security
Council, leaving aside their differences, unanimously
adopted resolution 2401 (2018). This upheld the unity
of the Council and provided a rare opportunity for a
ceasefire, halting the violence and easing the suffering
of the Syrian people. After the resolution was adopted,
we saw that United Nations humanitarian relief convoys
had overcome difficulties of all kinds and entered
eastern Ghouta, delivering much-needed assistance to
the people there.
With Russia announcing the implementation of
the temporary ceasefire, a humanitarian corridor
was opened for the Syrian people. We saw that some
civilians, including children, had already entered the
safe area through the humanitarian corridor and received
relief and assistance. It has also come to our attention
that the parties to the conflict continue to attack each
other and that owing to the shelling the humanitarian
corridor has not been able to serve its full purpose. We
urge all parties concerned to make joint efforts, exert
their influence and ensure that resolution 2401 (2018)
is effectively and earnestly implemented. All members
of the Security Council should maintain their unity and
jointly stay on track to find a political solution to the
Syrian issue, support the early resumption of the Geneva
peace talks and urge all parties in Syria to achieve a
solution acceptable to all as soon as possible, through a
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process, in order
to ease the suffering of the Syrian people. China will
continue to make unremitting efforts to that end.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I join others in thanking
Secretary-General António Guterres for his briefing.
We welcome the efforts of the United Nations,
its system and the International Committee of the
Red Cross to render immediate life-saving services,
conduct hundreds of medical evacuations and send
convoys to the besieged and hard-to-reach areas,
especially eastern Ghouta, despite the potential danger
to the lives of their personnel. We therefore urge the
members of the Security Council to assist the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in
operationalizing those emergency programmes and
to ensure the protection of medical and humanitarian
workers. Likewise, we also urge the parties to support
United Nations structures in fulfilling their mandates.

S/PV. 8201

We echo the United Nations calls to all parties
to facilitate unconditional, unimpeded and sustained
access to all people in need throughout the country and
to take the necessary measures to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure, including schools and medical
facilities, as required by international law and human
rights standards.
Kazakhstan considers that it is equally important
to further promote the Syrian settlement and believes
that the Astana process has great potential for guiding
intra-Syrian talks towards long-term peace. In that
context, we propose that all sides, including stakeholders,
provide all-round assistance, making use of the positive
developments to improve the humanitarian situation on
the ground.
Astana continues to support resolution 2254 (2015),
as it always has, and repeatedly calls on the International
Syria Support Group and other countries to help the
conflicting parties to implement the measures stipulated
in the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and the
Vienna statements.
We express concern over the existing difficulties
in Syria, which seriously impede the implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018), and we call on the international
community to influence the conflicting parties to
cooperate with the United Nations. The only way
to truly resolve the crisis is through negotiations,
predicated on mutual trust and understanding, together
with confidence-building measures.
In practical terms, we are convinced that expelling
terrorist groups from eastern Ghouta may calm the
situation in that sector. Let us be frank: removing the
Al-Nusra Front and other affiliated terrorist groups from
the area, as stated in a letter from three parties, must be
pursued in order to end hostilities. The implementation
of resolution 2401 (2018) is a collective responsibility,
with each Council member playing a significant role.
Finally, Kazakhstan supports solutions in Syria
on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communiqué, as well as the agreements on the
de-escalation zones reached during the Astana process.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting and to welcome the presence of
Secretary-General António Guterres, who reminded us
of the responsibilities of the international community,

18-0675615/23

S/PV.8201

The situation in the Middle East

in particular the Council, given the serious and terrible
developments in Syria.
Peru follows with great concern the humanitarian
situation in that country. We must express our sorrow
and solidarity to the victims of the conflict, most of
whom are children. We deeply regret that, two weeks
after the ceasefire was unanimously adopted by the
Council through resolution 2401 (2018), there has not
been sufficient progress in its implementation. As
the Secretary-General noted, a sustained cessation of
hostilities has not materialized. The conflict continues to
claim civilian victims. The much-needed humanitarian
assistance has been provided in a very limited way.
International law and international humanitarian law
continue to be violated with impunity.
The bleak outlook requires us to redouble our
efforts. The Security Council must remain united in
its responsibility to protect the Syrian population by
promoting all actions conducive to ensuring the full
and immediate implementation of resolution 2401
(2018). The responsibility to act is clearly greater for the
countries with the greatest capacity for influence in the
field, in particular the guarantors of the de-escalation
zones agreed in Astana.
The situation is particularly serious in eastern
Ghouta, where, among other emergencies, more than
1,000 people need to be evacuated for medical reasons.
It is also serious in Idlib, Afrin, Rukban and Raqqa,
among other places. We need to remember that the
ceasefire must cover the entire Syrian territory and
allow humanitarian assistance in a sustained, safe and
unhindered way.
The Syrian Government must comply with the
ceasefire immediately and fulfil its responsibility to
protect the population and its obligation to cooperate
with the implementation of resolution 2401 (2018). The
fight against terrorism cannot be used as an excuse to
violate human rights and international humanitarian law.
Peru supports the proposal of Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura to promote dialogue with the
opposition groups that have expressed their willingness
to comply with the ceasefire and to expel members of
terrorist organizations linked to the Al-Nusra Front
from eastern Ghouta.
Peru remains committed to achieving a political
solution to the conflict that ends the ongoing
humanitarian disaster, ensures accountability for the
16/23

12/03/2018

atrocious crimes committed in that country, including
the use of chemical weapons, supports regional stability
and achieves sustainable peace in Syria.
We would like to conclude by expressing our
support for the Secretary-General in his call for the
immediate implementation of resolution 2401 (2018)
and for his tireless efforts and those of his team on the
ground. We also wish to highlight the professionalism,
the courage and the sense of duty of the United Nations
humanitarian personnel and of the humanitarian
agencies such as the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, among
others deployed in Syria.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to express my
gratitude to Secretary-General António Guterres for his
informative briefing. I also thank him for his leadership
and all his support, in particular his tremendous efforts,
as well as those of his Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, and of the entire United Nations team, to
achieve the full implementation of resolution 2401
(2018) and a definitive resolution of the Syrian conflict.
Today’s meeting should be another milestone in
the international response to the humanitarian crisis
prevailing in Syria. However, unfortunately, that is not
the case. As the Secretary-General underscored in his
briefing, in recent weeks, the parties involved at all
levels have intensified their fighting in eastern Ghouta
despite the humanitarian ceasefire agreed through the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2401 (2018) exactly
16 days ago.
Nevertheless, we welcome with satisfaction reports
that the United Nations and Syrian Arab Red Crescent
convoy was finally able to reach eastern Ghouta last
Friday to complete the delivery of food that could not
be unloaded on 5 March for security reasons. However,
the delivery of all necessary humanitarian supplies,
including the medical and health-care supplies that were
seized in the first attempt by convoys to the besieged
areas, continues to be urgent and must be carried out
without delay.
We also welcome the news that the SecretaryGeneral has just provided to us with regard to some
improvements in the situation on the ground in eastern
Ghouta. We hope that today’s meeting will lead to
greater improvement or a definitive resolution of the
situation in that part of Syria.
18-06756

12/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

We read the letter dated 9 March that the
co-penholders — France, the United Kingdom and the
United States — addressed to the Secretary-General
and the Council. We have also read very carefully the
many letters that the Syrian Government has addressed
to the members of the Security Council through its
Permanent Representative. Basically, we note in those
letters the repeated mutual accusations that have been a
characteristic of this long conflict since its beginning.
We are talking about a 30-day ceasefire, and time is
gradually running out. We have had enough of mutual
recrimination. The only collective task that we should
focus on is finding a coherent peace mechanism to stop
this endless and heinous war.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea remains deeply
concerned about the developments in the situation
in Syria. We reiterate the urgent need for Council
members who have influence over the national parties
to the conflict to redouble their diplomatic initiatives
with a view to reaching a common understanding on
how to find a political solution to the tragic crisis in
Syria, the effects of which are a threat to the region and
the international community, in particular because of
the humanitarian implications posed by the millions of
Syrians who are currently being displaced within the
country or seeking asylum and because of the security
risks caused by the expansion of Da’esh, the Al-Nusra
Front and other terrorist entities.
We also express our deep indignation at the
continuing fighting in the province of Idlib, which,
for seven consecutive days, has been subject to attacks
and rocket fire from Islamic factions in areas of the
cities of Kafraya and Fo’ah. Those events, like many
others, demonstrate the need for a common front that
will expel from Syria the Islamic State, Al-Qaida, the
Al-Nusra Front and all other associated entities that
threaten peace and security in the region.
In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
calls on the guarantors of the Astana process — Russia,
Iran and Turkey — to ensure that the rounds of
negotiations to be held on 15 and 16 March — to which
the Special Envoy of the United Nations for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, was invited — serve not only
to plan future actions and strategies, but also to give
genuine impetus to finding a solution to the Syrian
crisis once and for all.
During my statement after the adoption of
resolution 2401 (2018), I said that we had partially

S/PV. 8201

spared ourselves from embarrassment (see S/PV.8188).
However, since 16 days have passed since the adoption
of the resolution without it being implemented. I think
we remain completely shamed.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me thank the Secretary­
General for his comprehensive, but again very worrying
and alarming, update.
Like many around this table, we share a sense of
urgency, especially following the adoption of resolution
2401 (2018). We also see how difficult it is to implement
resolution 2401 (2018) on the ground. Small steps,
such as sending an aid convoy to eastern Ghouta last
Monday, are still mere drops in the ocean of people’s
needs. Even with a unanimously adopted resolution, we
are still lacking any substantial change on the ground
and the fighting is far from being over. We therefore
call for the implementation of resolution 2401 (2018).
We understand that the solution is not entirely in our
hands, but still we should try to do our utmost to find
possible ways to ensure that the life-saving aid convoys
might reach those in need and medical evacuations
might begin. Unfortunately, the situation in eastern
Ghouta, but also in Idlib and Aleppo provinces, does not
allow the suffering of ordinary Syrians to be alleviated.
Let me once again stress our full support for the
Secretary-General, as well as his Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura, in finding a political solution to the Syrian
crisis. A political solution to the conflict remains the
only viable way to end the suffering of Syrian people.
Let me also underline that the role of the Security
Council remains crucial, but it is up to the Syrian people
to decide their own future.
We agree that fighting against terrorist groups
designated as such by the Security Council is crucial,
but, at the same time, such designations cannot justify the
attacks on innocent civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including health facilities. Those attacks must stop and
parties to the conflict must strictly comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law. In
that context, let me once again strongly underline that
any response to violence should be proportionate.
We need full compliance with the ceasefire agreed
in resolution 2401 (2018). The Russian proposal for a
daily five-hour pause is simply not enough to allow
humanitarian workers to deliver aid and to evacuate
those who cannot be treated on the ground. The
international community, and especially the Council,

18-0675617/23

S/PV.8201

The situation in the Middle East

bear a huge responsibility to protect civilians. Allow me
to share a couple of concrete ideas, which I hope will be
useful, on how to improve the situation on the ground.
As the Security Council, we should demand
United Nations access in order to monitor designated
de-escalation zones to ensure the well-being of
civilians. All States Members of the United Nations
should fully cooperate with the International, Impartial
and Independent Mechanism set up last year and
facilitate its work. Parties engaged in the conflict
must cease enabling the crimes on the ground and
withhold all their support to armed groups that target
civilians. Parties conducting air strikes against terrorist
groups must ensure that all necessary precautionary
measures are taken into consideration in order to avoid
civilian casualties and that all military operations
are fully consistent with international law. All
potential violations, including possible war crimes,
must be investigated, and the perpetrators must be
held accountable.
In conclusion, let me underline that, from our
perspective, we in New York sometimes lack feedback
on our actions. With regard to actions taken at
Headquarters, it is for the Syrian people themselves
to tell us what would be the most effective way to
support them.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): My delegation thanks the Secretary-General
for his briefing on the implementation of resolution
2401 (2018), on the humanitarian situation in Syria.

12/03/2018

health-care infrastructure. According to the World
Health Organization, such attacks are on the rise.
The deterioration of the humanitarian situation
within Syria’s borders due to increased fighting makes
for dangerous living conditions for thousands of
internally displaced persons and obliterates the hope of
restoring security and dignity to millions of refugees
in neighbouring countries living in extremely difficult
conditions. Given the dire situation, Côte d’Ivoire hopes
that the second international conference on supporting
the future of Syria and the region, to be held in Brussels
on 24 and 25 April at the initiative of the European
Union, will result in pledges of increased humanitarian
aid and development support.
In accordance with the provisions of resolution
2401 (2018), Côte d’Ivoire again calls for the immediate
cessation of hostilities in order to enable the safe,
sustained and unimpeded access of humanitarian
convoys delivering basic necessities to hundreds of
people in dire need in eastern Ghouta and other areas of
the country. My delegation welcomes reports that, for a
few days, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent was able once again to
enter the city of Douma in eastern Ghouta to deliver the
aid necessary, including food and non-food items. My
delegation encourages all Syrian stakeholders to create
conditions that would allow the United Nations to make
scheduled deliveries in eastern Ghouta, throughout the
entire country and on Syrian borders.

Two weeks after its unanimous adoption by
members of the Security Council, resolution 2401
(2018), which had inspired a great deal of hope, has not
been implemented as planned, much to our regret. The
requirement of an immediate cessation of hostilities for
a period of at least 30 days, provided for by resolution
2401 (2018), to enable the safe and unimpeded delivery
of humanitarian aid and services and medical evacuation
of the critically sick and wounded, in accordance with
applicable international humanitarian law, has not yet
gone into effect.

Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its belief that the
humanitarian situation will not improve without
significant progress on the political landscape because
the two issues are inextricably linked. Therefore, it
invites hostile groups and all stakeholders to engage in
political dialogue in order to achieve a peaceful solution
to the crisis in Syria. In that regard, it welcomes the
holding of a meeting in Geneva between the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. De Mistura, and the three Astana guarantors — Iran,
the Russian Federation and Turkey — with a view to
relaunching the Syrian political process.

The humanitarian and security situation remains
worrisome because it is impossible for humanitarian
convoys that endure indiscriminate attacks and
bombings perpetrated by various hostile groups to
reach besieged areas. In addition, attacks are carried
out against medical and humanitarian personnel and

The delegation of Côte d’Ivoire hopes that the
next meeting to be held in Astana, at the initiative
of the three guarantors of the Astana process, will
enable us to reach a lasting ceasefire in Syria and to
calmly resume the intra-Syrian peace talks pursuant to
resolution 2254 (2015).

18/23

18-06756

12/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing on the
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018).
Once again we take this opportunity to pay tribute
to humanitarian workers who risk their lives daily as
they carry out their duties. We join other colleagues
in congratulating the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
on his efforts to find a political solution to the serious
situation in Syria, which, as the Secretary-General
recalled, is in its eighth year.
Bolivia deplores the challenges to the implementation
of resolution 2401 (2018) that the Secretary-General
outlined in his briefing today. We condemn all deliberate
attacks on civilians and demand respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We call on the parties involved to focus primarily on
protecting hospitals, medical facilities, schools and
civilian residences, and the personnel of the various
agencies and humanitarian assistance organizations
whose employees put their own lives at risk as they
carry out their work on the ground. We call on the
parties to cooperate and enhance coordination efforts
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, provide unhindered humanitarian access and
allow urgent medical evacuations to be carried out, in
particular in besieged and hard-to-reach areas.
We call upon the parties to work together to
achieve the full implementation of resolution 2401
(2018) throughout Syria as soon as possible and in
accordance with agreements reached in the Astana
process and on the de-escalation zones. We underscore
the importance of unity within the Security Council
when implementing resolution 2401 (2018). Such unity
must be present if our goal is to fully implement it. We
also call on the members of the Council and all parties
involved to depoliticize the humanitarian situation in
the Syrian Arab Republic and ensure that its actions are
in line with international law.
We highlight a few forums for dialogue that could
assist with reaching consensus on a definitive cessation
of hostilities, such as the Syrian National Dialogue
Congress in Sochi, whose outcome is geared towards
strengthening the political process in Geneva. We hope
that that forum will allow for the full implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018) as soon as possible.

S/PV. 8201

In conclusion, we reiterate that there is no military
solution to the crisis. The only solution is through an
inclusive political dialogue ordered and led by and for
the Syrian people. We extend our best hopes for the
outcome of the next meeting to be held in Astana.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive, up-to-date and very
useful briefing on the implementation of resolution
2401 (2018).
Two weeks after the adoption of that resolution,
the humanitarian situation in Syria continues to
cause serious concern. The United Nations and its
humanitarian partners have failed to ensure safe,
sufficient, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian
access for populations in need of life-saving assistance
due ongoing fighting, in particular in eastern Ghouta.
Nonetheless, we are mindful of the fact that resolution
2401 (2018) applies to all parts of Syria. We note that
the Secretary-General did not overlook that aspect of
the resolution in his briefing.
We had all emphasized the importance of the
effective implementation of the resolution in order to
make positive changes on the ground and alleviate the
humanitarian tragedy in Syria. Given the increasingly
complex situation on the ground, we knew that it
would not be an easy task. After the Council adopted
resolution 2401 (2018), we recognized that the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners could deliver aid
to eastern Ghouta and other affected areas. No doubt,
there remain serious challenges to ensuring the full
implementation of the resolution.
Although it demands the cessation of hostilities
without delay for at least 30 consecutive days throughout
Syria, with the immediate engagement of all parties
to ensure safe, unimpeded and sustained delivery of
humanitarian aid and medical evacuations, there have
been ongoing military activities resulting in civilian
casualties and the destruction of civilian facilities.
Here, one should also not overlook the damage being
caused by the shelling of Damascus.
Therefore, it is clear that much more remains to be
done and all parties should be committed to the full
implementation of the resolution. As the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners are ready to deliver
more aid to all Syrians throughout the country, it is
absolutely critical that all the parties provide them safe,
unfettered and sustained humanitarian access. In that
regard, all those who have influence over the parties

18-0675619/23

S/PV.8201

The situation in the Middle East

should exert the necessary pressure to contribute to
saving lives. It is also imperative to use all existing
arrangements to facilitate the implementation of the
resolution, particularly the cessation of hostilities. In
that connection, we look forward to the Astana meeting,
scheduled to take place on 15 and 16 March, which
we hope will contribute to the full implementation of
the resolution.
Finally, as the Secretary-General stated, we are
entering into the eighth year since the start of the Syrian
crisis. While we look forward to seeing the Syrian
people, as a sovereign State, find a comprehensive
political solution based on resolution 2254 (2015), the
Council also has a responsibility and an indispensable
role in resolving the Syrian crisis. Therefore, we hope
that the spirit of cooperation and consensus that the
Council demonstrated during the adoption of resolution
2401 (2018) will be sustained not only to respond to
the humanitarian tragedy, but also to ensure progress
in the political track with a view to finding a lasting
solution to the crisis. Most importantly, the cooperation
of relevant countries that have influence is key. Without
those countries, there will be no solution in sight.
The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.
I would like to thank Secretary-General Guterres
for his briefing. Through him, I would also like to thank
all United Nations and other humanitarian personnel on
the ground. They work under extreme circumstances.
Sixteen days ago (see S/PV.8188), the Security
Council showed a rare example of unity regarding
Syria when it adopted resolution 2401 (2018) . I recall
the glimmer of hope that day in the Chamber. All of us
agreed that all parties to the Syrian conflict must cease
hostilities in order to enable the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and the evacuation of the critically sick and
wounded. Yet one day after the adoption of resolution
2401 (2018), the Syrian regime, supported by Russia
and Iran, launched a most violent ground offensive to
conquer the enclave of eastern Ghouta. That offensive
came on top of a relentless air campaign that had
started one month ago. Resolution 2401 (2018) calls for
a cessation of hostilities, without delay. Unfortunately,
it is the military offensive that continues without delay.
Elsewhere in Syria, including in Idlib and Afrin,
violence continues to threaten the civilian population
as well. The Council must do everything in its power
20/23

12/03/2018

to advance the full implementation of resolution
2401 (2018). In that regard, I would like to stress the
importance of humanitarian aid, the monitoring of the
cessation of hostilities and accountability.
With regard to my first point, the immediate
delivery of humanitarian aid, last week we were deeply
shocked to hear reports that medical supplies, including
surgical supplies, insulin and even trauma kits, had
been removed from convoys by the Syrian regime.
Medical supplies save lives and provide relief to the
inhumane suffering that too many Syrians are going
through. Medical supplies cannot be used as weapons
by terrorists. There is no justification for denying
medicine and medical supplies to the wounded and sick.
The first humanitarian convoy that received
authorization from the Syrian regime to deliver aid to
eastern Ghouta was not able to fully unload because of
resumed fighting. The convoy that arrived last Friday
was finally able to deliver aid, including medical
supplies, for 27,500 people. However, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is still waiting
for authorization to complete the delivery to Douma for
all 70,000 people, as initially approved by the Syrian
authorities. We call on all parties to immediately allow
sustained and unimpeded access to deliver supplies to
people in desperate need of humanitarian assistance.
That applies to eastern Ghouta and to all in need
throughout the country.
On my second point, the cessation of hostilities and
the need for monitoring, resolution 2401 (2018) calls
for an immediate nationwide cessation of hostilities.
A strong monitoring mechanism is needed urgently
in order to ensure implementation. We agree with the
French proposal in that regard. Since the adoption of
resolution 2401 (2018), air strikes have continued, even
increased, especially on eastern Ghouta.
We hear the Russian Federation say that those
strikes are targeted at terrorists. However, we underline
once more that the exemption to the ceasefire for attacks
directed at United Nations-listed terrorist groups does
not provide an excuse to ignore the basic principles of
distinction, proportionality and precaution. According
to the latest report of the Commission of Inquiry, the
siege of eastern Ghouta continues to be characterized
by the use of prohibited weapons and attacks against
civilian and protected objects, which we condemn in
the strongest terms.
18-06756

12/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

We also condemn the shelling of Damascus from
eastern Ghouta. We call upon all parties to abide by
their obligations under international humanitarian law
at all times. Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura should
facilitate negotiations between armed opposition
groups, the Syrian regime and Russia in order to
advance the implementation of resolution 2401 (2018).
One concrete and helpful step is to evacuate United
Nations-listed terrorist groups from eastern Ghouta.
A first evacuation of 13 imprisoned terrorist fighters
reportedly took place last Friday. It is crucial that
any evacuation of armed fighters take place in a safe
and orderly fashion. We call on the United Nations to
prepare for putting in place the necessary monitoring
mechanisms in that regard. We call on Russia to accept
the offer of the Special Envoy to facilitate further
evacuation of United Nations-listed terrorist groups
from eastern Ghouta. Civilians should never be forced
to leave against their will. Forced displacement may
constitute a war crime.
On my third point, the credibility and accountability
of the Council, despite the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2401 (2018) we have seen no cessation of
hostilities. We have seen no significant improvement
in the humanitarian situation on the ground in Syria.
This also has a negative impact on the credibility of
the Council. It is vital for the functioning of the rulesbased international order that decisions of the Council
be respected and implemented. As a Council, we have
a collective responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. However, we should
not forget that the responsibility and, indeed, the
obligation to execute its decisions lies with individual
Member States.
The human suffering in Syria, especially in
eastern Ghouta, must end now. We need a full
cessation of hostilities in all of Syria, including eastern
Ghouta, Idlib and Afrin. And we call on the Russian
Federation in particular to use its influence and to do
its utmost to achieve that, thereby also upholding the
Council’s credibility.
In conclusion, the siege of eastern Ghouta is
entering its fifth year. The war in Syria will enter its
eighth year later this week, on 15 March, as others have
noted. One wonders how the Syrian regime thinks to
ever achieve the legitimacy to govern the people it now
pounds into submission or death.

S/PV. 8201

As the High Commissioner for Human Rights
stated during the thirty-seventh session of the Human
Rights Council, “what we are seeing in eastern Ghouta
are likely war crimes and potentially crimes against
humanity”. The perpetrators of these crimes must know
they are being identified, that dossiers are being built
up with a view to their prosecution, and that they will
be held accountable for what they have done.
We
thank
the
Independent
International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic for
its important work to date. We recall the resolution of
the Human Rights Council of 5 March, which calls on
the Commission to investigate the situation in eastern
Ghouta. We call on all Council members to support
the referral of the humanitarian catastrophe in Syria
to the International Criminal Court. We also urge all
States to increase their support for the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for the Syrian
Arab Republic.
For now, however, our common efforts should be
directed at securing immediate relief for those millions
in Syria in urgent need of humanitarian assistance.
For that, we need the cessation of hostilities to be
implemented immediately and in a sustained manner.
We need a continuous pause in the fighting of 30
days, as demanded by resolution 2401 (2018). If its
implementation continues to fail, that will require a
response from the Council that goes beyond where we
stand now.
We thank the Secretary-General for his perseverance
and endless efforts to uphold the norms and values of
the Charter of the United Nations, international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, as well
as to promote compliance with resolution 2401 (2018).
We call on all Council members to follow his example.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I wish to again remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): I will not begin by commenting on the
procedural point that you have raised, Mr. President,
but rather I will focus on the essential issues that

18-0675621/23

S/PV.8201

The situation in the Middle East

12/03/2018

are supposed to be of interest to the members of the
Security Council.

with the Syrian Red Crescent, were sent to eastern
Ghouta on 5 and 9 March.

I welcome the Secretary-General and note
the statement at the outset of his briefing that the
Secretariat does not have all the necessary information
to carefully access the situation on the ground because
the United Nations does not have a presence in all areas.
The Secretariat humbly and politely said those words,
noting that it does not have full, relevant information
pertaining to the Syrian situation, although the United
Nations has a branch of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs in Damascus and there are
dozens of United Nations agencies operating in Syria,
in addition to 13 international non-governmental
organizations also operating there.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, all those
procedures have been countered by the terror of armed
organizations present in Ghouta. Incited by their
masters — some of them, unfortunately, members
of the Security Council — these organizations have
targeted civilians in Damascus since the beginning of
the year, firing more than 2,499 missiles and mortars
that have claimed the lives of 70 civilian martyrs and
injured 556 people. Those organizations have prevented
our people in eastern Ghouta from leaving in order to
continue to use them as human shields and material for
humanitarian and media blackmail. They have even
targeted those who managed to escape towards the two
corridors by firing bullets and missiles.

However, some of our colleagues in the Security
Council, who have shut down their embassies in
Damascus and are now completely disconnected from
credible information, instead rely on information from
what is known as open sources. They have provided
a vast amount of information that would never serve
the interests of the Syrian people or of those present
in such an important and significant discussion.
That information is misleading and could poison the
atmosphere and fuel sedition regarding the role of
the Security Council, which is mandated to maintain
international peace and security.
The Syrian Government stands ready to engage
seriously with positive international initiatives that
serve the interests of the Syrian people, especially in
ending the bloodshed throughout Syria, as stated in
resolution 2401 (2018). My country has expressed its
satisfaction with resolution 2401 (2018), particularly
the positive provisions contained therein. In that regard,
my country confirms that it has taken all the following
procedures to relieve the suffering of our people in
eastern Ghouta.
First, immediately after the adoption of resolution
2401 (2018), hostilities were ceased on a daily basis from
9 a.m. until 2 p.m, Damascus local time, and remain
so to this very moment, with the aim of delivering
humanitarian aid and ensuring the unimpeded and safe
exit of civilians from the areas controlled by terrorist
groups. Secondly, two safe humanitarian corridors
have been opened for civilians wishing to exit the
area. Thirdly, two joint United Nations-International
Committee of the Red Cross convoys, in collaboration
22/23

The latest incident in Syria occurred on 8 March,
when the so-called Faylaq Al-Rahman — one of
the terrorist arms of the petty State of Qatar in
Syria — targeted a civilian convoy heading towards
one of the corridors, leading to high casualties among
civilians. By the way, that terrorist organization, Faylaq
Al-Rahman, has been hailed by some of those present
because of its readiness to implement resolution 2401
(2018). They presented it as a part of the moderate
Syrian opposition, and distributed a letter signed by
that and other terrorist organizations, addressed to the
Secretary-General. That is the modus operandi of the
Security Council with terrorist groups.
The procedures taken by the Syrian Government
are not limited to eastern Ghouta. Over the past few
days, the Government has undertaken a number of other
procedures. First, we have requested that the United
Nations and a number of humanitarian organizations
immediately send a mission to investigate the
humanitarian situation in Raqqa, which was destroyed
by the International Coalition led by the United States of
America. Secondly, we have requested approval to send
humanitarian convoys to the Rukban camp, provided
that the aid is delivered and distributed by the Syrian
Red Crescent and the Red Cross exclusively, and not by
the United States occupation authorities or the terrorist
groups in Rukban camp and Tanaf area. Thirdly, two
days ago the Syrian Red Crescent obtained Government
approval to send convoys to Ghouta, Raqqa, Afrin and
Rukban. To date, it has not sent the convoys to Rukban
and Afrin because the United Nations failed to ensure
the necessary safeguards from the United States and
Turkish occupation forces. That is the reason.
18-06756

12/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East

With every advance by the Syrian Army against
terrorist groups in any given area, the States sponsoring
terrorism launch heated disinformation campaigns to
distract the world from the terrorism, aggression and
occupation against Syria. The inference is that those
countries have never been keen to protec the lives of
civilians, but prefer to protect their investments in
terrorism after they have spent billions of dollars on it,
as was said by the previous Prime Minister of Qatar, in
order to recycle terrorism elsewhere in Syria.
The behaviour that I have mentioned is not limited
to State-sponsored terrorism, unfortunately. It has
even been demonstrated by some senior officials of
the Secretariat. We had hoped that the Secretariat,
especially in the light of the second preambular
paragraph of resolution 2401 (2018), would provide an
unequivocal legal description of the crimes committed
by the so-called International Coalition led by the
United States against our Syrian people in Raqqa and
other places, and the procedures to ensure the end of
that aggression. We had also hoped that the Secretariat
would provide us with an unequivocal legal description
of the acts of invasion by Turkish forces of a precious
part of our national territory, especially against our
civilian people in Afrin, and the procedures to ensure
the end of the Turkish aggression. We had also hoped
for an unequivocal legal description of the presence of
the United States forces on Syrian territory without the
approval of the Syrian Government and the procedures
to ensure the end of that occupation.
The government of my country affirms its right to
defend its citizens and combat terrorism in accordance
with relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
the second preambular paragraph of resolution 2401
(2018); fight all those who practice, fund and support
terrorism; work towards restoring security stability
and peace; and rebuild all that has been destroyed by
terrorists and their masters.
Finally, I have listened to my colleague the
representative of the United States, who levels charges
again and again against my country before all who are
present and says that her country will take military
actions against my country outside the legitimacy of
the Council if chemical substances are used, just as
its administration in Washington, D.C., did when it

S/PV. 8201

bombarded Al-Shayrat air base in my country last year.
These irresponsible and provocative statements, which
run counter to the Charter of the United Nations, are
direct incitement to terrorist groups to use chemical
weapons and fabricate anew all the evidence needed to
accuse the Syrian Army, as they have done in previous
times. I remind the representative of the United States
that the former Joint Investigative Mechanism refused
to take samples from Al-Shayrat air base because if it
had done so it would have been categorically proved
that the Syrian Government is not responsible for the
incident in Khan Shaykhun. In fact, what the United
States perpetrated against that Syrian air base was a
full-fledged aggression.
I call on the representatives of the United States,
the United Kingdom and France to put an end to their
violations of Security Council resolutions related to
fighting terrorism, and on their Governments to stop
supporting the terrorist groups in my country and cease
providing them with a political umbrella to pursue
their crimes against the Syrian people. It is high time
that the United States Administration learn from its
mistakes and stop repeating them. Is it not enough
what they have done in Viet Nam, Iraq, Libya, Somalia
and Yemen, invoking very cheap lies that have already
been condemned and denounced by international public
opinion? In this regard, I recall the words of Naguib
Mahfouz, the Nobel laureate:
“They are liars, they know they are liars,
and they know that we know that they are liars.
However, they still lie, and very loudly so.”
In conclusion, the Russian Centre for Reconciliation
of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic issued
a statement a few minutes ago that street battles have
begun in Ghouta, following the demands for the
separation of the aforementioned Faylaq Al-Rahman
and Jabhat Al-Nusra. This current street fighting
impedes the evacuation of civilians who are forced to
find safe haven underground in Ghouta.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

18-0675623/23
