United Nations

S/PV.6424

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6424th meeting
Monday, 15 November 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Kodama
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-63741 (E)

*1063741*

S/PV.6424

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Cuba, India, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Morocco, Norway, Pakistan,
Philippines, Spain, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab
Republic and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, in which he requests to
be invited, in his capacity as Acting Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. If I hear no objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, we will hear briefings by His
Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
2

resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities; His
Excellency Mr. Ertuğrul Apakan, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism;
and His Excellency Mr. Claude Heller, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).
Before giving the three Chairmen the floor, I
would like to make some introductory remarks.
This briefing will be the last by all three Chairmen
in their current capacities. It is also the last briefing
before the expiry of the mandates of both the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and the 1540 Committee. I have therefore agreed with
the Chairmen that they will, in addition to their
statements on behalf of their Committees, offer their
views on the future of those Committees in a national
capacity. Therefore, each will deliver an abbreviated
version of their Committee’s statement. More detailed
versions of their reports will be distributed today, and
will be made available on the respective websites of the
three Committees in due course.
At the outset, Mr. Mayr-Harting will make a joint
statement on behalf of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004). Following that joint statement, the
Council will hear briefings by the three Chairs of those
Committees. I now give the floor to Mr. Mayr-Harting.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): On behalf of the
Chairmen of the three subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council, I would like to give an update on the
continued cooperation among the Committees and their
expert groups, as requested by the Council in recent
resolutions pertaining to the three Committees. I will
also give an abbreviated version of this joint report and
would refer members of the Council to the full text,
which will also be circulated.
The three Committees attach great importance to
the coordination and cooperation among their expert
groups — namely, the Monitoring Team, the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) Executive Directorate
(CTED) and the 1540 Committee experts. The
Committees welcome the continuing efforts of the
expert groups regarding joint outreach activities,
exchange of information and joint meetings, and
encourage the groups to further enhance the
coordination of those activities.
10-63741

S/PV.6424

On the occasion of previous briefings, a
comparative table was issued to highlight the main
aspects of the respective mandates and areas of
competence of the three Committees. Today, in order to
highlight the ongoing cooperation among the three
expert groups, we also intend to distribute a table
prepared by the groups. That table will also be posted
on the respective websites.
Cooperation is of the utmost importance when it
comes to outreach and exchange with Member States
and international organizations. Cooperation has
increased with regard to the coordination of visits to
Member States and participation at relevant
conferences, joint visits to States and participation in
workshops organized by one of the expert groups or
under the auspices of one of the Committees. The
Committees continue to believe that those coordinated
visits and workshops are very important tools to
enhance the dialogue with Member States, to help
improve the understanding of the distinct although
connected and complementary mandates of the three
Committees and to assist Member States in the
implementation of the relevant resolutions. As an
important step in that regard, we welcome the recently
finalized common strategy of the three expert groups to
engage with international, regional and subregional
organizations.
In accordance with the needs expressed by
Member States, the three expert groups have
commenced exchanging information on the technical
assistance needs of particular countries, with a view to
furthering cooperation in that domain while bearing in
mind the different mandates and roles of each
Committee with regard to technical assistance.
Information exchange is another important area
of cooperation, which is also dealt with in greater
detail in the joint report.
In addition to outreach activities and internal
exchange of information, the three expert groups
continue regular meetings among the heads of each
team, as well as at the expert level, in preparation for
visits, workshops and other joint activities.
Moreover, the CTC invites the Monitoring Team,
the 1540 Committee experts, the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) and other relevant
United Nations offices on a regular basis to meetings
with international and regional organizations. The 1540
Committee working group on cooperation with

10-63741

international organizations has also invited the other
two expert groups to meetings with international
organizations.
One point that I would like to refer to in greater
detail is the issue of co-location. The co-location of the
three expert groups would greatly contribute to
enhanced cooperation and information exchange
among them. In that context, I would like to recall that
in resolution 1904 (2009) and as recently reaffirmed in
the presidential statement adopted on 27 September
2010 (S/PRST/2010/19), the Security Council
reiterated the need to enhance ongoing cooperation
among the three Committees and their respective
expert groups and requested the Secretary-General to
make the necessary arrangements for the groups to be
co-located as soon as possible. In order to underline the
importance of this matter, the three Chairmen recently
wrote to the Secretary-General to draw his attention to
that request by the Security Council.
As the three expert groups are also members of
the CTITF, the Task Force provides an additional
framework within which the groups can further
coordinate their activities and share information.
Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction to non-State actors continue to be a
global threat to international peace and security that
requires a global answer. Cooperation and coordination
are therefore crucial elements in those efforts. The
three subsidiary bodies of the Security Council and
their respective expert groups are committed to
continue to cooperate and to coordinate their work,
within their respective mandates, in order to contribute
to an effective and efficient approach within the overall
United Nations framework, and within the broader
efforts of the international community. We recently
convened a meeting with representatives of the three
Committee Chairmen and the three expert groups to
exchange information about the status of ongoing
cooperation and to explore further ways to enhance it.
Ambassador Apakan, Ambassador Heller and I
have prepared some personal observations on the
aspects of cooperation based on our experience as
Chairmen of these three Committees. Given the limited
amount of time available, I will also not read out those
observations. However, copies will be distributed in
the Chamber. Nevertheless, we hope that those
observations will find interested readers, in particular
as the upcoming mandate renewal of CTED at the end

3

S/PV.6424

of this year could be the next opportunity for the
Security Council to provide further guidance on these
areas of common interest.
The President: I thank Mr. Mayr-Harting for that
statement. I now give him the floor once again in his
capacity as Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Again, as you
requested, Mr. President, I shall abbreviate my text and
read out what I consider to be the most important
elements. The rest will be circulated among colleagues.
Since I last briefed the Council in May 2010 (see
S/PV.6310), there have been a number of significant
developments in the work of the Committee and the
sanctions regime it is tasked to oversee. I therefore
welcome this opportunity to update the Council.
The review process, which was the first of its
kind conducted by a United Nations sanctions
committee, has been the main focus of the Committee’s
work over the past two years. It has served as an
important function both in improving the quality of the
consolidated list and in advancing the overall
credibility and transparency of the Committee. The
Committee concluded its review on 29 July, after the
Security Council extended the review period by one
month. On 29 July, I also gave an open briefing to all
Member States on the results of the review. I will
therefore only briefly recapitulate the main results,
which I consider quite impressive.
Of the 488 names reviewed, the Committee found
that the listings remained appropriate for 443, and
removed 45 names from the list. In addition, de-listing
requests submitted for 58 names in the course of the
review remain under the consideration of the
Committee.
The review demonstrated that the Committee
relies heavily on the cooperation of Member States, for
which we were grateful. I am confident that the high
level of engagement has contributed to a better
understanding of the Committee’s work.
In a similar vein, the Committee reiterates its
standing invitation to Member States to attend
Committee meetings to discuss relevant issues. We
recently discussed a new approach to invite Member

4

States to take a more active part in forthcoming
reviews.
The Monitoring Team produced a report on the
conduct and the results of the comprehensive review,
including a set of valuable recommendations. The
Committee is currently concluding its consideration of
the report and the recommendations contained therein
and will shortly submit its position to the Security
Council. The comprehensive review set the standards
for future additional reviews introduced by resolution
1904 (2009), namely for listed persons who are
reportedly deceased, for entries that lack identifiers for
effective implementation and for names on the
Consolidated List which have not been reviewed in
three or more years.
Such reviews represent an important step in
making the Consolidated List a more dynamic
document that responds better to the evolving and
continued threat, and that is more up to date and
contains the most complete and accurate information
possible on the identity and whereabouts of listed
parties in order to enable Member States to effectively
implement the three sanctions measures that apply to
them.
During the course of the comprehensive review,
the Committee also addressed the issue of deceased
persons on the List. Prior to the review, there was only
one single case of the removal of a deceased person
from the Consolidated List. At the conclusion of the
review, eight additional deceased persons had been
removed from the List: two names associated with the
Taliban and six names associated with Al-Qaida.
However, there remains a considerable number of
deceased persons on the List, which is why the
Committee will conduct a specific review of deceased
persons in accordance with paragraph 26 of resolution
1904 (2009).
The Committee will soon be preparing the
modalities of that review, which will be conducted in
the upcoming months. In that connection, I would like
to mention that the Committee recently discussed a
recommendation by the Monitoring Team to clarify the
process by which Member States need to submit the
necessary information to the Committee certifying the
death of the individual. The Committee will soon be in
a position to inform Member States about those
requirements and procedures.

10-63741

S/PV.6424

As a further attempt to improve the quality of the
List, the Committee is currently also discussing the
issue of entities that have ceased to exist and is
considering a review of that matter.
Finally, the Security Council also directed the
Committee to review all matters that were pending or
on hold as of 17 December 2009. The Committee has
commenced that review for the 23 items that fall within
its scope.
I would like also to highlight the new procedures
for matters that are pending and were placed on hold
after 17 December 2009. As called for in resolution
1904 (2009), the Committee adopted revised guidelines
on the conduct of its work, which bring those new
improvements into the Committee’s practice and also
introduce a new procedure for such pending issues. The
procedure foresees regular updates by Committee
members on the status of resolving such matters and
introduced detailed rules for the time limit.
The most significant step in resolution 1904
(2009) was the establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson to assist the Committee when
considering de-listing requests. On 3 June 2010, the
Secretary-General appointed Judge Kimberly Prost as
Ombudsperson.
Since
her
appointment,
the
Ombudsperson has swiftly commenced her important
work. The Ombudsperson has kept the Committee
informed of developments in all cases before her, in
accordance with resolution 1904 (2009). I would like
to underline the importance of permitting the
Ombudsperson to fulfil her mandate without
interference and in an impartial and independent
manner.
Regarding updates on the status of the
Consolidated List, the narrative summaries of reasons
for listing and outreach activities by the Monitoring
Team and the Committee, I refer to the more
comprehensive version of my statement.
In concluding my remarks as Chairman of the
Committee in the name of the Committee, I would like
to remind the Council that in a previous meeting I
already mentioned the challenges the 1267 sanctions
regime has been facing (see S/PV.6310). Over the past
two years, the Committee has experienced growing
criticism by States, individuals and courts because of
procedural and human rights concerns. National
parliaments, national and regional courts and civil
society as well as international bodies, including

10-63741

United Nations bodies, have pointed out shortcomings
of the 1267 sanctions regime. The Committee and the
Security Council have listened to those voices and
have taken important steps to address many of those
concerns in resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009).
The Committee has also strengthened fair and clear
procedures by revising its guidelines and internal
methods accordingly, and that has not gone unnoticed.
However, the recent judgment of the European
General Court in the case of Kadi II and other court
cases show that challenges remain. The high level of
engagement of Member States, for example during the
review, suggests that they continue to share the
Security Council’s concern that there should be a
coordinated international response to the threat posed
by Al-Qaida and the Taliban. It is therefore important
that the Committee continue to engage in dialogue to
find appropriate ways and means to respond to those
challenges.
As I have highlighted several times, improving
the procedures will make the regime stronger and
therefore a more effective tool in the fight against
terrorism. The Committee should remain on this track.
Significant improvements to ensure fair and clear
procedures have already been achieved, and that
process will hopefully be continued in future.
Before closing this formal part of my statement, I
would like to take the opportunity to thank the
members of the Monitoring Team, the Secretariat and
the Committee members for their invaluable
contribution in coping with the enormous work
challenges during the last two years.
I have now come to the end of the text that I was
asked to present in the name of the Committee. I would
like to make just a few comments, as you suggested,
Mr. President, in my personal capacity after having
nearly terminated two years of work at the head of the
Committee. I wish to underline that these comments
oblige only me and do not represent agreed positions
by the Committee.
The Committee’s comprehensive review was —
and this is my personal conviction — a groundbreaking
and unprecedented step. It was the first time ever that a
sanctions committee conducted such a thorough
review. I have already given the numbers: 488 names
were carefully scrutinized and 45 entries were deleted,
and some 60 de-listing requests are still pending. About
270 list entries — and I think this is also important —

5

S/PV.6424

that were added in 2001 have been reviewed for the
very first time since they were listed.
However, despite those efforts a number of
problematic entries, such as deceased people, defunct
entities and entries lacking identifying information,
remain on the list. I have already referred to the
additional reviews that were introduced by resolution
1904 (2009) — a review of deceased persons, a review
of entries that lack identifiers and the triennial
comprehensive review of each name on the list. This
basically means that in the future, in more complex
cases, the Committee will in fact review some names
up to three times, in three separate reviews, and that in
itself is a positive development. In addition, the
Committee recently agreed to conduct a specific
review of entities that have ceased to exist, which is in
fact a further step beyond what is provided for in
resolution 1904 (2009).
I have already referred to the appointment of
Judge Kimberly Prost as Ombudsperson, which was an
important and significant step.
I feel very strongly that we should give Judge
Prost, who is a remarkable person, the time to show her
merit. I would like to note that she has just started
working on her first cases, and I reiterate the
importance of Member States fully cooperating with
her and providing her with all relevant information.
The Council will remember that there was a
discussion at the time about whether the
Ombudsperson would be given the possibility to
present recommendations. Having seen Judge Prost, I
feel that the Committee will attach full weight to her
written reports, and in practice, the artificial distinction
drawn between recommendations and observations
might very well become irrelevant.
Finally, given the fact that the Ombudsperson was
appointed six months after the adoption of resolution
1904 (2009), I would be very pleased to see Judge
Prost’s mandate continue next year. I therefore believe
that the Council should consider extending her
mandate and also extend the mandate of the
Ombudsperson to other sanctions regimes, because the
creation of the function was an important first step that
will also be beneficial for all sanctions regimes.
Important progress has been achieved over the
past two years to strengthen due process in the internal
procedures and working methods of the Committee.

6

As regards the Committee’s decision-making, I
have clearly gained some experience with the principle
of consensus that exists within the Committee. I would
thus like to share some thoughts on that principle with
the Council, as the principle of consensus has been
criticized as giving designating States a right to veto
any de-listing request. It is obvious that that is perhaps
a rather far-reaching statement, since only a
designating State that is a member of the Security
Council can participate in decision-making.
While it is true that the consensus rule applies to
decisions of all sanctions committees of the Security
Council, it is often overlooked that paragraph 4(a) of
the Committee Guidelines expressly provides that if,
after consultations undertaken by the Chairman,
“consensus still cannot by reached, the matter may be
submitted to the Security Council”. Thus, even under
the current procedures, any de-listing request may be
submitted to the Security Council for review and
subsequent decision by majority rule pursuant to
Article 27 of the Charter.
I personally believe — and this is my strong
personal view — that it would not be a revolutionary
step to adopt the same decision-making procedure —
majority voting — for de-listing decisions of the
Committee as well. It is also interesting to note that in
some instances, such as the granting of humanitarian
exemptions pursuant to resolution 1452 (2002), the
Committee already takes decisions by so-called
negative consensus. That means that the consensus
principle has been reversed by requiring the Committee
to take a negative decision by consensus.
Finally, the 1267 sanctions regime regarding
Al-Qaida and the Taliban has also been criticized
recently in the sense that it was no longer a temporary
emergency measure to address a specific threat, but an
open-ended measure that was not limited in time or
space.
It is interesting to note that the Security Council
has not adopted a consistent approach in this regard.
While some country regimes, such as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, are renewed annually, many
targeted sanctions measures — including Sudan,
Somalia, Eritrea, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and others — are open-ended. However, in the
1267 regime the concerns regarding the open-ended
nature of the measures are considerably mitigated by
the reviews pursuant to resolutions 1822 (2008) and

10-63741

S/PV.6424

1904 (2009), which I outlined earlier. At least every
three years each name is thoroughly reviewed by the
Committee and, as I pointed out, in some cases more
that once, twice or even three times.
If the procedure — and this is again a personal
suggestion I would like to make — of those triennial
reviews were changed to require a positive
reconfirmation of each list entry under review, many of
the concerns I mentioned would be satisfied. The
adaptation of the periodic review procedure would in
fact then have the same effect as the introduction of a
time limit or sunset clause for the listings and would
put an end to the recurring question of whether the
sanctions regime is of a punitive or preventive nature.
I am confident that the Security Council and the
Committee will continue to actively follow the
developments and will continue to look for answers to
the concerns raised. The upcoming resolution to extend
the mandates of the Monitoring Team and the
Ombudsperson in June 2011 will provide the next
opportunity for the Security Council to take further
steps in that important matter. This is a living process,
a living regime that has been adapted continuously. We
have succeeded in improving it substantially during the
past two years, but I think efforts to further improve it
will continue.
The President: I thank Mr. Mayr-Harting for his
briefing and his personal remarks.
I shall now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Ertuğrul Apakan, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), concerning counter-terrorism.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I have the honour to brief
the Council in my capacity as Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) on the work of the Committee since the
previous briefing in May (see S/PV.6310).

to work actively in advancing our global efforts with
its more strategic and transparent approach. The
Committee tries to increase awareness about the need
for more effective implementation of relevant Security
Council resolutions, particularly resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005), and to enhance cooperation
among Member States. The Committee continues to
effectively monitor the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001).
One of the main instruments available to the
Committee in that regard is the Preliminary
Implementation Assessment (PIA). The ongoing
stocktaking exercise, in accordance with its new
guidelines, allows the Committee to enhance its regular
dialogue with Member States and to further identify
areas where the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) is still inadequate.
The Committee organizes and conducts visits to
Member States. Those consensual country visits are a
fundamental component of the Committee’s efforts to
monitor and promote implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). They enable us to establish direct contact
and dialogue with the national practitioners on the
ground and help us better understand the challenges
that individual countries are facing.
The Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) have placed
particular emphasis on capacity-building of Member
States, which is one of the main challenges in our fight
against terrorism. The Committee held a thematic
discussion on technical assistance to explore ways to
further facilitate the provision of assistance to relevant
Member States. The Committee and CTED have also
worked to enhance their ongoing dialogue with
Member States, donors and beneficiaries in that regard.

As we have seen in many parts of the world in
recent months, terrorists continue their activities
unabated. In light of that ongoing and evolving threat,
we must continue our common efforts and act in full
cooperation with each other. We should be as vigilant
and resilient as ever, and counter-terrorism should
remain a priority for the international community.

In the past six months, the Committee has tried to
make better use of the thematic discussions it organizes
on the issues mentioned in resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1624 (2005). Those discussions have proved to be
highly useful in helping us understand those issues in
greater depth and consider any possible concrete steps
that the Committee could take. As part of their more
transparent approach, the Committee and CTED have
also organized such thematic briefings for the wider
membership on four different areas.

Since its establishment, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) has played an important role in the
fight against terrorism. Now the Committee continues

In addition to the thematic areas, the Committee
has also started discussions on the challenges that some
regions face. Those discussions have provided the

10-63741

7

S/PV.6424

Committee with a more in-depth evaluation of the
progress and challenges in each region. In accordance
with its work programme, the Committee maintained
and increased its dialogue and cooperation with other
relevant international and regional organizations. In
June, an open meeting was held with four regional
organizations and bodies. The Committee has also
continued the practice of hearing briefings from
relevant international and regional organizations and
United Nations bodies.
In light of the focused and regional approach the
Committee and CTED are pursuing, I wish to mention
briefly some of the workshops that have been
organized in the past six months in different parts of
the world. They have proved particularly important in
bringing together the relevant officials of the countries
and of regional and subregional organizations to
strengthen coordination and cooperation and to ensure
better sharing of information and experience. I would
like to touch briefly upon only three of the most recent
workshops.
The first was the three-day practitioners
workshop held in Nairobi in June. It was organized by
CTED, in cooperation with the International
Organization for Migration, with the participation of
operational-level officers from relevant agencies of
Tanzania, Uganda and Kenya, as well as a large
number of experts from international and regional
organizations. A frank and open discussion was held on
matters related to effective border control.
In October, CTED organized another workshop in
Sarajevo. It brought together senior officials dealing
with counter-terrorism coordination from 13 countries
in the region and other representatives. It was jointly
organized with the Regional Cooperation Council, the
Southeast European Cooperative Initiative Center and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and was
supported by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF). During the two-day event,
participants explored ways to enhance national
coordination and regional cooperation in the region.
Last week, CTED organized a workshop at the
Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation in
Indonesia. This workshop focused on community
policing, new payment technologies and investigations
using cell phone records and communications. During
this event, an additional set of working group sessions
was held for counter-terrorism coordinators from South
Asia.
8

The Committee continues to include in its
dialogue with Member States discussion of their efforts
to implement resolution 1624 (2005). Thus far, a total
of 109 States have submitted reports to the Committee
on their implementation of the resolution. On the other
hand, the Committee encourages Member States to
become parties to and implement all international
counter-terrorism instruments.
The Committee considers effective counterterrorism measures and respect for human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law to be
complementary and mutually reinforcing. They are an
essential part of a successful counter-terrorism effort.
Therefore, the Committee has continued to remind
Member States that any measures taken to combat
terrorism must comply with all their obligations under
international law, in particular international human
rights, refugee and humanitarian law.
I would also like to give the Council a few
examples of the Committee’s cooperative activities
with its partners. The Committee, through CTED,
actively contributes to the work of the CTITF. The
Committee and CTED continue to engage actively with
the other Security Council subsidiary bodies and other
relevant entities working on counter-terrorism issues,
namely, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) and its Monitoring Team, and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and its Group of Experts. In this regard, the
CTC invites to its thematic discussions the Monitoring
Team, the Group of Experts, the CTITF, the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
representatives of INTERPOL.
Now, I wish to touch briefly on some activities
that the Committee is planning to organize in the near
future. One is a seminar on bringing terrorists to justice,
which will be held in New York from 1 to 3 December
2010. The seminar will bring together a select group of
national counter-terrorism prosecutors who have been
involved in highly visible cases within their national
jurisdictions. The Committee has made sure that the
participants will represent different regions, different
levels of development and different legal systems.
A second event that the Committee plans to hold
is the next special meeting with international, regional
and subregional organizations. The Council of Europe
has kindly offered to host that meeting in Strasbourg.
Let me express the Committee’s appreciation to the

10-63741

S/PV.6424

Council of Europe for its generosity. The Committee
has accepted this offer and decided to hold this special
meeting in April 2011 on the topic of the prevention of
terrorism.
To fulfil its mandate, the Committee relies on the
cooperation of and dialogue with Member States. I take
this opportunity to express the Committee’s
appreciation to Member States for their cooperation
with the Committee and its Executive Directorate,
either during the preparations of the Preliminary
Implementation Assessment, in the country visits,
workshops and briefings, or through their permanent
missions in New York. The Committee and CTED wish
to continue this dialogue and cooperation with all
Member States.
In accordance with this understanding, the
Committee and CTED have attached particular
importance to keeping Member States abreast of their
work. In this regard, the Committee’s Executive
Director and I gave a briefing to United Nations
Member States on 21 July. We intend to organize
another similar briefing in the upcoming weeks.
I would like to underline the valuable
contributions and excellent work of CTED, under the
able leadership of Mr. Mike Smith. CTED has
continued to provide the assistance the Committee
needed in the course of the past six months. I also wish
to thank the Secretariat for its continuous support.
Now, I will proceed to the second part of my
statement. In my personal capacity, I would like to
share with the Council and Member States some of our
assessments, views and suggestions on the work of the
CTC. I wish to thank the United Kingdom presidency
for arranging this open debate with this particular
forward-looking format.
In the beginning of this year, one of the priorities
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee was to streamline
its working methods to allow more time for substantive
and analytical work. Starting in February, the
Committee has spent less time on technical matters and
documents, and held in-depth discussions on the key
thematic areas and regions with a strategic approach in
an effort to better understand the evolving nature of the
threat of terrorism.
Furthermore, during the meeting held in Ankara in
June 2010, which brought together officials from the
capitals of the Security Council members with key

10-63741

counter-terrorism figures in the United Nations system,
the issues that merited more attention and the steps to be
taken were further explored in an informal setting. Most
of the challenges that need to be addressed for better
international cooperation and national coordination
were highlighted in the comprehensive presidential
statement (S/PRST/2010/19) adopted at the thematic
discussion of the Security Council on 27 September
2010 (see S/PV.6390).
I believe that the Committee has played and will
play a critical role in our global fight against terrorism,
based on its sound legal framework. The CTC should
continue to pursue its focused and strategic approach.
This will require further improvements in the working
methods of the Committee.
At the beginning of this year, the procedure for
adopting the Preliminary Implementation Assessments
was substantially amended. Now it is time to improve
the format of the Assessments, with more focus on the
gaps and needs. This will help us to better monitor
implementation and identify the needs of each Member
State. Ensuring effective implementation is of high
importance if we are to succeed in our endeavours to
combat terrorism. Since capacity-building is one of the
main challenges, particularly for some regions, in
implementing relevant resolutions, the Committee and
CTED should continue to focus on this matter as well.
With a view to making the Committee’s work
more accessible to Member States, Mr. Smith and I
have given two briefings so far to the wider
membership, and CTED has made presentations to all
Member States on eight different topics. These
briefings and presentations have proved to be very
useful in promoting more intensive dialogue and
interaction between the Committee and Member States.
The CTC and CTED have gained a lot from the views
and suggestions expressed at these meeting. Such
meetings should continue, since it is also the
responsibility of the Committee and CTED to update
all Member States on the new developments and
challenges. In this respect, I would also like to suggest
that we explore new possible ways to increase the
interaction between CTC and Member States.
The current threat of terrorism demands a
comprehensive and holistic approach. Therefore, apart
from combating terrorism, it would be useful for the
CTC to place greater emphasis on the prevention of
terrorism, in cooperation with CTITF and other

9

S/PV.6424

partners. I believe that the recent decision of the CTC
to organize the next special meeting at the Council of
Europe in Strasbourg on this topic will be a step in the
right direction.
Another area that merits particular attention is
incitement to terrorism. CTC and CTED should be
encouraged to continue their efforts to work with
Member States, in particular in a regional and
subregional approach, with a view to addressing
different and particular aspects of incitement to
terrorism.
Let me also emphasize that all counter-terrorism
measures should respect the rule of law and human
rights. This is important for effective international
cooperation on counter-terrorism.
As I mentioned earlier, the CTED has organized
regional workshops in different parts of the world. I
have touched on these, and believe that they will
provide the Committee with more insight into regional
achievements and challenges and that it will contribute
to better coordination and cooperation among regional
countries.
The Committee is now planning to organize a
seminar with prosecutors, which is something new. We
should build on it. All these activities indicate that
there is a need for the CTED to use new tools so that it
can use extrabudgetary funding based on the
established practices of the United Nations.
Before I conclude, let me underline once again
the fact that we are all exposed to the global threat of
terrorism and we are all duty-bound to act in solidarity
and with a resilient, unwavering and common stance.
We should not be complacent.
Today’s meeting constitutes another important
step to keep counter-terrorism high on the United
Nations agenda. I hope that this focused and forwardlooking approach of the Council will continue in the
future to ensure that the fight against terrorism remains
a priority for the United Nations.
The President: I thank Mr. Apakan for his
briefing and personal comments.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Claude
Heller in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): In
addition to the information presented in the joint

10

briefing that was presented by our colleague from
Austria, I am pleased, in my capacity as Chairman of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), to summarize the main developments in the
work of the Committee since the last joint briefing on
11 May 2010 (see S/PV.6310).
I would like to update the Security Council on the
recent activities of the Committee, highlighting the
growing cooperation between the Committee and
various
international
organizations,
and
the
standardization of our work practices in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), as well as in
increased assistance and transparency.
Building on the 2010 final document of the
comprehensive review and the Committee’s current
programme of work, I have held consultations with the
heads of intergovernmental organizations in order to
explore ways to further deepen and strengthen
cooperation among these organizations and the
Committee. These included meetings with the DirectorGeneral of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, Ambassador Üzümcü; with the
Director General the International Atomic Energy
Agency, Ambassador Amano; and with representatives
of the European Union. In addition, on 21 October, in
my capacity as Chairman of the 1540 Committee and at
their invitation, I addressed the Group of Eight
Non-Proliferation Directors Group in Vancouver,
Canada.
Furthermore, I carried out consultations in Paris,
London, Beijing and Moscow in March, and consulted
other Member States in New York to explore, among
other topics, their views on the extension of the 1540
Committee mandate beyond 25 April 2011. In addition,
following a meeting with European Union
representatives in Brussels, the 1540 Committee was
briefed by Ms. Annalisa Giannella, the European Union
Personal Representative on non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD). As listed in the
document that has been circulated in the Chamber,
there were other meetings and consultations held by
the 1540 Group of Experts during this period.
The 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts
continued to participate in outreach events at the
international, regional or subregional levels to facilitate
States’ implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
These events included two regional workshops
organized by the United Nations Office for

10-63741

S/PV.6424

Disarmament Affairs, which focused on border control
and exported materials. The first workshop, for SouthEast European States, took place from 14 to 17 June in
Split and was hosted by the Government of Croatia.
The second, for South-East Asian States, took place
from 28 September to 1 October in Hanoi and was
hosted by the Government of Viet Nam. Both
workshops enjoyed the support of the European Union
and of the Governments of the United States and of
Norway and, in the case of the Hanoi workshop, the
Government of New Zealand aw well. The other
activities in which the 1540 Group of Experts
participated are listed in the document circulated in the
Chamber.
As for the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), during the past six months, the Committee
received a first report from Togo on its
implementation. At the same time, I also continued to
meet with representatives of States that have not yet
submitted their first reports. For example, recently I
met with the representatives of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and Ethiopia, among
others, with whom we exchanged points of view, and I
reminded them of their obligation to present such
reports.
The Committee also received additional
information from Brazil, Canada, Ireland, Pakistan,
Portugal, and Uganda. In the case of Canada, it
included a voluntary action plan in its submission.
Using this and other information, the Committee is
reviewing 75 matrices and anticipates engaging in the
review of another 117 before the end of 2010. The
information in these matrices forms the basis of the
data that will appear in the 1540 Committee’s report to
the Security Council, due in April 2011.
In terms of assistance, the Committee has also
consolidated a database on assistance requests and
adopted new procedures for handling formal requests
for assistance. The Committee received new requests
for assistance from Iraq, Uganda and the Central
American Integration System. The Governments of
Canada, the United States and Poland notified the 1540
Committee of their offers of assistance.
With regard to transparency, the Committee
adopted new procedures for publishing reports from
Member States, as well as for its matrices and
assistance requests. On its webpage, the Committee
also added a “Frequently Asked Questions” section and

10-63741

a calendar of upcoming events, and began developing a
“What’s New” section.
In addition to the activities described earlier
relating to the enhancement of cooperation with other
international organizations, the Government of Austria
has informed the Committee that it is hosting a meeting
for
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations in Vienna on 15 and 16 December to
promote cooperation on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
It is my intention to participate in that meeting
and in a regional workshop organized by the
Government of Saudi Arabia for 11 and 12 December.
Similarly, as the 1540 Committee looks forward to
preparing its 2011 report to the Security Council, the
Committee and its Group of Experts will continue to
participate in international conferences and in regional
and subregional outreach activities so as to gather more
information on assistance and on measures adopted
towards the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
I would now like to make a few personal
comments based on my experience as Chairman of the
1540 Committee, especially in the light of the mandate
that is to be renewed next April.
As I mentioned earlier, the chairmanship has
carried out a series of consultations in capitals and in
New York with a view to be in a position to present an
assessment of elements that, in our opinion, should be
taken into account by the Council during its
deliberations on the renewal of the Committee’s
mandate, before the conclusion of Mexico’s
membership of the Council.
In my opinion, in the first years of its existence,
the Committee focused primarily on actions related to
increasing the awareness of Member States of their
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004), and in
assisting them in preparing legislative measures to
ensure compliance with the resolution. Speaking
generally, I could say that the Committee has
successfully completed this first stage. The challenge
now is to support and help States to take relevant
concrete measures to guarantee the compliance of their
legislative provisions.
More than six years after the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004), the renewal of its mandate is
an excellent opportunity to reflect on the best way to
adapt the Committee to respond to current proliferation

11

S/PV.6424

threats from non-State actors. I would like to point out
five areas upon which I believe we will need to reflect
in our discussions on renewing the mandate: first, areas
that warrant greater attention from the Committee;
secondly, the Committee’s relationship with relevant
international bodies; thirdly, strengthening the
Committee as a platform for cooperation and
enhancing its ability to facilitate assistance to States;
fourthly, the structure of the Group of Experts; and
fifthly, the very relevant issue of the duration of the
Committee’s mandate.
In its broad review, the Committee identified a
few areas in which States have taken relatively few
measures. Of the three categories of weapons of mass
destruction, the biological sector is the one where the
fewest measures have been identified. Likewise, vector
systems, control lists and the financing of banned
proliferation activities have been identified as areas
that warrant particular attention.
The 1540 Committee currently enjoys the support
of a Group of Experts consisting of eight individuals.
This contrasts significantly with the staff and resources
of such international bodies as the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons
or
the World
Customs
Organization. These bodies have direct jurisdiction in
areas relevant to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). In this respect, I am convinced of the urgent
need to strengthen cooperation with these bodies, in
particular in the area of information exchange, with
full respect for their various mandates.
The universal nature of the obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004), on the one hand, and the high
degree of specialization within international bodies in
aspects related to the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), on the other, ensure that close
cooperation between both sides would be mutually
beneficial and strengthen compliance with the various
mandates.
The growing recognition on the part of the
international community of the value of the work of the
1540 Committee arises largely from the cooperative
approach taken by the Committee. During our
chairmanship, we have worked to strengthen the
Committee as a platform for cooperation. Nonetheless,
we must continue to strengthen its work in the areas of
cooperation and assistance.

12

The implementation of the provisions of
resolution 1540 (2004) depends not only on the
political will of States, but also on the Committee’s
resources for the application of specific security
measures. In this respect, the Committee must continue
to play an active role to ensure the coordination of
requests for assistance with offers to assist.
The work of the Group of Experts is crucial to the
Committee’s work. However, since it was established,
the Group of Experts has worked without a specific
structure or a clear division of functions. I therefore
believe it necessary to establish a structure to permit it
to function more effectively. That task should not be
too complex, and the appointment by the Committee or
the Secretary-General of a coordinator could be a first
step to that end.
Finally, and bearing in mind that, unfortunately,
we cannot predict whether threats related to the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction due to
actions by non-State actors will cease to exist in the
short or the medium term, the Committee’s mandate
could be extended for a period longer than three years.
In my opinion, one option would be to renew the
Committee’s mandate for 10 years, while planning a
review after five, similar to the review cycle of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
The Committee would thereby be in a position to better
plan its needs with greater certainty. The international
community urgently needs a long-term strategy for
addressing non-proliferation challenges through
cooperation with Member States.
Lastly, I would like to thank the members of the
Committee, the Group of Experts and the Secretariat
for their support of our work.
The President: I thank Mr. Heller for his
briefing, and all three Chairmen for their important
personal comments and recommendations, which will
be very valuable to their successors.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

10-63741

S/PV.6424

I now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Permanent Representatives of
Austria, Mexico and Turkey, Ambassadors MayrHarting, Heller and Apakan, respectively, for their
briefings on the work of the Committees they head and
for their views. The Russian Federation considers the
strengthening of the efforts of these Committees and
their Groups of Experts to be an important condition
for enhancing the effectiveness of the Security
Council’s contribution to countering the global
terrorism threat.
Among the most substantive aspects of the
Committees’ activities since the briefing in May (see
S/PV.6310), we note the following. The CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC), backed by its CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), continued to
actively monitor implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) and work on resolution 1624 (2005). Moreover,
the CTC and CTED increased the transparency of their
work. The Russian Federation supports that approach,
believing that it promotes fuller implementation of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) by all States.
We note that the CTC’s continued dialogue with
States in the framework of the procedure of
Preliminary Implementation Assessments of resolution
1373 (2001) and its country visits are yielding results.
We advocate further improvement of these fundamental
monitoring instruments of the Committee.
Among the thematic priorities dealt with by the
CTC, we note the subjects of specialized international
cooperation, extradition and mutual legal assistance, as
well as the issue of curbing incitement of terrorist acts
in accordance with resolution 1624 (2005).
We believe it is necessary to step up efforts to
implement resolution 1624 (2005), develop the practice
of including relevant issues on the programme for
country visits, analyse best practices and experience
with a view to their wider dissemination, and prepare a
further global report on the state of affairs in this area.
In this context, we welcome the recent decision
of the CTC to hold a meeting of the Committee in
April 2011, at the Council of Europe in Strasbourg,
with
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations on the subject of preventing terrorism.
We believe that this meeting will create conditions

10-63741

conducive to an in-depth consideration of the whole
range of issues related to resolution 1624 (2005). It is
also important that the specialized Committee of the
Security Council once again bring international
organizations together to discuss the latest challenges
in contemporary counter-terrorism efforts.
We welcome the assistance given to the CounterTerrorism Committee by its Executive Directorate. We
support in every way the participation of the
Directorate on the basis of the existing mandate and the
efforts of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and its cooperation with the expert groups of
Security Council specialized committees.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) remains one of the fundamental
mechanisms of the Security Council in suppressing the
terrorist activities of Al-Qaida and the Taliban and the
spread of their influence and extremist ideology. We
call on all States to take firm measures with respect to
individuals and entities on the sanctions list, as
stipulated in the relevant Security Council resolutions
and in the guidelines for the work of the 1267
Committee.
We support the Afghan leadership’s policy aimed
at national reconciliation and the reintegration into
society of those members of illegal armed groups who
are not tainted by crimes against the Afghan people,
who have renounced violence and ties with Al-Qaida
and who have recognized the Constitution of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.
We continue to believe that removing individuals
from the sanctions list is possible only on an individual
basis. At the same time, we consider unacceptable any
proposals for the simplified de-listing of some
categories of individuals or entities on the list contrary
to existing procedures. We support the efforts of the
Committee and its Monitoring Team in keeping the
sanctions list up to date so that it reflects the real
nature of today’s terrorist threat.
The comprehensive review of the list that was
carried out was aimed at enhancing the effectiveness of
the Committee’s work and strengthening the sanctions
regime. We hope that the Ombudsperson, who has
begun work on de-listing, will contribute to making the
Committee’s procedures more transparent, so as to
avoid doubts about the legitimacy of applying
sanctions, including on the part of regional and

13

S/PV.6424

national courts. We call on States, pursuant to
resolutions 1735 (2006) and 1904 (2009), to continue
to submit to the Committee requests for inclusion on
the sanctions list of individuals and organizations with
ties to the Taliban and Al-Qaida, including those who
finance their terrorist activities through income from
the illegal drug trade.
The Russian Federation attaches great importance
to the unswerving implementation by all States of
resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent resolutions
1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008), which are designed to
serve as a reliable obstacle to prevent weapons of mass
destruction, their means of delivery and related
materials from falling into the hands of terrorists. The
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) plays a key role in reinforcing and
enhancing the effectiveness of international efforts to
carry out the measures provided for in these
resolutions. We believe that the Committee and its
group of experts worked hard during the reporting
period to help to further enhance the activities of the
international community to counter proliferation risks
and threats.
We welcome the efforts to make the work of the
Committee more planned and systemic, and we hope
that these efforts will be continued. We are in favour of
the Committee continuing to give priority attention to
the tasks of assisting States in implementing resolution
1540 (2004) and coordinating activities by the
international community to that end. For our part, we
are ready to continue actively supporting these
measures, including in the context of our ongoing
cooperation on issues related to resolution 1540 (2004)
with member States of the Commonwealth of
Independent States.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I would also like to
convey our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate. I thank the Permanent
Representatives of Turkey, Mexico and Austria for
their useful briefings on the activities carried out by
their respective Committees and teams.
We are pleased with the efforts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), under
the direction of Ambassador Apakan, in ensuring the
effective implementation of that resolution and
resolution 1624 (2005). Through the effective use of
tools such as informative meetings with the wider
United Nations membership, dialogue and cooperation

14

with Member States and external outreach
programmes,
the
Committee
has
contributed
significantly to raising awareness on the need to
implement those resolutions.
We have found very useful the ongoing
constructive dialogue between our Mission, our capital
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) on counter-terrorism matters.
These interactions and political consensus with our
Government have bolstered our counter-terrorism
activities. We thank Mr. Mike Smith, Executive
Director of CTED, and his team for their support and
efforts.
We welcome the discussions in the Committee on
the progress and challenges facing West Africa in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We all now
have a better understanding of the current threats and
challenges in the subregion. We should now aim to
address the identified gaps. With regard to capacitybuilding, we are of the view that more will be achieved
by delivering assistance in an integrated manner
through equal focus on all relevant national sectors. At
the same time, we will need a self-sustaining
knowledge transfer aimed at bridging the existing
knowledge gap.
The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) is vital in our efforts to promote counterterrorism measures within the West African subregion.
That is even more so as counter-terrorism matters
increasingly occupy the agenda of West African States,
individually and collectively. Our hope is that, in the
coming year, the partnership between CTED and
ECOWAS will result in concrete achievements.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) remains a vital tool that enables the
international community to prohibit non-State actors
access to weapons of mass destruction. Nigeria
strongly supports the work of the Committee and
appreciates the efforts made by Ambassador Heller and
the Committee, particularly in improving outreach
programmes and greater visibility for the Committee.
The clearing house role of the Committee in matching
assistance requests and offers needs to be sustained, so
as to promote greater implementation of the resolution
by States.
As its work continues to grapple with the
increasing challenge of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, the Committee should not relent in

10-63741

S/PV.6424

its efforts to assess and monitor the risk of these
weapons falling into the hands of non-State actors.
Promoting the broader process of international
cooperation should continue to be an area of focus for
the Committee.

To eradicate terrorism, a multifaceted approach
by all stakeholders is vital. These three committees
play a significant role in that regard and should
continue their efforts to develop further effective and
efficient measures.

We welcome the remarkable contributions of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) under the directorship of Ambassador Thomas
Mayr-Harting. The conclusion of the review of the 488
names on the consolidated list, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1822 (2008), and the
appointment of Ms. Kimberly Prost as the
Omnbudsperson are positive steps.

As we are all aware, the threat of terrorism posed
by Al-Qaida and the Taliban continues unabated. The
sanctions imposed on individuals and entities
associated with Al-Qaida and the Taliban under
resolution 1267 (1999) and its successor resolutions —
travel bans, freezing of assets and arms embargoes —
continue to play a crucial role in countering terrorism.
In order for the 1267 sanctions regime to be fully
effective and legitimate, our continued efforts to ensure
the credibility of the Consolidated List are
indispensable.

We further welcome the efforts of the Committee
to improve its procedures, including by adopting new
guidelines for its work. In the same vein, the six-month
review of deceased persons’ names and the annual
review of names on the consolidated list that have not
been reviewed in three or more years are
commendable. These measures should be strengthened
through regular improvement of the identification and
de-listing process of individuals and entities, as this
will enhance the credibility of the 1267 sanctions
regime. It is important that, at all times, the list remain
as accurate as possible, and the fundamental rights of
individuals adequately guaranteed.
We welcome the close cooperation and
coordination among the three counter-terrorism
Committees. We encourage them to continue their joint
efforts to improve information-sharing, to coordinate
their relationship with international, regional and
subregional organizations and to participate within the
framework of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Chairs of the
Council’s three counter-terrorism-related Committees
for their respective briefings on developments during
the past six months.
The recently uncovered cargo plane bomb plot
and last year’s attempted bombing of a United States
commercial aircraft remind us yet again that terrorism
continues to be a global and imminent threat and that
deep-seated problems surrounding terrorism, such as
radicalization and terrorist safe havens, need to be
addressed in an appropriate manner.

10-63741

In that context, we regard the improvement of the
1267 regime, pursuant to resolution 1907 (2009), as
instrumental in enhancing due process and raising the
List’s transparency and efficiency. We also welcome
the recent successful review of the Consolidated List
pursuant to paragraph 25 of resolution 1822 (2008),
and the commencement of work by Ms. Kimberly
Prost, who was appointed Ombudsperson on 3 June.
We are grateful to the Chair of the 1267 Committee,
Ambassador Mayr-Harting, and to the Austrian
Mission and the Monitoring Team for their devoted
work on reviewing the Consolidated List. We continue
to support their efforts to improve the sanctions regime
without compromising its effectiveness and efficiency
as a counter-terrorism measure.
I welcome the excellent work done by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) under the
leadership of the Chair, Ambassador Apakan of Turkey,
and by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) to encourage Member States to
fully implement resolution 1373 (2001). We recognize
that in recent CTC meetings we have had fruitful
discussions on substantive and regional issues. It is our
hope that we will have further discussions on thematic
issues and that those will facilitate the formulation of
best practices and effective recommendations in the
field of counter-terrorism.
Japan supports the stocktaking exercise for the
review of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) by all Member States. The exercise contributes
to identifying the challenges that Member States face
in that area and the technical assistance they require. In

15

S/PV.6424

that regard, we would stress that all Member States
should cooperate fully with CTC and CTED and make
a determined effort to submit their Preliminary
Implementation Assessments on time.
We would also like to highlight the importance of
the country visits that have been conducted by CTC
and CTED. Country visits, through direct contact with
the relevant authorities, provide a means to ascertain
the counter-terrorism situation in a given country and
to identify the concrete technical assistance needed for
capacity-building. To further enhance the efficiency
and effectiveness of CTED operations, we hope to see
more strategic execution of its country visits, through,
for example, prioritizing certain regions and areas.
We note that the Council will discuss the draft
resolution to extend CTED’s mandate next month.
Japan attaches great importance to the role of CTED in
determining essential technical assistance needs among
Member States in the field of counter-terrorism. With
that in mind, Japan will participate in the discussion of
the draft resolution in a constructive manner.
Japan appreciates the enhanced work of the 1540
Committee throughout this year. We believe that the
Committee’s work has become more effective and
better coordinated under the leadership of its Chair,
Ambassador Heller of Mexico, particularly from the
perspective of expanding the scope of its cooperation
with regional and international organizations. Japan is
delighted to have been able to support the Chair’s
efforts through our role as coordinator of the Working
Group on Monitoring and National Implementation. It
is our strong desire that the 1540 Committee will
deepen its cooperation with other relevant bodies,
above all, with the 1267 and 1373 Committees, in
order to ensure that Member States will fully meet their
obligations stipulated under resolution 1540 (2004).
The mandate of the 1540 Committee will expire
next April. Given the important role the Committee
plays in the area of non-proliferation, Japan hopes that
in the discussion of the renewal of its mandate, all the
experience gained and lessons learned from its past
activities will be taken fully into account. One of the
key features of the Committee’s work is its cooperation
with Member States to ensure full implementation of the
resolution. Needless to say, Japan will continue to offer
its assistance in promoting the objectives of resolution
1540 (2004), in close cooperation with the 1540
Committee and in other international forums, including

16

the Group of Eight. Through such assistance, joint
efforts of likeminded countries and close coordination
among the relevant organizations, the work of the 1540
Committee will move on from the stage of awarenessraising to that of strengthening Member States’ capacity
to advance the goals of non-proliferation.
Lastly, we appreciate the close cooperation
between the three subsidiary Committees, aimed at
maximizing the functions mandated by their respective
Security Council resolutions. We also commend the
contribution their work makes within the framework of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.
Cooperation, coordination and coherence in that area
should make the most of the Committees’ limited
capacities and resources by avoiding duplication and
overlap.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Chairs of the three Committees — the
Permanent Representatives of Austria, Turkey and
Mexico, Ambassadors Mayr-Harting, Apakan and
Heller — for their comprehensive briefings and efforts
with other Council members in promoting international
cooperation on counter-terrorism. Allow me to make
the following points.
First, with regard to the sanctions Committee
against Al-Qaida and the Taliban, established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999), we welcome the completion
of the review process in accordance with resolution
1822 (2008). It was a very serious effort that led to
indispensable amendments, and it should be continued
in order to clear the names of those who are dead or are
no longer associated with Al-Qaida or the Taliban.
We also welcome the steps taken to promote
transparency and respect for human rights laws, in
accordance with resolution 1904 (2009), in particular
the appointment of the Ombudsperson and the
amendment to the Committee’s system of work. We
welcome further the reforms needed to avoid use of the
Committee for goals for which it was not established.
We would like to recall that in order for the Committee
to enjoy full legitimacy, it must function in accordance
with international law, the United Nations Charter and
other instruments and rules of human rights, even of a
preventive nature.
Second, with regard to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), we encourage the thematic discussions and
studies aimed at countering terrorism, as well as the

10-63741

S/PV.6424

workshops that the Committee and its Executive
Directorate have conducted. We hope this will lead to
further implementation of the requirements of
resolution 1373 (2001), particularly in the area of the
exchange of expertise. We appreciate the efforts made
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate to provide the necessary technical
assistance and build the capacity of Member States,
particularly developing countries, in the areas of
legislation and institutions, and to continue its
cooperation and constructive engagement with States
and regional and national organizations, in accordance
with resolution 1373 (2001).
With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), Lebanon stresses
the importance of its ongoing cooperation with the
Members of the United Nations, particularly since
cooperation is the best way to prevent all these
weapons — be they nuclear, chemical or biological —
from falling into the hands of non-State actors.
At the regional level, we stress the importance of
the efforts of the League of Arab States to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
access to them by terrorists. We also emphasize the
importance of declaring the Middle East a region free
of weapons of mass destruction.
The 1540 Committee has made tireless efforts to
respond to requests for and offers of assistance and to
increase its transparency and contacts with Member
States. Ongoing coordination between the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1373 (2001) is of the utmost importance, particularly
since they are also linked to resolution 1540 (2004) and
its provisions. We believe that resolution 1540 (2004)
has become a fundamental cornerstone of the
non-proliferation regime and that further cooperation
and partnership between the Committee and related
international
organizations
—
including
the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the World
Customs Organization, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and others — is also critical.
We stress the importance of the proposal made in
the 2009 comprehensive review to commend Member
States that are not members of the Security Council but
have contributed greatly, through the hosting of
workshops, to raising awareness and the exchange of
expertise and confidence-building with neighbouring

10-63741

countries. In that regard, we extend our thanks to
Croatia, Viet Nam, Peru and Brazil for all their efforts.
In conclusion, we recall that Lebanon, which has
suffered from terrorism in all its aspects, believes that
terrorist acts are extremely dangerous and widespread
in many parts of the world in spite of the resolutions
adopted and measures taken against them by the United
Nations. We believe that commitment to combating
terrorism at its roots by removing all the factors
fuelling it — particularly hotbeds of tension, double
standards in applying international resolutions,
poverty, foreign occupation and human rights
violations — is of the greatest importance.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me at the outset to express our appreciation to
Ambassador Mayr-Harting, Ambassador Apakan and
Ambassador Heller for their briefings today and to
commend their commitment, contributions and tireless
work in chairing the respective Committees. We find
these regular briefings to be not only highly important,
as the Committees are among the crucial tools in
countering terrorism, but also an opportunity for
sharing and exchanging information with the wider
membership.
The events of recent weeks — waves of devices
sent to numerous Governments, embassies and
religious institutions — and the ever-present threat of
suicide bombs and violent extremism that take the lives
of innocent people are a grim reminder of the
challenges we need to address. Therefore, we have to
continuously rethink our current approaches and
engagement with the aim of providing effective
international legal cooperation and to properly address
existing deficiencies in the capacities of States
Members to fully implement the United Nations
counterterrorism framework.
Through the years, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) has evolved into
one of the most critical United Nations monitoring
bodies in the fight against the threat of Al-Qaida and
the Taliban. We welcome the tangible results and
progress achieved in the work of the Committee since
our last briefing (see S/PV.6310), in particular the
completion of a demanding task — the comprehensive
review in accordance with resolution 1822 (2008) in
July this year.
We stand ready to actively work with the
Chairman and the Committee members, taking into

17

S/PV.6424

account the contributions of the Monitoring Team and
designated Member States to conducting the review of
pending issues and deceased persons. The completion
of the review process of the consolidated list and the
full implementation of resolution 1904 (2009) will
further improve the credibility and transparency of the
Committee’s work.
At the heart of all the criticism regarding the
fairness and transparency of the work not only of the
1267 Committee, but of other relevant counterterrorism bodies as well, lies concern for respect for
human rights. Undertaking difficult steps in countering
terrorism at the national and international levels, we
pledged that the promotion and protection of human
rights and the rule of law should remain a priority, as
they constitute the fundamental values enshrined in the
United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. We would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate Ms. Kimberly Prost on her
appointment and to present our sincere wishes for her
future work as Ombudsperson of the 1267 Committee.
Although the institution of Ombudsperson still needs to
develop its full potential in the days to come, we are
confident that Ms. Prost will successfully address all
concerns expressed in the past, to the great benefit of
the Committee and the Security Council.
With regard to the issue of monitoring the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005), several aspects of the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) have contributed
cumulatively to its efficiency. The continuous
assessment and stocktaking of revised Preliminary
Implementation Assessments, in accordance with the
previous practice, and visibility-raising through more
frequent open briefings are beneficial both to Member
States, which now have the opportunity to exchange
views and offer their experiences, and to the
Committee, which is in a position to have better insight
into country implementation of the recommendations
and consequently extend further technical support.
Since the briefing in May this year, Committee
has carried on its active engagement in a series of
thematic and regional debates that have brought into
perspective all the challenges and difficulties we all
face in our common fight against terrorism and efforts
to implement our obligations under relevant Security
Council resolutions. To that extent, it is necessary to
underline the importance of reaching out to partner
organizations, and we commend the practice of the

18

CTC of arranging meetings with relevant international,
regional and subregional organizations.
Bosnia and Herzegovina will continue fully to
support the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
We remain strongly committed to the effective
prevention of and fight against this global threat, and
stand ready to provide every assistance and support to
international efforts to that end.
The importance and role of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) as one
of the focal points of the United Nations counterterrorism and non-proliferation activities has already
been well highlighted. We fully recognize the crucial
role of the 1540 Committee as a clearinghouse for
channelling assistance to Member States in establishing
and further developing their capacity to face the threat
of non-State actors acquiring weapons of mass
destruction. We also believe that the growing
acceptance of resolution 1540 (2004) in recent years is
a result of increased understanding on the part of
Member States of its importance and the Committee’s
cooperative approach in assisting States in
implementation of its provisions.
In that regard, we support the extension of the
1540 Committee’s mandate and call for it to be
strengthened in material and human resources so as to
enable it to provide assistance where and when needed.
It is also important that Member States extend their
additional support to the Committee’s efforts by
securing more voluntary contributions for financing its
activities, thus enabling the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina will
continue to give its fullest support and contribute to the
overall international efforts to counter terrorism
through its actions at both the national and the
international levels.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999),
Ambassador Mayr-Harting of Austria; the Chairman of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), Ambassador
Apakan of Turkey; and the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
Ambassador Heller of Mexico, for their respective
briefings and for all the work they have done.

10-63741

S/PV.6424

With painstaking and protracted efforts, the 1267
Committee has completed the review of its
consolidated list, which has greatly enhanced the
accuracy and reliability of the list. That represents a
significant achievement. China supports the Committee
in its efforts to move ahead with the review of pending
issues, in line with resolution 1904 (2009), continue to
implement its new approach, and improve its efficiency
and transparency, thus upholding the authority and
effectiveness of the sanctions regime against Al-Qaida,
the Taliban and other individuals.
China appreciates the efforts of the CTC to
improve its working methods and to strengthen its
dialogue with Member States. Over the past month, the
CTC conducted an in-depth analysis of the major
difficulties and challenges in the implementation of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), helped
Member States to enhance their counter-terrorism
capacity-building, and prepared new policy guidelines
on international judicial cooperation, with positive
results in its work. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) played an important
role in assisting the CTC. China welcomes the efforts
of the CTED.
Recently, the 1540 Committee has done much
useful work to strengthen international cooperation,
expand its outreach activities and promote assistance.
We support the Committee’s proposal to strengthen the
interaction and cooperation of Member States and
international
and
regional
organizations
in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). China hopes that
those that are in a position to do so will provide
developing countries with the necessary assistance to
ease the difficulties that they face in implementing the
resolution.
China attaches importance to the role of the 1540
Committee by participating actively and constructively
in all aspects of its work. Not long ago, Ambassador
Heller visited China in his capacity as Chairman of the
1540 Committee and exchanged views with the
Chinese side on the implementation of the resolution
and the next phase of the Committee’s work, which
helped to deepen China’s cooperation with the
Committee. China is ready to assist the relevant
countries as far as possible in such areas as
implementing resolution 1540 (2004).
Terrorism remains a major threat facing the
international community, with terrorist attacks taking

10-63741

place sporadically in various parts of the world. The
United Nations and the Security Council play a core
role in facilitating international counter-terrorism
cooperation. China supports the participation of the
1267 Committee, the CTC and the 1540 Committee in
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, within their respective mandates, in order
to promote the balanced implementation of all four
pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy.
At the same time, China hopes that the three
Committees will pay more attention to the counterterrorism needs of developing countries and actively
assist them.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let
me, too, thank the Chairmen for their briefings. Their
dedicated leadership is central to the effectiveness of
the
Council’s
three
counter-terrorism-related
committees. I would especially like to thank the
Chairmen for their recommendations, which merit
serious consideration.
The importance of this work and the broader
international effort to combat terrorism was
underscored by the recent foiled plot involving the
explosives-laden parcels flown out of Yemen that were
tracked down in the United Kingdom and Dubai. That
event and other attempts earlier this year are harsh
reminders of the global nature of the terrorist threat.
The United States remains committed to reaching out
and forging international coalitions, based on mutual
interests and respect, to combat terrorism and prevent
the spread of weapons of mass destruction to terrorists.
Working with our partners to strengthen the
ability of the United Nations to help address those
threats continues to be a key priority of my
Government. To achieve that goal, we must continue to
maximize the effectiveness, transparency and relevance
of the Council’s counter-terrorism-related subsidiary
bodies.
Let me thank Ambassador Apakan for an
exceptional job guiding the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) during his tenure as Chair.
Ambassador has Apakan fostered greater efficiency in
the CTC’s work and worked with Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Director Mike Smith to keep the
general membership up to date on the Committee’s
activities through open meetings on such topics as
international legal cooperation and maritime security.

19

S/PV.6424

As the Council begins to look at the renewal of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) mandate, which the United States strongly
supports, CTED should intensify its regional and
thematic approach to its work. It should also continue
to develop regional capacity- and network-building
initiatives in the Horn of Africa, South Asia and the
Sahel.
Finally, consistent with the emphasis that this
Council placed on prevention issues in its September
presidential statement on terrorism (S/PRST/2010/19),
CTED should devote more attention to dialogue with
countries on the issues addressed in resolution 1624
(2005) that relate to softer approaches to counterterrorism. The CTC and CTED have made great strides
in 2010, and we look forward to working with our
partners to ensure that their efforts remain practical,
focused and innovative.
Over the past 11 years, the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions regime has been one of the United Nations
most effective counter-terrorism tools and a symbol of
international consensus against the ongoing threats
posed by Al-Qaida and the Taliban. The United States
will continue to work through the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) to
recommend the addition and removal of names on the
sanctions list to ensure that the list keeps pace with the
changing threat. We must now focus on ensuring that
countries are implementing the financial, arms and
travel sanctions against those on the list.
The United States welcomes the significant
enhancements to the regime’s listing and de-listing
processes outlined in resolutions 1735 (2006), 1822
(2008) and 1904 (2009). We remain confident that the
establishment of an independent Ombudsman for the
regime will help ensure that the de-listing procedures
are fair and transparent. We welcome Kimberly Prost’s
appointment as the Committee’s first Ombudsperson,
and we look forward to working with her.
Let me thank Ambassador Mayr-Harting and his
team, as well as the Secretariat, for their tremendous
efforts. They have worked steadfastly to implement
these reforms, and we are truly grateful for their work.
I also thank the 1267 Monitoring Team for its
important role in preparing narrative summaries of the
reasons for listing each entry and proposing
recommendations for improving the Committee’s work.

20

Finally, let join my colleagues in thanking
Ambassador Heller for leading the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) this past
year. The United States views the Committee’s
activities over the past six years as a landmark effort to
gain strong political support for the broad obligations
created by that resolution, the success of which is
noted in resolution 1887 (2009), adopted during the
2009 Security Council summit (see S/PV.6191), the
2009 comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004)
and the work plan for this year’s Nuclear Security
Summit. Resolution 1540 (2004) is not only a crucial
instrument in the international counter-terrorism
regime; it is also a vital piece on the international nonproliferation landscape.
The United States is pleased with the efforts of
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs and
its recent workshops in Croatia and Viet Nam, which
we co-sponsored. We are preparing to provide a
financial contribution to the 1540 Committee through
existing United Nations official development
assistance funding mechanisms. We hope that this will
help facilitate and motivate cooperation among other
assistance providers.
The United States supports a lengthy, perhaps
indefinite, continuation of the 1540 Committee to
allow for long-term strategic implementation and
resourcing. Such a mandate would include a periodic
review of the Committee’s mandate and work methods,
as well as a sunset provision requiring the Committee
to cease operations when the Security Council
determines that it has met all its objectives.
We are pleased with the direction steered by the
three Committees. Under the capable leadership of the
three current Chairs, United Nations counter-terrorism
efforts will guide and reinforce Member States’ actions
to deter terrorism, including the threats posed by
Al-Qaida, its affiliated groups and the Taliban, as well
as proliferation efforts by non-State actors.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like first of all to thank
Ambassadors Mayr-Harting, Apakan and Heller for
their respective briefings. We commend the remarkable
role they have played in leading the work of the
counter-terrorism committees. As their mandates come
to an end, we pay them well-deserved tribute for their
important contributions.

10-63741

S/PV.6424

My country welcomes the progress made by the
international community in fighting terrorism, even if
the daily reality reminds us that the terrorist threat
continues to weigh on our collective security. We
should therefore remain active in our determination to
put an end to this scourge.
Gabon fully associates itself with the efforts
made by the Security Council to that end through its
relevant subsidiary bodies. In that regard, my
delegation reiterates its support for counter-terrorism
mechanisms.
Thanks to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, the Council has made available to Member
States tools to more effectively combat this
phenomenon. My delegation would like to say a few
words about the work of those three Committees.
With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), we welcome the
progress made since the last debate on this issue
(S/PV.6310), namely, the comprehensive review of the
consolidated list and the appointment of Ms. Kimberly
Prost as Ombudsperson, whose role will be to review
requests for the de-listing of persons and entities
covered by sanctions. My delegation supports the
Committee’s efforts to improve its methods with regard
to the listing and de-listing of incriminated entities and
persons. The report of the Monitoring Team that will
soon be submitted to the Council will be devoted
entirely to that. We encourage the Committee to
strengthen its cooperation with Member States,
regional organizations and specialized counterterrorism bodies.
With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), my delegation
welcomes the results obtained since various aspects of
its working methods were streamlined. Those
improvements now make it possible for the Committee
to devote more time to substantive work while
continuing to focus on preliminary assessments
prepared by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate in the context of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
Similarly, we welcome the establishment of the
Committee’s website, which serves as a tool for
training and awareness-raising of our common efforts
to combat terrorism. We also support the Committee’s
practice of organizing regional workshops in order to
take into account various challenges in the process of

10-63741

combating terrorism. In that regard, a regional
workshop organized jointly by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime was held in
Libreville this past June. The workshop was an
opportunity for Member States of the Central African
subregion to familiarize themselves with legal
provisions applicable to illegal acts against maritime
security and navigation and off-shore platforms.
As Chair of Subcommittee C of the 1373
Committee, Gabon appreciates the efforts made by
many Member States to implement the provisions of
the resolution. In that regard, we call on Member States
to strengthen their cooperation with counter-terrorism
bodies.
With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), Gabon welcomes
the work to update the matrices that will constitute the
database to be included in the report that the
Committee will submit to the Security Council in April
2011. The establishment of new procedures for the
publication of reports and for dealing with requests for
technical assistance from States is another development
that should be highlighted.
Gabon, which is party to nearly all instruments
governing the disarmament process, reiterates its
commitment to work alongside other States to
completely eliminate weapons of mass destruction,
which are today a threat to international peace and
security.
Lastly, my delegation would like to reiterate its
appreciation for the work of the 1267, 1373 and 1540
Committees. We urge them to strengthen their
cooperation in the areas of information exchange,
country visits, organizing workshops, technical
assistance and relations with Member States and
regional organizations.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank the Chairmen of the
Security Council Committees related to terrorism for
their briefings today and commend them for their
work.
Brazil has long argued, both in the General
Assembly and in the Security Council, for a
coordinated and multidimensional response to the
challenges posed by terrorism. Today’s debate may help
us to reflect on ways to move towards that goal, which
we believe is shared by the broad majority of Members.

21

S/PV.6424

An essential element of a strategy to fight
terrorism is strong cooperation among Member States
and between them and international, regional and
subregional organizations. We are pleased that the
work of the Security Council has gradually shifted its
focus from the mere imposition of legal obligations —
important as they are — to greater emphasis on
building the capacity of Member States. For a legal
framework to be truly effective, Member States must
develop the means to implement it.
The activities of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee reflect this new reality. The Committee has
dedicated much of its work to facilitating technical
assistance to Member States and to organizing events
to train Government officials. It has also strived to
adopt a regional perspective and to avoid preconceived
solutions in dealing with shortfalls. In doing so, it has
duly recognized that countries with different levels of
development require different approaches. Its
Executive Directorate has had, and will continue to
have, an important role to play in that regard. My
delegation supports the extension of its mandate.
Similarly, as highlighted on other occasions, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) has made important strides in the recent past,
especially after the adoption of resolution 1904 (2009).
The conclusion of the review of the consolidated list of
sanctions and the establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson are but the most relevant examples. My
delegation welcomes the appointment of Ms. Kimberly
Prost as the first Ombudsperson and pledges its full
support to her.
However, as we are all aware, major challenges
still remain, in particular with regard to due process. In
this critical area of its work, the Committee must
reinforce its dialogue with the wider membership. In
addition, Members should do their utmost to present
their reasons when denying de-listing. Lastly, the
Committee should ensure that its work fully benefits
from the views of the Ombudsperson. To that end,
Member States must provide her with the maximum
relevant information possible. Her opinions must be
fully taken into account in the decision-making
process.
Turning to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), we welcome the progress that
it has continued to make in implementing its mandate.
We note in particular the importance of taking forward

22

its cooperation with the other counter-terrorism
Committees and with international organizations,
consistent with the Committee’s mandate.
Brazil looks forward to the submission of the
Committee’s report and to the renewal of its mandate
early next year. In doing so, we feel that particular
emphasis should be placed on those States whose
capacities for implementation and reporting are
limited. The Committee should mobilize its energy and
resources to ensure that those States receive the
support they need to implement resolution 1540
(2004).
The progress made in the recent past in the three
Committees would not have been achieved without the
competent work, constant leadership and dedication of
their respective Chairs. I join others in commending
Ambassadors Ertuğrul Apakan, Thomas Mayr-Harting
and Claude Heller for the invaluable contributions they
have made.
Mr. Bonne (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, as other speakers have done before me, I would
like to express my delegation’s gratitude to the Chairs
of the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) — namely,
Ambassadors, Thomas Mayr-Harting, Ertuğrul Apakan
and Claude Heller. I would like very much to commend
them and their teams, who have demonstrated constant
commitment in the course of the past two years.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made shortly by the representative of the
delegation of the European Union on behalf of the
Union. Allow me to say a few words about each of the
three Committees.
With regard to the 1267 Committee, we have
come to the end of a process that involved two
ambitious tracks, as mentioned by the representative of
Austria. Throughout that process, France has sought to
improve the efficiency of the sanctions regime, both as
a counter-terrorism tool and to strengthen its
legitimacy by taking into account the rights of listed
persons as much as possible. We must ensure that the
reforms set forth in resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904
(2009) are fully implemented so as to restore balance
to the Committee’s procedures in order to better take
into account the fundamental rights of individuals and
entities on the list. It is also essential that members of
the Committee cooperate as far as possible with the
Ombudsperson, an independent and autonomous body.

10-63741

S/PV.6424

The new legal context leads us to reflect on a new
reform of the Committee that would reflect the
concerns of all members of the Security Council and
make it possible to preserve the current sanctions
regime. It seems to me that that would be the best way
to respond to recent criticism of the 1267 sanctions
regime. To condemn the regime is to draw the wrong
conclusions from the current situation. We must all
preserve the authority of the Security Council and
defend its actions in fighting terrorism.
Current events from the Sahel to Pakistan have
shown that we need more than ever an coordinated
international response against the terrorist threat. We
are convinced that the Committee can play an
important role in the inter-Afghan reconciliation
process with those who have chosen to renounce
violence, cut ties with international terrorism and
respect the Afghan Constitution.
Secondly, the Counter-Terrorism Committee has
in recent months continued to refocus on more
strategic tasks. It has highlighted specific difficulties
related to various regional contexts, as well as issues of
concern to all Member States, such as border control,
the financing of terrorism, incitement to terrorism and
judicial cooperation. France is very committed to the
Committee’s in-depth work with each Member State of
the United Nations. For us all, that is a way to ensure
that the international measures we take are as effective
as possible.
This year, Ambassador Apakan has organized
several meetings open to all Member States on specific
subjects, which made it possible to share the results of
the Committee’s work as widely as possible. We would
like the Committee to continue this informationsharing work and develop, together with the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, a guide of good
practices in the most sensitive areas that would be
accessible for all.
Whatever the commitment of the Chair of the
Committee, it is as effective as it is because it can rely
on the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED). In just a few years, the CTED has
become a key body of the United Nations for
countering terrorism, and many States have benefited
from technical assistance thanks to its assistance. Of
course, we shall support the renewal of its mandate in
several weeks.

10-63741

Finally, I turn to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Terrorism and
weapons of mass destruction continue to be a major
threat to our security. Resolution 1540 (2004) provided
the Council’s concrete and appropriate response to that
threat, which, of course, does not exclude actions by
other bodies. Together with Germany, France presented
in the First Committee this year a draft resolution on
preventing the acquisition by terrorists of radioactive
sources (A/C.1/65/L.46), which was adopted by
consensus. I would also like to recall the holding in
April of the Nuclear Security Summit in Washington,
D.C., which gave political impetus at the highest level
to efforts to counter nuclear terrorism. We welcome the
new summit is to be held in 2012 in Seoul.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is now well established
in the United Nations landscape, but we must pursue
our efforts to implement it effectively. The 1540
Committee remains a crucial tool in this effort, and we
hope that its mandate will be renewed after 25 April
2011. We must also increase the visibility and
effectiveness of the Committee. The Mexican
chairmanship and the Group of Exerts have spared no
effort to that end, and we thank them for that.
One area where particular progress could be made
is assistance. As the Council knows, my delegation
coordinates the working group on this subject. Some
progress has already been made, and we now have an
effective follow-up mechanism for offers of and
requests for assistance. We have just adopted
procedures to rationalize, improve and accelerate our
response to these requests. Other areas in which we are
working include developing specific visits to some
countries, but we need the help of States for the
Committee to play its role as an effective mediator.
Here, I would appeal to all of those who offer or
receive assistance in implementing resolution 1540
(2004) to so inform the Committee.
For its part, France will make the most of its
presidency of the Group of Eight to encourage
continued reflection on supporting the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), in particular with respect to
offers of assistance.
The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force (CTITF) continues its work in coordinating with
different actors, including the three Committees that
we are discussing today. We welcome the appointment
of its Chairman as the Director of the CTITF Office.

23

S/PV.6424

The strengthening of the Office will allow it to better
enhance its actions to implement all the pillars of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The review of the
Strategy, which has been under way since September,
has been an opportunity to welcome the effectiveness
of the Task Force. Once again, I welcome that work
today.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank the three
Chairpersons of the Security Council Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004), Ambassadors Thomas MayrHarting, Ertuğrul Apakan and Claude Heller,
respectively, for their comprehensive briefings.
Terrorism is a global threat that requires
collective and resolute action by all countries. Uganda
reiterates its condemnation of all acts of terrorism and
reaffirms that such acts are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation and of who commits
them. In this regard, we support the work of the three
Committees and commend them for developing
common strategies to advance the global fight against
terrorism.
The briefings of the Committee Chairpersons
have highlighted the progress made in the
implementation of Security Council resolutions in the
fight against terrorism and the challenges encountered
in the course of their work. Given the increased level
of sophistication of global terrorist networks, our
collective efforts should continue to focus on denying
terrorists any safe havens, closing sources of terrorist
financing and reducing State vulnerability, while at the
same time enhancing the preparedness and response
capacities of States.
Uganda commends the cooperation and
coordination among the three Committees and expert
groups, which have had a positive impact on the fight
against terrorism. We also welcome the increased
outreach activities and sharing of information by the
three Committees with the stakeholders. We thank
those countries, organizations and financial institutions
that have provided and continue to provide financial
and technical support for the implementation of the
respective resolutions.
We commend the closer cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations and countries as an effective way of
fighting terrorism. At the continental level, the African
Union summit held in Kampala in July called for

24

enhanced cooperation to boost
collective action against terrorism.

the

continent’s

Finally, Uganda shares the conclusions of the
Chairpersons that coordination and cooperation among
Member States, the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations provide an essential way to
counter the threat of terrorism. The work of the three
Committees is vital within the United Nations
framework and the wider efforts of the international
community. They can continue to count on Uganda’s
unequivocal and full support.
The President: I shall now make a brief
statement in my national capacity.
I would like to thank Ambassador Heller for his
work leading the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) this past year. Under his
leadership, the Committee has played a more
prominent role in global multilateral counterproliferation and counter-terrorism efforts. The
mechanisms for coordinating technical assistance
requests have also been significantly improved.
Looking ahead, a further Committee mandate
should recognize that the preliminary reporting
exercise is now almost complete. With just a handful of
non-reporting States left, the Committee would benefit
from taking a more analytical approach and addressing
the complex issues in implementing resolution 1540
(2004) that these reports and dialogues between the
Committee and States have revealed. The Committee
and its experts should develop their role as
coordinators of relevant technical assistance, matching
donors with recipients. The Committee should
concentrate on assistance gaps and on establishing
where it can add value to other efforts in counterproliferation and counter-terrorism fields. For example,
the comprehensive review of the status of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) showed that
bio-security was among the weaker areas of
implementation.
Turning to the Counter-Terrorism Committee, I
am grateful to Ambassador Apakan for his final
briefing as Chair. I pay tribute to his work to improve
the Committee’s effectiveness, particularly its outreach
and transparency through regular open thematic
briefings and through the regional workshops
conducted by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED). Looking ahead to the
next CTED mandate, the Directorate should build on

10-63741

S/PV.6424

its success and continue to adapt to the evolving threat
of terrorism. In particular, we would like to see more
focus on the drivers of radicalization and on how States
can better counter violent extremism.
The Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime is,
and will continue to be, a vital counter-terrorism tool
that enables the international community to disrupt
terrorist activity on a much greater scale than through
domestic measures alone. That is why we need to
continue to work to ensure that the regime remains
credible as a tool to maintain and restore international
peace and security.
Turning to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), I would like to thank
Ambassador Mayr-Harting for chairing the Committee
over the past two years. His leadership has been
instrumental in driving the regime forward in a positive
direction. The Committee has worked hard this year in
implementing the advances to the regime introduced by
resolution 1904 (2009), not least in conducting a
successful review of those sanctioned and working
with the newly appointed Ombudsperson. But the hard
work is not over. The regime must continue to evolve
to address the challenges it faces. The United Kingdom
remains committed to this process and looks forward to
contributing to further reform efforts over the coming
year.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Spain. I
remind all speakers to restrict their remarks to less than
five minutes.
Mr. Oyarzun (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful for the opportunity given to my delegation to
participate in this open debate on the activities of the
three Security Council Committees focused on the
fight against terrorism. In that regard, I would like
fully to endorse the statement to be made by the
representative of the European Union delegation.
Spain believes that the Security Council has made
great efforts since the 1990s to build a counterterrorism system that, as a whole, is satisfactory and
should be supported and improved as necessary in a
duly constructive spirit by all States. This work of the
Security Council should be complementary to the
counter-terrorism efforts developed by the General
Assembly, which should be the preferred forum for

10-63741

articulating the overall response of the international
community to global problems of our day. Spain is
firmly committed to active multilateralism in the fight
against terrorism and believes that the implementation
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, adopted by consensus by the General
Assembly in 2006, is a valuable tool against the global
threat posed by terrorism.
Respect for the rule of law and human rights is
basic in the fight against terrorism. Spain will therefore
always support reforms of the system that allow that
fight to be conducted in a more fair, rational and
transparent way, with full respect for human rights. The
guarantees provided for in resolution 1904 (2009)
concerning the listing procedures of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
constitute a concrete example of the constructive spirit
of improvement I mentioned earlier.
Spain also contributes actively to promoting the
Alliance of Civilizations, an initiative of the SecretaryGeneral that seeks in a practical way to promote
understanding and cooperative relations among States
and peoples of all cultures, so as to address all kinds of
extremism and fanaticism that could lead to violence.
In that regard, I would like to refer to the
informational meeting of the Security Council held on
26 May, which was devoted to intercultural dialogue
for peace and security and convened by the presidency
of Lebanon (see S/PV.6322). I would also like to refer
to the victims of terrorism. In that connection, Spain
believes that we must respond by highlighting their
status, visibility and testimony. We therefore hope that
the Security Council will encourage the necessary
follow-through to the intention expressed in resolution
1566 (2004), on assistance to victims of terrorism,
through a support fund or a practical assistance
mechanism, which is also called for in the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
I would like to thank the Chairs of the 1267
Committee, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) for the information
provided today and for the work that they have been
carrying out together with their expert groups to fulfil
the mandates assigned to them. In that regard, we
appreciate their intention to strengthen cooperation
among themselves and to organize joint initiatives and

25

S/PV.6424

visits to States so that States may better understand
their degree of compliance with their obligations.
Resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004) constitute concrete actions by the Council in
defence of international peace and security against the
threat posed by international terrorism. Spain would
like, first of all, to highlight the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999),
concerning Al-Qaida, the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities. Specifically, we would like to
point to the recent review of the consolidated list
within the deadline, 30 July, which will help to monitor
compliance with the sanctions regime imposed by the
Security Council. Resolution 1904 (2009) introduced
improvements in the procedures of the individual
sanctions established by resolution 1267 (1999) and
increased due process guarantees so as to set fair and
clear procedures regarding the matter of listing and delisting.
Spain would also like to highlight the work done
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate to ensure compliance with resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005) and to facilitate technical
assistance to countries that request it.
Today, new threats to international peace and
security are linked to the proliferation and trafficking
of weapons of mass destruction in the hands of nonState actors or States outside or in violation of
international law. Therefore, Spain would like to
express its support for the work performed by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and for its efforts to design mechanisms for
monitoring the implementation of that resolution, and
for the work to extend its universal application.
Terrorism constitutes a grave threat to
international peace and security, has devastating effects
on innocent people in all regions of the world and aims
to undermine supreme values extolled in the United
Nations Charter. It is time that Member States above
all, under the aegis of the Organization, show strong
political will to confront this barbarism and that we use
all means that the United Nations Charter provides us.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express our deep
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for holding this
open debate. We would also like to thank the three
Chairmen of the Security Council Committees for their
detailed briefings. Those Committees form the

26

cornerstone of counter-terrorism at the global level. We
would also like to commend the continuous progress in
cooperation and constructive dialogue between the
groups of experts and those Committees, enhancing the
effectiveness of their mandates and the influence of
their activities in the field.
With regard to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), we support its adoption of a
transparent, strategic approach to its work,
concentrating on raising awareness of the importance
of that work within the United Nations and
contributing to the rationalization of its working
methods. We also support the Committee in
enumerating the major challenges facing the Member
States in fully implementing resolution 1373 (2001)
included in the report of the Executive Directorate,
particularly with regard to the urgent and necessary
human and financial resources and the basic
infrastructure for national capacity-building.
We believe that taking a regional and subregional
approach to facilitate the provision of technical
assistance to Member States, upon their requests,
would enhance rational management of available
resources and increase the opportunity for coordination
and exchange of expertise in combating terrorism
among neighbouring countries.
At the national level, Morocco has continued its
intensified efforts to implement resolution 1373
(2001), particularly the practical parts regarding
measures to counter money laundering. We established
a special unit on financial transactions in 2009 that
receives and deals with the reports submitted to it by
banking
institutions
on
suspicious
financial
transactions. It has begun to respond to those requests
with a view to joining the Egmont Group of Financial
Intelligence Units in 2011.
Furthermore, all the relevant aspects of
implementing resolution 1624 (2005) are in complete
accordance with all the efforts by the Kingdom of
Morocco in adopting a comprehensive approach to
counter-terrorism that focuses on and deals with the
factors that contribute to the spread of extremist
ideologies and ideas.
With regard to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, we welcome the efforts by that
Committee in reviewing the Consolidated List to make

10-63741

S/PV.6424

it more accurate, credible and effective. Although we
note the progress made in order to implement the
provisions of paragraph 25 of resolution 1267 (1999),
we believe further efforts are required to enhance
transparency and contacts with concerned States. We
believe that the Consolidated List on which the
sanctions regime depends must remain accurate and
flexible in order to cope with changing developments
on the ground.
In that regard, we would like to express our deep
concern over the spread of terrorist activities in the
Sahara and coastal areas and the intensification of
trafficking activities in drugs, humans and small arms,
which finances terrorist activities that affect the region
and beyond and represent a grave danger to the entire
area. At the national level, we have continued our
tireless efforts to adapt our legislation to our
international commitments, particularly in monitoring
dual-use export material and in accordance with the
free trade agreement that we concluded in recent years.
We will continue to be an active and serious partner
with the international community by making every
possible effort to establish constructive and effective
international cooperation in order to eradicate
terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
way in which you have been steering the work of the
Security Council this month.
I will speak for less than four minutes. I thank the
Chairmen of the Committees for the information
provided, which informs us about the work they are
carrying out. Cuba values and follows up on the work
of those Committees and strictly complies with the
obligations under Security Council resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). I wish to
reiterate Cuba’s strongest rejection of all terrorist acts,
methods and practices in all their forms and
manifestations, by whomever or against whomever and
wherever they are committed. All terrorist acts,
whatever their motivations, must be condemned.
My country has systematically submitted various
comprehensive reports on measures it has taken on this
issue. Border control is a major aspect of Cuba’s work
in combating terrorism. Our control is efficient, based
on the experience gained in more than 50 years

10-63741

fighting terrorism. That has allowed us to thwart many
acts of this nature.
The position of my country on weapons of mass
destruction is also clear. Cuba does not possess, nor
has it the intention of possessing, weapons of that kind.
They have never been part of our national defence
strategy. In addition, my country has ratified or
acceded to 13 international conventions on terrorism.
Cuba attaches great importance to the adoption of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
My country has enacted a wide range of legislative
measures, even long before the adoption of the
Strategy, with the goal of preventing and suppressing
all terrorist acts and activities and those directly or
indirectly associated with them. My country has an
impeccable record in confronting terrorism, to which it
has historically fallen victim. I wish to reiterate Cuba’s
unswerving determination to never allow its national
territory to be used to organize, incite, support or carry
out terrorist acts.
Cuba categorically rejects the unilateral
preparation by the Government of the United States of
America of a list of States that supposedly sponsor
terrorism, and the inclusion of Cuba on that list. That is
a spurious and politically motivated exercise, contrary
to international law and the Charter of the United
Nations.
No Government can claim the right to classify the
behaviour of other nations in terms of terrorism. Much
less can that be done by a Government that adopts a
double standard, as it does not prosecute the confessed
perpetrators of horrible terrorist acts against Cuba and
other countries of this hemisphere, as in the cases of
Luis Posada Carriles and Orlando Bosch. It allows
them to remain free and to participate in political
activities. At the same time it arbitrarily and unjustly
keeps in prison five Cuban citizens, who, risking their
lives, were fighting against the activities of terrorist
groups that operate with impunity against Cuba in the
United States territory.
Just a month ago, several terrorists with a long
record of actions against Cuba were honoured at the
Institute for Cuban and Cuban-American Studies of the
University of Miami, in the presence of American
members of Congress. That Institute is heavily
subsidized by the United States Government. Only
eight months ago, Posada Carriles was the guest of
honour of the annual conference of the terrorist

27

S/PV.6424

organization, Alpha 66. Recent revelations by another
confessed terrorist, Francisco Chávez Abarca, confirm
details of Posada Carriles’ responsibility for acts of
terrorism against Cuba. It is not in Cuba but in the
United States where a terrorist mafia acts with
impunity, having organized, financed and carried out
hundreds of terrorist acts against the Cuban nation.
Cuba has a completely clean record concerning
terrorism. The United States Department of State,
which issued that report, cannot say the same.
On several occasions Cuba has cooperated with
the United States Government and has recently
reiterated its willingness to continue doing so.
We reiterate our willingness to deliver a more
detailed presentation on these questions before the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, or to submit to it any
additional information or clarification considered
necessary.
As it has always done, Cuba will continue to
strictly comply with the stipulations of Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
and will cooperate with the subsidiary bodies
established pursuant to them.
Before concluding, I wish to reiterate the
willingness of my country to cooperate with any State,
including the United States, in preventing and
confronting international terrorism on the basis of
mutual respect, the sovereign equality of States and the
principles and rules of international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mrs. Smith (Norway): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the informal group of like-minded States
comprising Belgium, Costa Rica, Denmark, Germany,
Finland, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Sweden,
Switzerland and my own country, Norway.
The members of the European Union (EU) in this
group also align themselves with the statement to be
delivered by the delegation of the European Union.
We thank the respective Chairpersons for their
briefings today. The Council and the 1267 Committee
have taken significant steps to further strengthen the
due-process elements in the work of the Committee. It
is against that backdrop that the informal group of likeminded States makes this intervention today.

28

In doing so, I should underline that the group
supports and fully recognizes the application of
targeted sanctions as a useful and necessary tool to
effectively combat international terrorism. Our position
has been guided by the goal of strengthening the
regime established by resolution 1267 (1999) in order
to make that regime more credible and thus more
effective.
First of all, we commend the 1267 Committee,
under the leadership of Ambassador Thomas MayrHarting of Austria, for having completed the review of
all the persons and entities on the Committee’s
Consolidated List on 30 July this year. The review is an
important achievement, as the removal of 45 entries,
including 9 deceased persons, strengthens the
credibility of the system. Many Member States have
made important contributions to the Committee’s
review. We should also like to recognize the efforts and
hard work of the Secretariat and the Monitoring Team
in that process. We are also pleased to note that the
number of narrative summaries posted on the
Committee’s website continues to grow.
In the view of the like-minded States, the
adoption of resolution 1904 (2009) is a major step
forward in strengthening due-process guarantees, in
particular for persons or entities that wish to be
removed from the Consolidated List. The creation of
the position of an Ombudsperson to assist the
Committee when it considers requests for de-listing is
of course the main feature introduced by resolution
1904 (2009).
We commend the Secretary-General for the
appointment in June this year of Judge Kimberly Prost
to serve as Ombudsperson. Judge Prost has a wealth of
experience in a number of legal disciplines as well as
in the counter-terrorism field. We are confident that she
will execute her important mandate to the full
satisfaction of all involved parties, and we pledge full
support to and cooperation with Judge Prost and her
office.
The Ombudsperson receives and considers
requests for removal of entries from the Consolidated
List. To that end, she engages with individuals, entities
and States in order to obtain a clear picture of why a
given person or entity has been listed by the
Committee, and also in order to assess the current
justification for the listing.

10-63741

S/PV.6424

The Ombudsperson cannot function effectively
without the full cooperation of Member States. We
therefore call on all United Nations Member States, not
only the members of the Security Council, to respond
promptly and adequately to the Ombudsperson’s
requests for information and assistance. It is of
paramount importance that the Ombudsperson has
access to all relevant information, including
confidential and classified documents, regarding the
listing.
We have taken due note of the Ombudsperson’s
initial priorities of safeguarding the independence of
her office and of raising general awareness of the role
of the Ombudsperson. All Governments should assist
the Ombudsperson in making the office’s mandate
widely known by, for example, bringing the existence
of the Ombudsperson’s website to the attention of
relevant non-governmental organizations and to
national bar associations. States should also be
encouraged to include information in their periodic
reports to the 1267 Committee on what steps they have
taken to generate publicity about the mandate of the
Ombudsperson.
Furthermore, all States should receive the
necessary general information about the work of the
Ombudsperson. Such information will contribute to a
deeper appreciation of the role and needs of the
Ombudsperson and of any possible challenges in the
exercise of her mandate. More knowledge on the part
of Member States in that area could in turn strengthen
the cooperation with the Ombudsperson. We therefore
look forward to the biannual reports of the
Ombudsperson.
The informal group of like-minded States would
also encourage the Ombudsperson to consider giving
regular interactive briefings on her role and activities,
as has become the practice for other key United
Nations entities in the field of counter-terrorism, such
as the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate.
The Ombudsperson cannot -and is not intended
to — function in a vacuum. She will need to engage
with States and petitioners when performing the key
functions of her mandate. That activity may require
resources
for
travelling.
Furthermore,
the
Ombudsperson might benefit in her work from
participating in relevant seminars or obtaining countryspecific information. We therefore call on the Council

10-63741

to provide the necessary resources and thereby
consolidate the independence of the mandate of the
Ombudsperson.
One of the major improvements that came with
resolution 1904 (2009) is that the Committee will meet
to discuss the report that the Ombudsperson submits to
it after she has considered a request for de-listing. We
assume that in such cases, where the Ombudsperson
has been involved and has thus given the request for
de-listing a thorough assessment, there will be less
need for putting requests on hold. The current practice
of placing de-listing requests on hold is sometimes
justified by a need for additional information before a
final decision can be made. That justification might be
less compelling in a situation where the Ombudsperson
has provided the Committee with all relevant
information.
The informal group welcomes all the progress
made so far, and we will continue to closely follow the
functioning of the mandate of the Ombudsperson. We
support any measures that are suitable to maximize the
effectiveness of that mandate.
At the same time, we will continue to consider
further steps towards strengthening the due-process
rights of those listed. In our view, we should continue
to reflect on how the current system could be
enhanced, including in terms of guaranteeing its
effectiveness and credibility, without calling into
question the very important progress that has been
achieved so far.
I would like to once again encourage the Council
to continue its open and inclusive dialogue with
interested States on issues pertaining to sanctions. I
would, in this regard, reassure you that the informal
group of like-minded States stands ready to engage in
such a dialogue and offer our views and perspective on
the way forward on those important issues.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Puri (India): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council.
I would also like at the outset to place on record
our deep appreciation for the excellent work of the
three distinguished Chairs of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004), as well as for their briefings

29

S/PV.6424

and the sharing of their experiences while carrying out
the work of those Committees.
Terrorism is the most abhorrent and heinous
crime against humanity as a whole. It continues to be a
pervasive and insidious threat not only to global
security, but also to the core values of the United
Nations. It is our firm conviction that no belief,
justification, political cause or argument can be used to
justify acts of terrorism. We condemn terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, irrespective of its
motivations, as criminal and unjustifiable.
There are deep concerns about the potential nexus
between clandestine proliferation and terrorism and the
ever-present danger of such weapons or vulnerable
nuclear materials falling into the hands of non-State
actors. As a victim of terrorism and the worst sufferer
for the last many decades, India fully supports all
efforts for greater and more meaningful international
cooperation to counter and combat the scourge of
terrorism.
We support the anti-terrorism mechanisms
established by the United Nations, including Security
Council resolution 1267 (1999) related to sanctions
against Al-Qaida and the Taliban; resolution 1373
(2001), which led to establishment of the CounterTerrorism Committee; and resolution 1540 (2004),
which addressed the issue of non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
We support measures to strengthen the review
process of the listings on the Consolidated List through
the Office of the Ombudsperson, pursuant to resolution
1904 (2009). At the same time, we are concerned that
the process of listing and de-listing in the Consolidated
List continues to be subject to political will and
pressure — a scenario we can ill afford in our united
fight against terrorism.
We fully support the efforts of the CounterTerrorism Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to play a
more effective role in countering terrorism. As the
CTED mandate comes up for renewal next month, the
endeavour should be to enhance coherence and synergy
among the various counter-terrorism structures that are
dealing with the issue of terrorism within the United
Nations. We appreciate the Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s efforts to organize thematic briefings,
streamline its working methods and give more focus to
substantive and analytic work.

30

We have also taken note of the recommendations
made in the report of the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
(A/HRC/10/3 and Add.1). It requires careful
examination and further consideration.
We support efforts of the 1540 Committee to
handle assistance requests by countries and to find
means to address the most commonly found gaps in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). However, it is
important that those activities are performed at the
request of Member States while keeping in mind their
varying national capacities, procedures and systems.
We look forward to greater efforts to bring
together interrelated aspects of the operational
mechanisms of the 1267 Committee, the 1540
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee. In
that context, the institutionalization of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF) in 2009
was a positive step to strengthen United Nations efforts
to counter terrorism by providing an umbrella under
which different United Nations entities can effectively
work in a coordinated and coherent manner.
India has an abiding interest in expeditiously
concluding
the
long-pending
comprehensive
convention on international terrorism. An early
adoption of the convention is in the interests of all
Member States and would provide impetus to
multilateral and collective action to counter
international terrorism. In his latest report on the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (A/64/818), the
Secretary-General has rightly pointed out, in paragraph
139, that the comprehensiveness of implementing the
Strategy will not be complete without the conclusion of
a comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
It is important to bear in mind that successful
implementation of counter-terrorism measures requires
not only the fullest collective effort of the entire
membership, but also their fullest participation in
processes that affect the collective security of all
nations equally.
We will be privileged to serve on the Security
Council from January 2011 onwards, and we intend to
work very closely with the counter-terrorism
mechanisms. It will be our endeavour to strengthen
ongoing efforts to promote open dialogue and
interactive discussions in order to ensure wider
participation of the membership.

10-63741

S/PV.6424

The President: I give
representative of Sri Lanka.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): At the outset, may I
offer my congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council and for
initiating this timely discussion. I thank the Permanent
Representatives of Austria, Mexico and Turkey for
their briefings on the implementation of the three
crucial Council resolutions on terrorism, so central to
maintaining international peace and security.
Much had been said within the United Nations, in
particular in the Council, on countering terrorism. Yet
the world continues to be rocked regularly by senseless
acts of terror or attempts to unleash death and
destruction in our midst. The scourge of terrorism
poses a suffocating threat to our common values of
decency and humanity and to our democratic way of
life.
Constant fear — induced by terrorism, insecurity,
anxiety and the never-ending tragic losses both human
and material — and economic stagnation were a
common experience of life in Sri Lanka for nearly
three decades. Fortunately, that vile menace was
completely eradicated from our soil last year, after
repeated efforts to talk to the perpetrators and get them
back into the democratic fold had been rebuffed. For
our part, we will take every measure to ensure that our
lives will never again be allowed to be tortured by
warped minds wantonly sowing death and destruction.
The agony imposed by terrorism does not respect
boundaries. It is a menace that has affected countries
across the globe — their attitudes, their economies and
their daily lives. Hence, our response to terrorism
cannot and should not be viewed or judged by looking
through different prisms. The United Nations, and this
Council in particular, should act with a common
purpose to assist every sovereign State and to respect
its right to free its territory from the abomination of
terrorism and protect its people’s right to life, peace,
security and democracy.
The presentations we have just heard from the
three Committee Chairs were comprehensive. We
recognize the efforts of the Committees to assist with
capacity-building and knowledge-sharing and to bridge
gaps in implementing counter-terrorism measures.
We see enormous benefits in all Member States
closing ranks in order to implement the Security

10-63741

Council resolutions on countering terrorism. In that
context, we emphasize the need to prevent the use of
their territories as safe havens by terrorist groups and
front organizations, including for raising funds,
acquiring financial assets and economic resources and
other related activities that fuel and sustain terrorism
and pose threats to peace and security elsewhere.
The continuing danger posed by seemingly
innocent front organizations exploiting the democratic
freedoms of our societies to perpetuate this evil must
be stopped. Enhanced cooperation among intelligence
and defence establishments across borders, active
intelligence-sharing and constant vigilance are vital in
our efforts to counter terrorism. Sri Lanka is grateful to
our network of friends with whom we have effectively
developed intelligence links. The value of intelligencesharing was lucidly illustrated in recent days when
multiple tragedies were avoided due to the vigilance of
intelligence agencies and their willingness to share
information.
Similarly, such cooperation is vital to prevent the
acquisition of arms and other destructive material by
groups bent on sowing death and destruction. Crossborder cooperation in thwarting the ever present link
between international terrorism and transnational
organized crime becomes critical. Terrorism’s tentacles
have spread to such areas as the illicit trade in arms,
the multibillion-dollar narcotics trade, moneylaundering and trafficking in persons — a phenomenon
that my own country is now confronting.
Collective action has become all the more vital
due to the ease with which terrorists establish crossborder linkages and exploit advances in technology and
communications that can lead to formidable and
destructive innovations. In parallel, it is also necessary
to address underlying social, economic and political
factors that may contribute to breeding terrorism.
Against that background, it becomes incumbent
on all countries to re-examine their policies on granting
asylum and refugee status, especially to prevent the
abuse of well-intentioned, generous and humane
policies by terrorists, front organizations or facilitators
of terror. It would also be imperative to streamline and
enhance domestic law enforcement and security
mechanisms to close any loopholes.
Cooperation across borders also becomes an
absolute necessity if this hydra is to be placed back in
its box. Arrangements for mutual legal assistance and

31

S/PV.6424

the extradition of terrorists — a requirement under a
number of conventions concluded under the auspices of
the United Nations — and helping countries to develop
national capacity in the areas of investigation,
prosecution, intelligence gathering, border protection,
customs and immigration surveillance and forensic
science are vital tools that can add to global efforts in
countering terrorism.

Union. The candidate countries of Turkey, Croatia and
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the
countries of the Stabilisation and Association Process
and potential candidates of Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia, as well as the
Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
declaration. I will read an abridged version of my
statement.

In this regard, we thank the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Governments
of Canada and Australia for facilitating the second
workshop in South Asia, which was hosted by Sri
Lanka in August 2010, for police and prosecutors on
the subject of effectively countering terrorism.

I wish to thank the Chairs of the Committees
established under resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004) for their reports. We note that, since
the most recent debate on this topic in May 2010 (see
S/PV.6310), a number of relevant developments have
occurred, which demonstrates the usefulness of having
these regular briefings.

Collective regional efforts could significantly
boost efforts in deterring terrorist activity. It was in
that spirit of cooperation and understanding that the
members of the South Asian region adopted the South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
Matters and the ministerial declaration on cooperation
in combating terrorism, during the fifteenth SARRC
meeting, held in Colombo in 2009, for which Sri Lanka
provided firm leadership.
Sri Lanka earnestly hopes that all the Members of
the United Nations will demonstrate the necessary
political will by concluding negotiations on the
comprehensive convention on international terrorism,
which has unfortunately been on the table for almost a
decade. It is time to send an unequivocal message of
our commitment to eradicate the menace of terrorism
by taking the appropriate political decisions now.
My country remains committed to cooperating
with the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1540 (2004), 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001) — as well
as with other related intergovernmental bodies working
on countering terrorism such as the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL, the
International Civil Aviation Organization and the
International Maritime Organization — both at the
international and regional levels, as well as to sharing
its experience and expertise in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Pedro
Serrano, acting head of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano (European Union): Mr. President,
many thanks for giving the floor to the European

32

The European Union highly commends the efforts
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), under the chairmanship of Ambassador
Mayr-Harting, and its Monitoring Team to strengthen
due process in the Committee’s work.
The adoption of resolution 1904 (2009), at the
end of last year, was a significant step forward in the
continued efforts of the Security Council to ensure that
fair and clear procedures exist for listing and de-listing
decisions. We believe that ensuring procedural
guarantees for the individuals and entities designated
by the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee will
strengthen the effectiveness of the sanctions and
contribute to their credibility.
In that regard, we welcome the creation of the
Office of the Ombudsperson and the appointment of
Judge Kimberly Prost as Ombudsperson. We wish her
every success in the fulfilment of her challenging
mandate and offer her the full support of the European
Union (EU). The full cooperation with, and the
provision of all relevant information to, the
Ombudsperson and the consideration of her
observations are essential.
The EU remains committed to ensuring the
implementation of the decisions adopted by the
Committee in its own legal order. The most recent
judgement of the EU General Court in the Kadi case
indicates that legal challenges remain ahead. However,
we are confident that those challenges can be
overcome. They should not be considered as putting in
question the EU commitment to upholding the
principles of the United Nations Charter and the
collective obligations of its member States under it. In

10-63741

S/PV.6424

that regard, a continued dialogue between EU
institutions and the Security Council remains essential
to address these common issues in order to find
common solutions.
We welcome the completion by the Committee of
the comprehensive review of the consolidated list at
the end of July, thereby fulfilling an important mandate
under resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009). The
implementation of the new provisions of resolution
1904 (2009) should further enhance the quality and
credibility of the sanctions regime.
The European Union would also like to commend
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), under the
able leadership of Ambassador Apakan of Turkey, as
well as the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) for their ongoing work, and in
particular the emphasis on capacity-building and the
facilitation of technical assistance to countries
requesting it, bearing in mind the respective mandates
and roles of the CTC and CTED. We recall in this
context the continuing support of the EU for capacitybuilding projects in close cooperation with CTED.
We also appreciate the recent activities of the
Committee and CTED to address specific counterterrorism issues through thematic debates and
briefings, as well as the many regional workshops. We
look forward with interest to the upcoming mandate
renewal. In this context, we continue to encourage
deeper integration of human rights in the work of the
CTC and CTED with Member States, as well as closer
cooperation
with
the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and its entities.
The European Union fully supports the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), and we warmly thank Ambassador Heller of
Mexico for conducting the Committee’s efforts. The
EU strategy against the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction of 2003 and the EU new lines for
action adopted in 2008 provide the framework for
concrete EU action in that regard.
The European Union has been active in ensuring
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), both
internally, inter alia through regular updates of its
regulation on export controls on dual-use goods, and
externally, by promoting the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) in third countries and
supporting a number of projects and regional
workshops.

10-63741

In closing, I would like to commend once again
the crucial and complex work of these three specialized
Security Council Committees to prevent and combat
terrorism. More generally, we wish to underline the
importance of good cooperation between the
Committees and all relevant United Nations actors in
this field.
The European Union would like to underline once
again that any measures that we undertake to prevent
and combat terrorism must comply with our obligations
under international law, in particular human rights law,
refugee law and international humanitarian law.
The European Union would like to join others in
thanking the members, experts and Chairmen of the
three Committees for their important work. I would
like to assure them of the full commitment of the EU to
support the Committees’ work.
The President: I thank Mr. Serrano for keeping
strictly to the time limit. I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Sial (Pakistan): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of the United
Kingdom for the excellent work of the Security
Council done under your leadership this month. I
would
like
to
congratulate
the
Permanent
Representative of Uganda and his team for a successful
presidency of the Council during the month of October.
I would like to thank the Chairpersons of the
Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for their briefings today. We support the efforts
of all three Committees in promoting greater
transparency and dialogue with Member States
concerning their respective areas of activity.
Pakistan strongly condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, committed by whomever,
wherever and for whatever purposes. Terrorism and
extremism should not be associated with any religion,
race, ethnicity, faith, value system, culture or society.
No religious tradition or doctrine could be depicted as
encouraging or inspiring acts of terrorism.
The international community needs to promote
economic and social development as the means to arrest
and eliminate extremism and terrorism. Socio-economic
marginalization is one of the conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism. The promotion of socio-economic

33

S/PV.6424

development in regions where extremism exists should
be a high priority for the international community.

Terrorism Committee and CTED, under its capable
leadership, will soon be able to deliver in this area.

I would like to underline that the important thing
is that countries should take action against terrorism
and should be provided with the resources and ability
to do so. We should follow procedures but must not get
caught up in procedures, processes and reporting
requirements, which should be secondary to the actual
action on the ground undertaken by States. Pakistan
has deployed 160,000 troops on its border with
Afghanistan and has set up 822 border posts to
intercept Al-Qaida and Taliban members. As a result of
terrorist acts and our efforts to root out terrorism, the
death total for Pakistan’s law-enforcement personnel
stands at 2,549, with 7,185 civilian casualties, while
6,790 law-enforcement personnel and 15,502 civilians
have been injured.

The Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee
and its Monitoring Team have a difficult task to
perform. We have noted the efforts of the 1267
Sanctions Committee to bring clarity to its working
methods, and that the Committee has made an effort to
improve
its
guidelines.
We
appreciate
the
improvements in information-gathering and the flow of
information between various actors, as well as the
introduction of a timetable for the de-listing procedure.
We hope that the Committee will continue to bring
greater transparency to its work.

We have noted the report of the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism, contained in document A/65/258. Mr. Martin
Scheinin has raised many fundamental questions on the
role of Security Council Committees in the area of
counter-terrorism, which we have carefully noted.
Pakistan has made considerable progress since
the last report of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) on countering the
financing of terrorism. Pakistan has become a party to
the United Nations Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism and has enacted a landmark
anti-money-laundering bill. A financial monitoring unit
has been established in the State Bank of Pakistan to
monitor suspicious financial transactions. Recently, 64
additional bank accounts and 750.8 million Pakistan
rupees have been frozen. CTED also organized a
workshop for Pakistani parliamentarians in Islamabad
in November 2009. Such workshops and visits are
helpful in human resource development.
A large number of Pakistan’s security personnel
have sacrificed their lives in counter-terrorism
operations. We need to enhance their capacity too. We
need counter-terrorist equipment, including safety
vests for police officers, night-vision equipment,
wireless interceptors and monitors. So far, the narrative
of capacity-building has not included the most obvious
requirements of States in concrete situations of
counter-terrorist operations. We trust that the Counter-

34

We are of the view that much needs to be done to
improve the revised procedures and meet the standards
required to ensure a fair hearing for listing or de-listing
individuals and entities. We welcome the appointment
of the Ombudsperson under resolution 1904 (2009), as
it improves compliance with one element of due
process, that is, accessibility. The institution of the
Ombudsperson can earn credibility if it is mandated to
make recommendations, if not decisions, to the
Committee, and if its recommendations can lead to
binding obligations for Member States.
We are not surprised that the decisions of
domestic and international courts and tribunals on the
1267 sanctions regime have garnered worldwide
attention. The preventive nature of the sanctions makes
the listings very simple and enforcement-friendly.
However, the legal community is more inclined to
verifiable evidence that might be acceptable in a court
of law. The questions of due process and effective
remedy are at the heart of courts’ deliberations. We
should consider the possibility of exclusive sharing of
verifiable evidence with courts, and of fixing a time
limit on a listing’s being in effect.
Pakistan was a member of the Security Council
when resolution 1540 (2004) was adopted. We agreed
that it was a timely measure for addressing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery to non-State actors. We also
identified the need to make the resolution’s follow-up
mechanism more inclusive, transparent and balanced in
terms of the responsibilities of States and the
international cooperation available to them to achieve
its objectives.

10-63741

S/PV.6424

Finally, I would once again underscore the
evolving nature of the counter-terrorism challenges we
are facing and the usefulness of these briefings.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would first like to congratulate your country,
Mr. President, on presiding over the Council this
month. I also thank your predecessor for doing the
same last month. We have also followed attentively the
presentations by the Chairs of the Committees in this
meeting, and we thank them for their briefings.
As the Council knows, Syria was one of the first
States to suffer from the scourge of terrorism, which it
fought against using various ways and means. We have
condemned terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, whatever its origins, whoever the
perpetrators may be and wherever they may come
from, whether an individual, a group or a State. Syria
has advocated against linking terrorism with any
particular religion, ethnicity, nationality or civilization,
and has also called for a definition of terrorism under
the aegis of the United Nations. We have called for
analyzing this phenomenon in all its aspects and for
discussing the conditions that lead to its spread. The
Syrian Arab Republic reaffirms the need to distinguish
between terrorism and the legitimate right of peoples to
resist foreign occupation.
We believe that force alone is inadequate in
fighting terrorism. It is essential to look at the
underlying causes, considering that all of the measures
used to counter terrorism must be taken in the
framework of international legitimacy and in
conformity with countries’ obligations stemming from
the United Nations Charter and international law. In
that regard, Syria reaffirms its compliance with
relevant international resolutions concerning the fight
against terrorism. We are convinced that the General
Assembly plays a central role in the counter-terrorism
struggle at the international level, as well as in
establishing international consensus.
We believe that the Security Council Committees
responsible for fighting terrorism can also play a role
in coordinating international counter-terrorism efforts
through transparent and neutral mechanisms. We joined
the consensus during the adoption of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in 2006
based on our support for all international efforts to that

10-63741

end and because we are convinced that the Strategy is
an important tool for facilitating international
cooperation in the fight against terrorism. We did so on
condition that Syria’s concerns be taken into account
with respect to the definition of terrorism and the
distinction between State terrorism and resistance.
State terrorism is very serious, perhaps the gravest kind
of terrorism. The greatest example of it are the daily
crimes committed by Israel against the Palestinian
people since their occupation of the Arab territories.
Perhaps the most abject example of this were the
killings that took place during the aggression against
Gaza and the freedom flotilla, which was attacked in
international waters as it sought to deliver
humanitarian assistance to the people of blockaded
Gaza, not to mention the assassination of national
Palestinian personalities in other countries.
Israel has falsified travel documents for its
killers, in flagrant violation of international law, and
threatens the use of nuclear terrorism as it flouts
international resolutions and law. Our citizens in the
occupied Syrian Golan have not been spared terrorism
and brutal occupation. Zionist terrorism victimizes the
people, trees, stones and the very soil of the occupied
Syrian Golan. This is a very clear example of State
terrorism in violation of international law, resolutions
and legitimacy, as well as human rights law. Syria has
also suffered the scourge of terrorism and terrorist acts
on its soil, the most recent of which was the operation
in Al-Kazzaz in 2008, which was condemned by the
Security Council at the time.
Convinced of the central role of the United
Nations in fighting terrorism at the international level,
Syria cooperates fully with the three Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004). We have created national
commissions to ensure the optimum implementation of
those resolutions and to promote cooperation with the
Committees of the Security Council established to
ensure their implementation.
The Syrian Arab Republic is making significant
efforts to fight money-laundering and the financing of
terrorism. We are members of the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF) and the Egmont Group. The
international community has recognized these Syrian
efforts. The report of the FATF mutual evaluation team
highlighted Syria’s efforts to that end:

35

S/PV.6424

“The Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic has in recent years succeeded in
adopting practical measures and important
legislation to that end, in conformity with
relevant international recommendations”.
The mutual evaluation report was a very important step
with respect to the confidence of relevant international
institutions. The work of the Syrian national
commission charged with following up the
implementation of the recommendations of the Middle
East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force has
allowed us to consider amending Legislative Decree
No. 33 of 2005, in line with international developments
and the recommendations of the FATF.
During his visit to Damascus on 13 December
2007, the Secretary General of INTERPOL declared
that “Syria is a pioneer in the fight against terrorism”.
He also said that “the INTERPOL office in Damascus
is one of the 10 best in the world”. Given that there are
186 such offices throughout the world, this
demonstrates Syria’s serious and practical approach to
fighting terrorism internationally.
With respect to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban, we are taking
every measure stipulated therein. With respect to
resolution 1373 (2001), Syria periodically presents
national reports in the framework of international
efforts. With respect to resolution 1540 (2004), in 1968
Syria was one of the first signatories to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Syria opposed to the possession of nuclear weapons by
any country.
In conclusion, and despite the threat posed to the
Middle East by the presence of an occupier that usurps
other people’s lands and resorts to the worst forms of
State terrorism in flagrant disregard of international
law and resolutions and of international appeals to sign
the NPT, Syria calls on the international community to
pressure Israel to comply with international
resolutions, in particular those of the Security Council.
The President: I
representative of Israel.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Waxman (Israel): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate on counterterrorism. I would also like to express my appreciation
to the Chairpersons of the s committees for their

36

professional work and for their informative briefings
this morning.
Considering the crucial role that the United
Nations plays in coordinating global counter-terrorism
efforts, it is of the utmost importance that there be
close cooperation among all three of its subsidiary
bodies, as well as with the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), on this issue. We
welcome the periodic informal briefings for Member
States held by the counter-terrorism committees, and
we encourage them to continue to hold them.
In September, at the second review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, Member
States reaffirmed their collective commitment to
making progress on these issues and resolved to
implement the Strategy. The review also reaffirmed the
important role of the CTITF in enhancing international
cooperation and capacity-building in this field.
Every day, at least one Member State suffers from
some form of a terrorist attack. No matter whether
these attacks are in the form of roadside bombs, letter
bombs, suicide bombers, threats to synagogues or
kidnappings, their objectives remain the same: to instil
fear in the population and advance terrorists’ goals
through abhorrent violent means.
We in Israel know first-hand the devastation
caused by terrorism. Hamas and Hizbullah are among
the most dangerous terrorist organizations worldwide,
threatening not just Israel’s security but also the
stability of the entire region. The growing arsenal of
missiles and rockets, combined with the continuous
transfer and smuggling of weapons and ammunition to
these organizations, including by Iran and Syria,
represent an imminent threat.
In this regard, it should come as no surprise that
the speaker before me lectured all of us about
terrorism. Syria is the prime sanctuary for terrorists,
hosting the headquarters of numerous terrorist
organizations in Damascus and financing, sponsoring
and training terrorist activities in and from its soil, in
clear violations of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624
(2005) and 1701 (2006) numerous other resolutions.
An important briefing organized by the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) in
October closely examined the elements of resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) relating to safe haven for
terrorists. This issue is of particular concern to my

10-63741

S/PV.6424

delegation, as in our region, as I said before, several
Member States have granted safe haven to terrorists
who seek to attack Israel by any means.
Regarding the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, I would like to commend
Executive Director Mike Smith for his able leadership.
We appreciate his ongoing dialogue with Member
States, as well as his valuable informal briefings. My
delegation fully supports the renewal of CTED’s
mandate, which will be considered next month.
Israel continues to strengthen its professional
cooperation with CTED and to share best practices
with other interested parties, including by means of
technical cooperation. For example, Israel was among
the donor States that contributed to the successful
workshop entitled “Challenges to effective border
control facing East African countries”, which was held
in Nairobi, Kenya, in June. Our contribution to the
workshop was part of Israel’s broader bilateral
cooperation with and technical assistance to States in
the Horn of Africa.
In a similar vein, Israel has taken a keen interest
in supporting other initiatives in West Africa, Asia and
South America in the multilateral, regional and
bilateral spheres. Among the particular areas of Israel’s
bilateral cooperation are those relating to preventing
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism,
public safety, security aviation, and the protection and
security of borders.
In this regard, earlier this month the Israel Export
and International Cooperation Institute convened its
first Israeli Homeland Security Conference on Security
Technology Operations Policies. Among the highlights
addressed in the Conference were airport security and
innovative methods and technologies for the protection
and safety of cities. Over 500 homeland security
experts from around the world participated and
contributed to its success.
In September 2010, the International Institute for
Counter-Terrorism held its tenth annual international
conference, in Herzliya, Israel. The conference
addressed numerous aspects of counter-terrorism,
including aviation terrorism and security, the processes
of de-radicalization and the challenges of asymmetric
warfare.

10-63741

Both those conferences served as platforms for
enhancing international and bilateral cooperation in
that field by providing the essential opportunity for
high-profile experts from a wide range of disciplines to
establish professional relationships.
Furthermore, Israel’s counter-terrorism agencies
cooperate with a large number of regional
organizations, including NATO, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the InterAmerican Committee against Terrorism and the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building
Measures in Asia, including in the context of assisting
third countries. Israel also closely cooperates with and
contributes to the work of the Terrorism Prevention
Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime.
The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and
Taliban and associated individuals and entities remains
an important part of the effort to isolate terrorists and
their means to inflict harm. Israel welcomes the
considerable progress made towards promoting clear
and fair procedures concerning the inclusion of
individuals and entities on the consolidated list. In that
regard, we welcome the appointment in June 2010 of
Judge Kimberly Prost as Ombudsperson to address key
aspects of due process and human rights concerns. We
also welcome the recent completion of the review of
the consolidated list, following the dedicated work of
the Chair of the Committee and its members.
Finally, we believe that it is critical to continue to
develop
international
standards
against
the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and dualuse items. The international community must continue
to seek and implement measures that keep the world’s
most dangerous weapons out of the hands of its most
dangerous individuals, especially in our region.
In that regard, I wish to reiterate Israel’s full
support for resolution 1540 (2004). Israel believes that,
in order to enhance the dialogue between Member
States and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), it would be very
helpful to receive periodic briefings by the Expert
Coordinator on the work of the Committee.
The struggle against terrorism requires our joint
will, effort and action. We appreciate this opportunity
for dialogue, and will continue to actively engage in

37

S/PV.6424

and support the important work of the Council’s
counter-terrorism Committees.

the fight against terrorism and to improvement in the
security situation.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.

As long as terrorism remains a threat, the fight
against it will continue. By the same token, it is widely
recognized that military efforts alone are not the
solution to Afghanistan’s security problem. The
reconciliation and reintegration of former combatants
with no links to terrorist organizations are critical to
achieving lasting peace and security.

Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): As this is the first time
that I am taking the floor this month, permit me at the
outset to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for November. We thank you
for holding today’s debate on the work of the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council dealing with
terrorism.
Afghanistan remains the primary victim of
international terrorism. Nearly a decade ago,
Afghanistan and the international community joined
hands to end the rule of the terrorists and extremists
who used our country as a base for international
terrorism. Today, notwithstanding important progress
on the political, social and economic fronts, the
terrorist campaign of the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other
extremist groups continues to be the main challenge to
Afghanistan’s
security,
reconstruction
and
development.
As we have echoed time and again in this very
Council, terrorism in our part of the world is a growing
threat to international peace and security. The enemy
we face is part of a complex and sophisticated network,
with safe havens and sanctuaries in our region from
which terrorists still enjoy support. Afghanistan
remains alarmed at the presence of those support
centres and reiterates that, unless they are addressed,
the terrorism that has been raging like wildfire will,
regrettably, continue.
As we speak, our national army and police are
engaged in fierce combat against enemy forces in joint
military operations with international forces. We have
taken the fight to the terrorists and prevented their
ability to carry out large-scale conventional attacks.
That is why they resort to desperate tactics, such as
suicide bombings, assassinations and abductions.
Further, as we get ready to begin the transition
process, we have given new focus to building the size
and strength of our national army and police. A
detailed plan for the transition strategy will be
presented at the NATO summit in Lisbon later this
week. We are confident that a stronger and more
efficient security force will lead to further progress in

38

Afghanistan commends the Security Council for
the able manner in which it is leading international
efforts in combating terrorism. In that regard, we
highlight the importance of the Security Council
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).
The 1267 Committee remains one of the most
important instruments of the Security Council in
countering terrorism. Consistent with resolution 1904
(2009), the Committee has taken a number of important
steps to increase the transparency and effectiveness of
its work. In July, the Committee revised its working
guidelines. Another important achievement is the
publication of narrative summaries for listing. That
new practice provides Member States with concise
information, such as the date of and reason for listing.
Moreover, in August the Committee concluded its
review of all individuals on the consolidated list, which
led to the de-listing of additional names.
We join other speakers in underscoring the
importance of a periodic review of the list so as to
ensure its accuracy. In that connection, Afghanistan
welcomes the de-listing of 10 former Taliban members
during the course of the year. Such measures will
benefit Afghanistan’s peace and reconciliation
initiative. That said, we urge the Committee to also
give consideration to Afghanistan’s additional delisting requests, and we look forward to the Monitoring
Team’s visit to Kabul at the end of this month.
In regard to the 1373 Committee, we underscore
its important work and welcome the continued efforts
of the Committee and its Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate for increased collaboration with Member
States.
Terrorists have proved their readiness to terrorize
people, societies and countries as a demonstration of
their strength. They will spare no effort and go to all
lengths, including resorting to nuclear, chemical and

10-63741

S/PV.6424

biological terrorism. In that connection, we commend
the ongoing efforts of the 1540 Committee to prevent
non-State actors from participating in the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction.

country has taken to implement the provisions of that
and other relevant resolutions. Those steps include
stepping up border control security and surveillance
measures at entry and exit checkpoints.

Afghanistan is actively engaged in implementing
the relevant Security Council resolutions on terrorism,
on which we have presented national reports. Needless
to say, Afghanistan is party to all 13 conventions on
terrorism. Moreover, Afghanistan’s relevant national
institutions, in particular the security and judicial
sectors, are working diligently to further strengthen our
counter-terrorism efforts.

Moreover, we have intensified our fight against
drug trafficking originating mainly from an eastern
neighbouring country. Given the fact that very often
proceeds from narcotic drugs are used as a source for
the financing of terrorism, Iran’s efforts in that regard
have undoubtedly made a fundamental contribution to
the global fight against terrorism. Just as importantly,
we are committed both to fighting terrorism through
effective measures that prevent the planning,
preparation and execution of acts of terrorism as well
as by combating other forms of transnational crime,
within our borders and beyond.

In conclusion, I should like to state that the fight
against terrorism is a key component of our partnership
with the international community, and we look forward
to strengthening that partnership in the coming years.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate,
which is an excellent opportunity for delegations to
hear from the Chairs of the key subsidiary bodies of
the Security Council and to provide input into their
activities. I also wish to commend the Chairs of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1540 (2004) for their work and their briefings today.
We hope that this debate will help to revitalize and
strengthen international cooperation in combating the
threat of terrorism under the auspices of the United
Nations.

In that regard, I should like echo the conclusion
of the Chairman of the CTC in his recent report,
namely, that the Executive Directorate and the
Committee, as important international counterterrorism bodies and subsidiary organs of the Security
Council, could play a great role by “work[ing] with
their neighbours so that their common counterterrorism defences are as effective as possible.”
(S/2010/569, annex, para. 39)

We have all acknowledged and emphasized the
important contribution that the United Nations counterterrorism mechanisms can and should make to our
collective effort to fight terrorism. It is in that belief
that my Government has been committed to
cooperating with these mechanisms, including the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001). We highly appreciate the work done by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) under the able
chairmanship of His Excellency Ambassador Apakan.

The Islamic Republic of Iran has provided its
national report to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) on the measures it has taken
to implement the resolution. As clearly stated in that
report, based on its principled positions and contractual
commitments and as a State party to all international
instruments banning weapons of mass destruction —
namely, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention, the
Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention and the
1925 Geneva Protocol — the Islamic Republic of Iran
is very keen on the implementation of those treaties.
However, the continued existence and development of
weapons of mass destruction, the possibility of their
use or threat of use and the prospect of non-State actors
acquiring such weapons make them all the more
threatening to the whole international community.

The Islamic Republic of Iran, as a clear victim of
terrorism, has taken great steps to implement the
Security Council’s resolutions on terrorism, including
resolution 1373 (2001). We have submitted six national
reports on our implementation of the resolution, in
which we have set out the concrete steps that our

Despite limited bilateral and unilateral arms
reductions, such efforts fall far short of international
expectations for real and effective steps towards the
total elimination of nuclear weapons. Nuclear-weapon
States are obligated to comply with their legally
binding commitments to fully work towards the

10-63741

39

S/PV.6424

elimination of their nuclear weapons. It is obvious that,
as long as those weapons exist, their continued
existence itself and the development and deployment
of thousands of nuclear warheads will not only threaten
international peace and security; there is also always
the risk that they could fall into the hands of terrorists
and non-State actors. Therefore, the compliance of all
Member States with all their obligations under existing
WMD disarmament and non-proliferation conventions,
including the universality of those instruments, is vital
to eliminating the risk that such weapons could fall
into the hands of terrorists and non-State actors.
I would like to reiterate that we will continue to
work closely with the counter-terrorism mechanisms
established by resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004). The scourge of terrorism requires the
international community to act in concert and in a
comprehensive manner, free of double standards and
selective and discriminatory considerations and
narrowly defined political objectives. The necessary
political will and resolve need to be constantly in
evidence for the international community to send a
truly strong and unambiguous signal of our resolve to
fight terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Before I conclude, I would like to respond to the
reference made to my country by the representative of
the Israeli regime. I would like to place on record that
my delegation rejects the baseless allegations and
distortions in his statement. This is yet another tired
practice by that regime to distract the attention of the
international community from its State terrorism and
possession of a nuclear arsenal, as well as its criminal
policies and abhorrent atrocities in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your conduct of
this debate.
The fight against terrorism is a responsibility of
all countries and should be carried out within the
framework of multilateralism and international
cooperation based on respect for self-determination,
sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs
States, in accordance with the Charter of United
Nations and international and regional conventions and
protocols on the subject.

40

Some Governments draw up lists of countries that
allegedly collaborate with this crime, while they shelter
dangerous international terrorists on their soil. We
should recall that resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005) urged States not to give refuge to terrorists and
not to resort to political motivations for refusing
requests for extradition.
It has been 34 years since the bombing of Cubana
Airlines flight 455 over the waters of Barbados, in
which 73 innocent civilians were murdered, and Luis
Posada Carriles, the person responsible for that
terrorist attack, remains free in the United States. On
July 2, the Salvadoran terrorist Francisco Chávez
Abarca — who is accused of being responsible for
several explosive attacks in Cuba — was caught at
Venezuela’s Maiquetía International Airport. He
confessed that he had gone to Venezuela to sabotage
the parliamentary elections and that he had the support
of Luis Posada Carriles. We therefore reiterate to the
Government of the United States our request for the
extradition of Luis Posada Carriles or, barring that, at
least try him for the terrorist acts he has confessed.
Terrorists Raúl Díaz Peña, José Antonio Colina
and Germán Rodolfo Varela, sentenced to prison in
Venezuela for their involvement in placing bombs at
the Spanish and Colombian consulates in 2003, have
fled to the United States. Those crimes were committed
a few months after the oil sabotage and coup against
President Hugo Chávez Frias. Venezuela has requested
the Government of the United States to extradite
Colina and Varela. But that has been denied and they
have been given refuge and protection on the grounds
of supposed political asylum. They have also granted a
visa to Raúl Díaz Peña, a fugitive from Venezuelan
justice.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela supported
General Assembly resolution 64/297. We reiterate our
commitment to the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Venezuela is committed to the fight against
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, whatever
its origin or motive, including State terrorism, which
today is one of the most evil instruments of subjugation
and neocolonial domination.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.

10-63741

S/PV.6424

Mr. Sorreta (Philippines): A copy of my remarks
has been distributed, and I would like to deliver a
shortened version of those remarks.
Terrorism continues to make its presence felt
throughout the world. In its many forms and
manifestations, it threatens the peace and stability of
nations, endangers the lives of our peoples, impedes
national, regional and global growth and development,
and more insidiously, it breaks apart the precious bonds
between peoples, fostering deep-seated anger, fear,
suspicion and intolerance.
All nations share the responsibility of preventing,
neutralizing and combating the threat of terrorism. The
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is
an important step forward in harnessing our collective
experience and expertise as we strive to rid the world
of the threat of terrorism.
We laud the recent workshop held in Bali,
Indonesia, organized by the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, and we fully support its
outcome. We would like to emphasize the point that, if
counter-terrorism strategies are to be effective, they
must be comprehensive and encompass a combination
of hard and soft approaches, including the use of
interfaith dialogue, as both instrument and objective, in
countering terrorism.
In order to draw nations and peoples closer
together in understanding and respect, the Philippines
is working closely with Pakistan and other partners
again this year on a draft resolution on interreligious
and intercultural dialogue and cooperation for peace,
which we hope will garner increased support.
As we strive towards further strengthening our
capacities to combat terrorism through increased
cooperation in intelligence information sharing, we
wish to draw cautious attention to the issuance of
travel advisories, especially those that relate to
possible terrorist attacks. While the Philippines
recognizes the responsibility of States to protect their
citizens, we believe that Governments must exercise
due care and diligence in issuing travel advisories.
Advisories affect not only travelling citizens but also
the lifeline and economy of a country that is the subject
of a travel advisory. Governments must clearly
distinguish between threats posed by ordinary criminal
elements and those posed by terrorists, which are two
very distinct categories. When a travel advisory does
not distinguish between the two, it does a disservice to

10-63741

the country issuing it and the country that is subject to
it.
Our work is far from done. We must remain
steadfast. Only with our sustained commitment and
cooperation and a balanced approach can we break
terrorism’s backbone and win this battle together.
The President: The representative of Turkey has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Sevi (Turkey): Turkey aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of the European
Union.
I would like to take this opportunity to make
some very brief additional remarks on the sanctions
regime under the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999). Turkey believes that the
overall review process is important and should be
undertaken in an effective manner. The Ombudsperson
will contribute to the effectiveness of the process and
to the rule of law, including by preventing possible
unfair application of the listing process. Therefore, we
fully support the Ombudsperson.
On the other hand, all counter-terrorism measures
should respect the basic human rights of individuals. In
this regard, the right to reply and object of those
persons who have been added to the consolidated list
should be protected.
The President: The representative of the United
States has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Donovan (United States of America):
Contrary to the statements the Council has heard, the
United States has taken a number of actions with
respect to Luis Posada Carriles. The actions of the
United States are consistent with international law as
well as with our domestic legal framework, which
provides for due process and various constitutional
safeguards.
I would like to give the Council a brief overview
of the steps the United States has taken with respect to
Posada within our legal framework. Posada entered the
United States illegally in early 2005. Posada was
detained by immigration authorities in the United
States on 17 May 2005, and he was, in accordance with
United States law, placed in removal proceedings. This
order remains in effect.

41

S/PV.6424

Moreover, the United States sought and obtained
a criminal indictment charging Posada with violations
of our immigration laws. On 8 April 2009, new
criminal charges were brought against Posada in that
case, accusing him of lying to United States
Government officials about his involvement in terrorist
bombings that took place in Havana in 1997. Trial in
that case is presently scheduled to commence in
January 2011.
In sum, with respect to Posada, the United States
continues to be engaged in an ongoing series of actions
consistent with our legal requirements and due process.
In the case of the five Cubans accused of spying,
the facts of the case negate the misrepresentations
issued by the Cuban Government and others in relation
to it. The Cuban five were tried in United States federal
court and were accorded all guarantees of due process
provided under the United States Constitution. They
were convicted on numerous charges, including acting
in the United States as agents of a foreign Power
without making the required notification, conspiring to
do so and conspiring to defraud the United States
concerning its governmental functions and rights. In
addition, three were convicted of conspiracy to commit
espionage related to the covert penetration of United
States military facilities, and one was convicted of
conspiracy to commit murder.
The defendants have never denied that they were
covert agents of the Cuban regime. The defendants
have made full use of their extensive due process
rights, benefiting from their vast procedural protections
and the provision of United States Government-funded
legal assistance. The five convicted Cuban spies are
serving sentences in federal institutions throughout the
United States. They are held among and have the same
privileges as those available to the general prison
population.
The President: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I am sorry for requesting the floor once again.
Nothing justifies terrorism, which my country
categorically condemns, whatever the forms, reasons or
pretexts. That is our international legal position,
sanctioned by the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
adopted by the United Nations in 2006. My country

42

took an active part in the adoption of the Strategy,
which we continue to support.
The ridiculous attempt by the representative of
Israel to conflate terrorism, which is a denounced
international practice, with the right of peoples under
foreign occupation to resist occupation does not
deceive anyone. Its only objective is to distract
everyone from Israel’s State terrorism, which is well
known and well documented.
The United Nations, through an historic
resolution of the 1970s, declared that occupation was
the gravest form of aggression. We take that as a
starting point. The United Nations has documented
Israeli State terrorism since 1948. This terrorism
began, as everyone knows, in the form of terrorist acts
carried out by various gangs, such as the Irgun, Stern
and Haganah, whose goals were to kill messengers of
peace, including in particular Count Bernadotte, the
United Nations envoy. This was followed by the mass
killing of Palestinians to make them flee their land.
The massacres of Deir Yassin, Qibya, Kafr Qasem,
Jenin, Beit Hanoun and various others are well known
to everyone.
Next, this State terrorism took aim at
neighbouring countries: Qana 1, Qana 2, the Golan,
Tunis, the Sudan, Egypt and Jordan; finally, as we
know, it reached Dubai. Among all these acts, Israel
hijacked a civilian aircraft — a Syrian plane — for the
first time in 1954. Then, in 1971, it brought down a
civilian Libyan plane.
Conventional terrorism has
transformed into nuclear terrorism.

recently

been

Israel, as everyone knows, spies on its closest
allies, including the United States of America. A great
number of former Israeli officers work in the trade in
children’s organs, as has been internationally
documented.
I recall that Israel has set up 600 military
checkpoints in the West Bank in a space that is no
bigger than 5,000 square kilometres — one can picture
Manhattan, for example, with 600 security
checkpoints. Moreover, the settlements number in the
hundreds, devouring swathes of territory, killing
inhabitants and driving out the Palestinians. There is
also the internationally condemned and criminal
blockade of Gaza and daily threats of war and
aggression.

10-63741

S/PV.6424

The illegal arms trade conducted by Israel fuels
terrorism, as we know. According to international
reports, including a report on arms published in
Sweden, Israel is ranked fourth among States active in
the international arms trade. If that does not constitute
terrorism, and if strangling peace is not international
terrorism, then what is terrorism? The Security Council
must question and stop Israeli State terrorism and make
no exception for Israel or allow it to be above the law.
The President: The representative of Lebanon
has asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Lebanon
regrets the fact that some speakers have tried to use
today’s debate to distract us from our main work,
which is to consider the work of the technical
committees involved in the fight against terrorism. We
therefore reject the conflation of the legitimate right of
people to resist foreign occupation with terrorism.
Worse still, the party that did so was the one that not
only occupies other people’s territories, but also
attacks its neighbours and defies this Council’s
resolutions and the provisions of international law. We
therefore see an absolute need to agree unanimously on
a definition of terrorism, which my delegation has long
called for.
The President: The representative of Cuba has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Given the reports that we have submitted to it, the
Security Council is very familiar with the case of the
well known, self-confessed terrorist Luis Posada
Carriles, who is responsible for the mid-air explosion
of a Cubana de Aviación plane with 73 people on
board. He is also responsible for many acts of terrorism
against my country in which citizens of other countries
have also died. Despite the fact that it has all the
evidence against Posada Carriles that we have
provided, the Government of the United States, as its
representative has just acknowledged, refuses to try
Posada Carriles for terrorism and prosecutes him
instead on minor charges.
Cuba reiterates that the handling of the case of
Posada Carriles by the Government of the United
States, if he is not extradited to Venezuela or tried as
what he is, a well known terrorist, is a flagrant
violation of resolution 1373 (2001).

10-63741

The revealing statements made by the confessed
terrorist Francisco Chávez Abarca, who was detained
by the Venezuelan authorities as he was attempting to
carry out an attack against stability in that country and
other brotherly countries, confirm details of the new
pathways being exploited by international terrorism
and provide irrefutable proof of the guilt of Posada
Carriles and his sponsor, the United States. The plans
of this terrorist included sinking ships loaded with oil
en route to Cuba.
The case of the five young anti-terrorist Cubans
in the United States is also well known, despite the
wall of silence that the Government of the United
States has sought to set up around them. These five
young Cubans infiltrated terrorist organizations in the
United States and uncovered plans for terrorist acts
against Cuba that would have claimed the lives of
Cuban and United States citizens. The Cuban
Government delivered all of that information to the
United States Government. Instead of imprisoning the
terrorists, the United States Government imprisoned
the five young Cuban counter-terrorists. They were
sentenced unjustly to long periods of incarceration in a
rigged and politically manipulated trial, without
evidence, in the city of Miami, surrounded by intense
media propaganda. Even the prosecutor admitted that
there was not enough evidence to support any of the
charges made against them. Nonetheless, they find
themselves unjustly imprisoned in this country. The
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention of the defunct
Commission on Human Rights spoke out on this case.
Many
organizations
of
international
lawyers
throughout the world have spoken out about this case.
The case is well known despite the wall of silence that
attempts have been made to erect around it.
Over the past 50 years, my country has been the
victim of many terrorist acts organized within the
territory of the United Stares. Those acts have claimed
3,478 lives in my country, and a further 2,099 people
have been injured.
Double standards cannot prevail when it comes to
terrorism. It will never be possible to eradicate
terrorism if only some acts are condemned while others
are covered up.
Cuba urges the United States Government once
again to try Posada Carriles as what he is — a terrorist.
Cuba urges once again — backed by the clamour of the
international community and the growing clamour of

43

S/PV.6424

the people of the United States, despite the wall of
silence that the authorities wish to establish around this
case — for the five Cuban anti-terrorist fighters to be
set free.

The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 2 p.m.

44

10-63741
