IX. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

ing parties also to the additional Protocols at the earliest
possible date;
4. Calls upon all States becoming parties to Protocol I
to consider making the declaration provided for under ar­
ticle 90 of that Protocol;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-ffth session a report on the
status of the additional Protocols based on information re­
ceived from Member States;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fifth session the item entitled "Status of the Proto­
cols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts: re­
port of the Secretary-General".
76th plenary meeting
9 December 1988
43/162. Progressive development of the principles and
norms of international law relating to the new
international economic order
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, the General Assembly is called upon
to initiate studies and make recommendations for the pur­
pose of encouraging the progressive development of inter­
national law and its codification,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Pro­
gramme of Action on the Establishment of a New Interna­
tional Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Du­
ties of States, 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on devel­
opment and international economic co-operation and
35/56 of 5 December 1980, the annex to which contains
the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade,
Recalling also its resolutions 34/150 of 17 December
1979 and 35/166 of 15 December 1980, entitled "Consoli­
dation and progressive development of the principles and
norms of international economic law relating in particular
to the legal aspects of the new international economic or­
der", and its resolutions 36/107 of 10 December 1981,
37/103 of 16 December 1982, 38/128 of 19 December
1983, 39/75 of 13 December 1984, 40/67 of 11 December
1985, 41/73 of 3 December 1986 and 42/149 of? Decem­
ber 1987, entitled "Progressive development of the princi­
ples and norms of international law relating to the new in­
ternational economic order",
Bearing in mind the urgent need to adopt measures to
reactivate the process of international economic co­
operation and the negotiations undertaken for that pur­
pose, particularly in view of the economic difficulties en­
countered by the developing countries,
Considering the close link between the establishment of
a just and equitable international economic order and the
existence of an appropriate legal framework,
Recognizing the need for the codification and progres­
sive development of the principles and norms of interna­
tional law relating to the new international economic or­
der,
Recalling the analytical study 14 submitted to the Gen­
eral Assembly at its thirty-ninth session by the United Na­
tions Institute for Training and Research,
14 A/39/504/Add.1, annex

III.

279

1. Notes with appreciation the views and comments
submitted by Governments pursuant to resolutions 40/67,
41/73 and 42/149; 15
2. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to seek proposals of Member States
concerning the most appropriate procedures to be adopted
with regard to the consideration of the analytical study, as
well as the codification and progressive development of
the principles and norms of international law relating to
the new international economic order;
(b) To include the proposals received in accordance
with subparagraph (a) above in a report to be submitted to
the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session;
3. Recommends that the Sixth Committee should con­
sider making a fnal decision at the forty-fourth session of
the General Assembly on the question of the appropriate
forum within its framework which would undertake the
task of completing the elaboration of the process of codifi­
cation and progressive development of the principles and
norms of international law relating to the new interna­
tional economic order, taking into account the proposals
and suggestions which have been or will be submitted by
Member States on the matter;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Progressive devel­
opment of the principles and norms of international law
relating to the new international economic order''.
76th plenary meeting
9 December 1988
43/163. Peaceful
States

settlement

of disputes between

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Peaceful settlement
of disputes between States",
Recalling its resolution 37/10 of 15 November 1982, by
which it approved the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
Settlement of International Disputes, annexed thereto,
Recalling also its resolutions 38/131 of 19 December
1983, 39/79 of 13 December 1984, 40/68 of 11 December
1985, 41/74 of 3 December 1986 and 42/150 of? Decem­
ber 1987.
Deeply concerned at the continuation of conflict situa­
tions and the emergence of new sources of disputes and
tension in international life, and especially at the growing
tendency to resort to force or the threat of the use of force
and to intervention in internal affairs, and at the escalation
of the arms race, which gravely endanger the indepen­
dence and security of States as well as international peace
and security,
Taking into account the need to exert the utmost effort in
order to settle any situations and disputes between States
on the basis of sovereign equality and exclusively by peace­
ful means, in conformity with the Charter of the United
Nations, and to avoid any military actions and hostilities
against other States, which can only make more difficult
the solution of existing problems,
Considering that the question of the peaceful settlement
of disputes should represent one of the central concerns
for States and for the United Nations and that efforts for
strengthening the process of peaceful settlement of dis­
putes should be continued,
1

'

A/41/536, A/42/481 and Add.I and 2 and A/43/529 and Add.I

280

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

Emphasizing the responsibility of every State to promote
a policy of respect for the national independence and sov­
ereignty of other States, non-interference in internal affairs
and good understanding and co-operation, which is a
basic requirement for reducing tension and for establish­
ing a climate of peace and mutual confidence in the world,
Taking note with interest of the report of the Secretary­
General, 16 submitted in accordance with resolution
42/150, which contains useful opinions, proposals and
considerations for a broader implementation of the
Manila Declaration,
1. Again urges all States to observe and promote in
good faith the provisions of the Manila Declaration on the
Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes in the settle­
ment of their international disputes;
2. Stresses the need to continue efforts to strengthen
the process of the peaceful settlement of disputes through
progressive development and codification of international
law and through enhancing the effectiveness of the United
Nations in this field;
3. Calls upon Member States to make full use, in accor­
dance with the Charter of the United Nations, of the
framework provided by the United Nations for the peace­
ful settlement of disputes and international problems;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session a further re­
port containing the replies of Member States, relevant
United Nations bodies and specialized agencies, regional
intergovernmental organizations and interested interna­
tional legal bodies on the implementation of the Manila
Declaration and on ways and means of increasing the ef­
fectiveness of this instrument;
5. Decides that the question of the peaceful settlement
of disputes between States shall be considered at its forty­
fourth session as a separate agenda item, in conjunction
with the item of the provisional agenda entitled "Report of
the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Na­
tions and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organi­
zation".
76th plenary meeting
9 December 1988
43/164. Draft Code of Crimes against the Peace and
Security of Mankind
The General Assembly,
Mindful of Article 13, paragraph 1 a, of the Charter of
the United Nations, which provides that the General As­
sembly shall initiate studies and make recommendations
for the purpose of encouraging the progressive develop­
ment of international Jaw and its codification,
Recalling its resolution 177 (II) of 21 November 1947,
by which it directed the International Law Commission to
prepare a draft code of offences against the peace and
security of mankind,
Having considered the draft Code of Offences against the
Peace and Security of Mankind prepared by the Commis­
sion and submitted to the General Assembly in 1954, 17
Recalling its belief that the elaboration of a code of of­
fences against the peace and security of mankind could
contribute to strengthening international peace and

security and thus to promoting and implementing the pur­
poses and principles set forth in the Charter,
Recalling also its resolution 36/106 of 10 December
1981, in which it invited the Commission to resume its
work with a view to elaborating the draft Code and to ex­
amine it with the required priority in order to review it,
taking into account the results achieved by the process of
the progressive development of international law,
Bearing in mind that the Commission should fulfil its
task on the basis of early elaboration of draft articles
thereof,
Having considered chapter IV of the report of the Com­
mission on the work of its fortieth session, 18
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the subject, 19
Taking into account the views expressed during the de­
bate on this item at its forty-third session, 20
Recognizing the importance and urgency of the subject,
l. Invites the International Law Commission to con­
tinue its work on the elaboration of the draft Code of
Crimes against the Peace and Security of Mankind includ­
ing the elaboration of a list of crimes, taking into account
the progress made at its fortieth session, as well as the
views expressed during the forty-third session of the Gen­
eral Assembly;
2. Notes the approach currently envisaged by the
Commission in dealing with the judicial authority to be as­
signed for the implementation of the provisions of the
draft Code, and encourages the Commission to explore
further all possible alternatives on the question;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to seek
the views of Member States regarding the conclusions con­
tained in paragraph 69 (c) (i) of the Commission's report
on the work of its thirty-fifth session;21
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to include the
views received from Member States in accordance with
paragraph 3 above in a report to be submitted to the Gen­
eral Assembly at its forty-fourth session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Draft Code of
Crimes against the Peace and Security of Mankind", to be
considered in conjunction with the examination of the re­
port of the Commission.
76th plenary meeting
9 December 1988
43/165. United Nations Convention on International
Bills of Exchange and International Promis­
sory Notes
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December
1966, by which it created the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law with a mandate to further the
progressive harmonization and unification of the law of in­
ternational trade and in that respect to bear in mind the in­
terests of all peoples, in particular those of developing
countries, in the extensive development of international
trade,
18 Ibid., Forty-third Session, Supplement No.

16 A/43/530 and Add. I and 2.

17 Official Records ofrhe General Assembly, Ninth Session. Supplement
No. 9 (A/2693), para. 54.

19 A/43/525 and Add. I.

10 (A/43/10).

20 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-third Session.

Sixth Committee, 25th to 40th and 48th meetings, and corrigendum.
21 Ibid., Thirty-eighth Session, Supplement No. JO (A/38/10).
