General Asscmhly-Thirty-second Session

94
A rticle VII
EXCHANGE

OF

INFORMA l ,ON

AND

llOt'Ui\lfo'-iT,;

Subject to such a,rangements as may be necessary for the
safeguanJing of confidc,ntial rnakriaL a Lill and prompt exchang~ of information ami documcnt, on mattcr.i concerning
tourism shall be madc betw;:;en thc Unitcd Natio'ls and th~
World Tourism Organization. The World Tourism Organiz:1tion agrees to transmit to the Economic and Social Council
reports on its activitics and prngrammes.
Ar;ic/e V'/
STAThTICAL

SI '!\ lCI ,

l. The World Tourism Organization takes note that the
United Nations is the central agency for the collection.
analysis, publication, standardization and improvement of
statistics on tourism as part of th~ statistics in respect of
international travel. national accounting and other general
statistical information.

2. The United Nations recognizes the World Tourism
Organization as the appropriate organization for the collecti-011, analysis, publication, standardization and improvement
of statistics within the sphere of the World Tourism Organization, without prejuJice to the right of the United Nations to
concern itself with such statistics in so far as they may be
essential for its own purposes or for the improvement of
statistics throughout the world.
3. The United Nations and the World Tourism OrganiLation agree to combine ,their efforts to secure the greatest pos
sible usefulness and utilization of such statistical information
and to minimize the burden placed upon national Governments and other organizations from which the information
may be collected.
Article IX
IMPLLMENTATION

OF THE AGREEMENT

The Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Secretary-General of the World Tourism Organization may
enter into such supplementary arrangements for the implementation of this Agreement as may be found desirable.
Article X
ENTRY

1.

INTO FORCE AND REV1SION

OF THE

AGREEMENT

This Agreement shall come into force upon its approval

by the General Acsembly of the United Nations and the
General Assembly of the World Tourism Organization.
2.

This Agrecment may be amended or revised by agree-

ment between the United Nations and the World Tourism

Organization, and such amendment or revision shall come
into force upon approval by the General Assembly of thc
United Nations and the General Assembly of the World
Tourism Organization.

32/157.

World Tourism Organization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its rcsolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration
and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of
a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 ( S-VII)
of 16 September 197 5 on development and international economic co-operation,
Reca/ling also articlc 27 of the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling further its resolutions 2529 (XXIV) of 5
December 1969 and 2802 (XXVI) of 14 Decembcr
1971 concerning, ínter alia, the establishment of the

World Tourism Organization as an intergovernmcntal
organization, as wcll as the Economic and Social Council decision of 20 May 1971 on co-operation and relations betwecn the United Natio:1s and thc World
Tourism Orgimization,'1 7
Na:ing that thc statutes of the World Tourism OrJan:zation,H-" which wcrc adopted at Mexico City on
'27 Scptcmbcr 1970, cntcrcd into force on 2 January Jl)75.
Noting further article 3 of the statutes of thc World
Tourism Organization, which statcs that thc organization, in order to establish its central role in thc field of
tourism, shall cstablish and maintain effectivc collaboration with the appropriatc organs of the Unitcd Nations
and its specializcd agencies,
Rccafling its rcsolution 32/ 156 of 19 December
1977, by which it approved the Agreement on Coopcration and Relationships betwccn the United Nations
and the World Tourism Organization,
Bearing in mind article II of that Agreement, undcr
which the World Tourism Organization agrees to suhrnit as soon as possible to its General Assembly or its
Exccutivc CounciL as appropriate, ali formal rccommendations that the United Nations may makc to it
and, in due course, to report to the United Nations on
the action takcn by it in order to give effect to such
rccommendations,
Recalling further article IX of the Agreement, which
states that the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the Secretary-Gcneral of the World Tourism Organization may enter into supplementary arrangements
for the implementation of the Agreement,
Recogni::.ing the contribution of tourism to economic and social development and to the promotion of
international understanding, peace and prospcrity,
C anscious of the need to pay particular attention to
t he intcrests of developing countrics in the field of
tourism,
A ware of the actions undertaken by developing countries individually and collectively to promote tourism,
1. Requests the World Tourism Organization to
intcnsify its cfforts to promote tourism, particularly in
dcveloping countries, through international co-operation, bcaring in mind articlc 3 of its statutes, and to
report to thc General Assembly at its thirty-third session, through thc Economic and Social Council at its
sixty-fifth session, on the action taken by it with rcspect
to this recommcndation;
2. Invites those Statcs Membcrs of the Unitcd
Nations which are not yet members of the World
Tourism Organization to consider becoming members
of that organization;

3. Requests the Secrctary-Gencral to follow up this
invitation with the Member States concerncd and rcport
on this matter to the General Assembly at its thirtythird scssion, through the Economic and Social Council
at its sixty-fifth scs;ion.
107th plenary meeting
19 Decemher 1977
u7 See O/jiciu/ Recurds of the Economic and Social Counci/,
Fi/tieth S,ssion, Supplcment No. I (E/5044), p. 25, ítem

12 (h).
68 E/4955,

annex.
