S/PV.9293

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9293rd meeting

Thursday, 23 March 2023, 3.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Fernandes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Stastoli
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. Olmedo
Mr. Nanga
Ms. Kesse Antwi
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Abushahab
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-08442 (E)
*2308442*

S/PV.9293

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Ambassador Hernán Pérez Loose, Permanent
Representative of Ecuador, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Pérez Loose.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
As the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), I am
honoured to address the Security Council on the work of
the Committee since the previous briefing, on 14 March
2022 (see S/PV.8993).
Resolution 1540 (2004) remains a vital component
of the global non-proliferation architecture that aims to
prevent non-State actors from gaining access to weapons
of mass destruction, particularly if it is for terrorist
purposes. While steady progress was recorded in its
implementation, and acknowledging the complexities
of its implementation across obligations, weapons
categories and regions, the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) remains a long-term task.
I am pleased to report that, in 2022, as restrictions
arising from the coronavirus disease pandemic eased,
the Committee was able to conduct most of its work
in in-person meetings, supplemented by occasional
virtual meetings. In 2022, the Committee held two
formal meetings and five informal meetings. The
Committee participated in 15 in-person and 14 virtual
outreach events in 2022, compared to one in-person
and 23 virtual events. In particular, in the reporting
period following the adoption of resolution 2622
(2022), on 25 February 2022, and the extension of the
mandate of the Committee to 30 November 2022, the
Committee successfully completed the comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004), in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 1977 (2011).
The comprehensive review focused on the status of
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by Member
2/12

23/03/2023

States. The Committee also addressed its role in
facilitating assistance matchmaking; its collaboration
with relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations and other United Nations bodies; and
its outreach activities. The review was an inclusive
process, and the Committee held open consultations
with Member States and international, regional and
subregional organizations. Relevant civil society
organizations also participated informally. Under
resolution 2663 (2022), adopted unanimously on
30 November 2022 (see S/PV.9205), the Committee’s
mandate was extended for a period of 10 years, until
30 November 2032.
During the reporting period, no States submitted
first national reports with information on the
measures taken to comply with obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004). The number of Member States
that have submitted their first reports remains at 185,
leaving eight States that have not yet done so.
One helpful activity, among others, in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004) is the development of voluntary
national implementation action plans by States, as
encouraged by paragraph 8 of resolution 2663 (2022).
The number of States that have submitted such plans
to the Committee since 2007 now stands at 38, an
increase of three States since the last briefing to the
Security Council.
Acknowledging that Member States are in the
best position to identify effective national practices,
the Committee recognizes the need to promote the
sharing of experiences, including through peer reviews
and other means to evaluate and reinforce effective
practices. Peer reviews have been held all around the
world. The number of such reviews is unchanged since
the last briefing to the Council. The Committee looks
forward to the results of further peer reviews and will
continue to support States that wish to conduct them,
where appropriate.
To date, a total of 142 Member States, compared
to 136 in 2021, have informed the Committee of their
national points of contact for the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). No training courses for
regional points of contact have been conducted since
2020, due to pandemic-related restrictions. However,
the Committee hopes to resume such training courses
soon, as circumstances permit.
The Committee plays an important role in
facilitating assistance to Member States to fulfil their
23-08442

23/03/2023

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

1540 obligations by matching assistance requests
from States with offers of assistance from States or
international, regional or subregional organizations. In
2022, no States submitted new requests for assistance,
compared to four in 2021. The Committee received
requests for technical and financial support for national
events in Madagascar and Sierra Leone.
The Committee web page lists States and
international, regional and subregional organizations
that offer 1540-related assistance. The Committee
stands ready to include new programmes or updated
information with regard to available assistance on its
website. In addition to assistance provided by States and
international, regional and subregional organizations,
the Committee and its Group of Experts will continue to
undertake visits to States, at their invitation, to discuss
national reporting, national action plans, Committee
matrices and assistance on implementation measures.
The Committee will continue to use its website and the
Chair’s quarterly message for outreach and enhancing
the transparency of its activities. Information
relating to participation in outreach events, as well as
statements, including video-messages, delivered by or
on behalf of the Chair, are regularly uploaded to the
Committee’s website.
As for the future, in Annex I of my letter dated
16 February 2023 addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2023/117), I forwarded the
Committee’s twentieth programme of work covering
the period from 1 February 2023 to 31 January 2024.
The programme includes a comprehensive list of the
activities that the Committee intends to undertake to
promote the full implementation of the requirements
of resolution 1540 (2004) by all Member States,
covering areas such as Committee outreach, the
Committee’s assistance mechanism, cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations
and transparency.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
appreciation to my fellow Committee members for their
efforts in support of its work, to the Group of Experts, to
officials of the United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs and Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs and to my staff for their invaluable support to
the Committee.
I will now make a statement in my national capacity.
Ecuador reiterates the priority it attaches to
Security Council actions on matters concerning the

S/PV.9293

non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The
unanimous adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) was an
important and timely measure as part of international
efforts aimed at preventing the proliferation to
non-State actors of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery. The proposed programme
of work for this year covers common challenges and
goals that will enable us to continue contributing to
upholding and strengthening the global disarmament
and non-proliferation architecture. We therefore call on
all Member States to continue engaging actively and
transparently with the work of the 1540 Committee and
the Ecuadorian chairpersonship.
The President: I thank Ambassador Pérez Loose
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Stastoli (Albania): Allow me to congratulate
and thank Ambassador Pérez Loose of Ecuador for
his leadership in advancing the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and for his briefing today.
The year 2022 was a dynamic one for the
Committee. We undertook a full review of and report
on (see S/2022/899) resolution 1540 (2004) and also
succeeded in unanimously adopting resolution 2663
(2022), on the extension of the Committee’s mandate
until 2032. The comprehensive review, which focused
on the status of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) by Member States, clearly concluded that real
progress has been made. It is very encouraging that the
overall implementation of the resolution has increased
by around 6 per cent since 2016. As we heard from
the Chair today, 185 of the 193 States Members of the
United Nations have submitted national reports on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Albania
encourages the non-reporting States to submit their
first reports, and in that regard, we also advocate for a
stronger role for the Committee in supporting States in
meeting their obligations. The Committee can play an
essential role in facilitating requests for assistance from
Member States in fulfilling their obligations under the
resolution. Setting up an effective process that reviews
and matches requests with offers of assistance would be
a welcome step.
The threat of the possession of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) by non-State actors, including
terrorists, has not diminished. On the contrary, it has

23-084423/12

S/PV.9293

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

become much more complex due to the rapid evolution
of science and technology, which constitutes a new
challenge for non-proliferation. It is up to all of us to
see the application of resolution 1540 (2004) assessed
and promoted. Our determination to comply with it
will certainly help to reduce the threat of WMDs, while
inaction will lead us into uncertainty.
With regard to transparency and public awareness
of the role and obligations of resolution 1540 (2004), we
believe that greater cooperation and better awareness
among Member States involving academia, civil society
and industry can only strengthen the implementation
and effectiveness of the resolution. In particular, we
emphasize our support for strengthening the meaningful
participation of women in decision-making processes
on the implementation of that resolution. To that end,
we welcome the 1540 Committee’s programme of work
for 2023. It is realistic and achievable, and we thank
Ecuador for preparing it. The Committee can count on
our full support.
Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Permanent Representative of Ecuador for his briefing
on the work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). I wish him and his team an
excellent term at the helm of the 1540 Committee.
Next year we will celebrate the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1540 (2004), which remains a pillar of the
international non-proliferation framework. The fact
is that not only does the threat of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction persist, it is evolving.
We are witnessing scientific and technological
developments in the biological, chemical and nuclear
arenas. At the same time, proliferation channels are
becoming more complex, so the risk of biological,
chemical and nuclear materials falling into the hands
of non-State actors remains. We must therefore ensure
that the 1540 Committee retains its capacity to respond
to those developments so that States’ regulatory
frameworks remain adequate to the risks.
We welcomed the adoption on 30 November of
resolution 2663 (2022), which renewed the Committee’s
mandate for 10 years, as well as the adoption of the
report of the comprehensive review that was conducted
over two years (see S/2022/899). We thank Mexico for
the role it played in those difficult negotiations. It is
particularly regrettable that we were not able to agree
on guiding principles for the Group of Experts.
4/12

23/03/2023

Progress is being made in the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). A large majority of Member
States have adopted measures to incorporate the
provisions of the resolution into their national
legislation, but further progress is still needed. Some
States may need help in implementing the resolution,
which is why France attaches particular importance to
the issue of assistance. More can be done to improve
matching offers of assistance, which are not always easy
to identify, to the specific needs expressed by certain
States. The Group of Experts should also be mandated
to offer assistance on a voluntary basis when necessary.
In parallel, a growing number of international
and regional organizations have adopted strategies to
implement and promote the resolution’s provisions. We
also need to deepen cooperation with the relevant forums,
such as the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
the Biological Weapons Convention, export control
regimes and other United Nations committees, such as
those dealing with terrorism.
Finally, it is important to raise awareness of resolution
1540 (2004) in order to facilitate its implementation.
Working with civil-society organizations remains vital
in that regard.
Let me conclude by paying a sincere tribute to the
Group of Experts, whose analytical and advocacy work
continues to be indispensable.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank
Ambassador Pérez Loose for his detailed briefing on
the activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) during a very active year.
Brazil welcomed the renewal of the mandate of the
1540 Committee and of its Group of Experts through the
adoption of resolution 2263 (2022) in November. Despite
the challenges and divisions, we have all been able to
come together and recognize that the 1540 Committee
remains a cornerstone of the global disarmament and
non-proliferation efforts. Furthermore, we are able
to find common ground to update the tools of the
Committee, while still preserving the importance of
international cooperation in materials, equipment
and technology for peaceful purposes. Reaching
the necessary compromise to update this crucial
disarmament and non-proliferation framework was no
easy task, and we thank the delegation of Mexico for its
work in chairing the Committee.
23-08442

23/03/2023

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Brazil stands ready to continue to play a constructive
role in the context of the Committee, as well as through
outreach programmes at the regional and global levels.
We should continue to improve our ability to assist
Member States in implementing their obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004), which will require constant
dialogue in order to identify gaps and better understand
what we, as the Committee, can do to help.
A well-functioning Group of Experts, with a clear
and useful mandate, remains essential to aiding the
1540 Committee in its goals. To that end, I call on all
of us to exercise the same spirit of compromise that
enabled us to reach consensus on adopting resolution
2663 (2022) in November so as to finalize the internal
guidelines of the Group of Experts by next month. We
have a broad agreement on the role of the Group and on
its usefulness to the Committee. Let us now cross this
final stretch so that the Group can continue to fulfil the
purposes set out for it in resolution 1540 (2004).
Responding resolutely to the spread of weapons of
mass destruction is a key challenge for all of us, and
Brazil will continue to play its part in that endeavour.
The commitment of each and every one of us is central
to the functioning of resolution 1540 (2004). However,
as we pursue our common goals, we should not
jeopardize the balance between the control of sensitive
items and access to technologies and goods intended
for legitimate uses.
In that regard, I would like to underscore Brazil’s
view that obligations arising from resolution 1540
(2004) should not create hindrances to access to
goods and technologies for legitimate purposes,
especially those related to the space programmes of
developing countries.

S/PV.9293

Malta welcomes the adoption of resolution 2663
(2022), extending the mandate of the Committee for
another 10 years. We also express our gratitude to
Ambassador Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez of
Mexico, as previous Chair of the 1540 Committee,
for his leadership, diplomacy and hard work on
that resolution. We commend the completion of the
comprehensive review, which provided Member States
an important opportunity to take stock and review the
status of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Malta particularly valued the participation of civil
society and international and regional organizations in
that process.
Malta welcomes the first national reports submitted
by 185 Member States on measures taken to comply
with their obligations under resolution 1540 (2004), and
we encourage the remaining eight States to submit their
first reports. Malta further welcomes the voluntary
national implementation action plans submitted by 38
States, including the three submitted over the past year.
We commend the seven voluntary peer reviews held
so far, which are an excellent tool to evaluate effective
practices, and we look forward to training for points of
contact being resumed once the circumstances allow.
One important role of the Committee is facilitating
assistance to Member States by matching assistance
requests with offers of assistance. The utility of that
role was underlined by States during the comprehensive
review. Malta welcomes the ongoing work of the
Committee in that respect, including visits to States.
Furthermore, Malta looks forward to the successful
adoption of new guidelines for the Group of Experts,
which should enable the Group to undertake its actions
and work in the most efficient way.

Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Ambassador Pérez
Loose for his briefing, and I congratulate him on his
appointment as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). As a newly elected
Vice-Chair of the Committee, Ambassador Pérez Loose
can count on Malta’s full support.

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I
thank Ambassador Pérez Loose for his briefing. I
assure him of the unwavering support of the United
Arab Emirates for the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and his
chairmanship. We are grateful to the Group of Experts
for its contribution in promoting the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

Malta places great value on the work of the 1540
Committee, which plays a key role in the global
non-proliferation architecture. The adoption of the
programme of work is a positive development and will
guide the Committee’s important activities, including
on outreach, assistance, cooperation and transparency.

For nearly two decades, resolution 1540 (2004)
has played a unique role within the non-proliferation
regime. It has focused on reducing the threat of
terrorists and non-State actors acquiring, developing,
trafficking in or using weapons of mass destruction.
Today that mandate remains as relevant as ever, and

23-084425/12

S/PV.9293

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the evolving nature of proliferation continues to pose
a threat to international peace and security. In the face
of such challenges, we welcome the progress made
by States in their implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), while acknowledging that its full and effective
implementation is a long-term endeavour.
We were pleased to see the successful completion of
the comprehensive review and the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2663 (2022) last year under Mexico’s
able leadership. By renewing the mandate of the 1540
Committee for 10 years, it expanded the horizon in
which the Security Council and the Committee can
further support Member States in implementing their
obligations. That should take us to a new chapter for
the global non-proliferation architecture, focused on
vigilance, strict controls and mutual accountability.
An important element of resolution 2663 (2022)
was that it encouraged the 1540 Committee to give
due consideration to the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in all its activities. We believe
that integrating the women and peace and security
agenda into the non-proliferation context will better
address the specific impacts of weapons proliferation on
women and girls, lead to more effective policymaking
and improve implementation.
The United Arab Emirates also believes that
it was particularly important that resolution 2663
(2022) stipulate the significance of continued outreach
and assistance by the Committee to Member States,
including by cooperating with the relevant international,
regional and subregional organizations. The 1540
Committee’s Group of Experts provides valuable
assistance to Member States. Greater streamlining of
the Committee’s decision-making processes related
to tasks assigned to the Group of Experts would be
especially constructive in that regard.
We appreciate the efforts of the Chair and his team,
as well as those of the United Kingdom, to ensure that
the Committee was recently able to adopt a programme
of work after two years of stalemate. We look forward
to engaging with other members in executing the
activities that it outlines.
We are all witnessing the rapid pace of
technological advancements in recent years, such as
in artificial intelligence (AI). The risk that non-State
actors could misuse AI to acquire or develop weapons
of mass destruction serves to highlight the importance
of States and of the non-proliferation architecture with
6/12

23/03/2023

regard to resolution 1540 (2004). Both are making
significant efforts to stay ahead of the evolving nature
of risks and rapid advances in science and technology,
as called for in resolution 2663 (2022). It is essential
that Governments and technology companies work
together to develop effective safeguards and monitoring
mechanisms to prevent such misuse, and it is important
for the Security Council to stay ahead of that curve.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would like to thank Ambassador Hernán Pérez
Loose, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), for briefing the Security
Council on the Committee’s work. I congratulate him
on assuming that important post.
The active work of the Committee last year yielded
tangible results and effectively promoted cooperation
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
international non-proliferation. The Committee,
the Group of Experts and the Secretariat have all
made efforts and contributions to that end, which
China appreciates.
In recent years we have seen a deepening
international consensus on non-proliferation and
increasingly effective and stronger efforts to counter
proliferation among non-State actors. Meanwhile, the
non-proliferation situation remains grave. Unilateralism
and double standards are on the rise. Developing
countries still face restrictions on their peaceful use
of technology. The inequitable and unreasonable
elements in the international non-proliferation regime
are becoming increasingly pronounced. In view of the
current non-proliferation situation, the Committee’s
new comprehensive review process and longer-term
non-proliferation efforts, I would like to share the
following observations.
First, we must create a favourable international
security environment. Parties should uphold a vision of
common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security, practise true multilateralism, adhere to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations in order to peacefully settle disputes, promote
unity and cooperation, abandon the Cold War mindset,
renounce division and confrontation, jointly respond
to global and regional security threats and build a
community with shared security through dialogue
and cooperation.
Secondly, we must build on and strengthen the
current non-proliferation regime. The non-proliferation
23-08442

23/03/2023

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

S/PV.9293

architecture, underpinned by international treaties,
Security Council resolutions and the relevant
international bodies, has played an indispensable role
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
Parties should further strengthen the authority and
effectiveness of the major international treaties,
including the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the Biological Weapons Convention, uphold the
role and functions of the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, among other bodies, and firmly
oppose any politicization of their work. We must also
ensure that they are not used as tools for pursuing
geopolitical goals.

security partnership. In an unprecedented move, two
nuclear-weapon States that are also NPT depositary
States have transferred tons of weapons-grade highly
enriched uranium to a non-nuclear weapon State,
provoking an arms race, fuelling a confrontation
between blocs, jeopardizing regional and global
security and stability, violating the goals and purposes
of the NPT and constituting a grave challenge to the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime. We
urge the relevant countries to abandon their archaic and
narrow geopolitical considerations, honour their own
non-proliferation obligations in earnest, revoke their
decision on nuclear submarine cooperation and take
concrete steps to safeguard regional and international
peace and security.

Thirdly, we should vigorously advance capacitybuilding in Member States. We encourage Member
States to identify priority goals and areas for the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) that are
commensurate with their own international obligations
and national conditions. Resources for providing
technical assistance and international cooperation
should be increased, with a focus on helping developing
countries meet their shortfalls in non-proliferation
mechanisms, technologies and talents. New proliferation
risks resulting from technological advances, especially
emerging technologies, should be taken seriously.
Government regulation should be reinforced and an
environment conducive to the relevant technological
advances encouraged.

Non-proliferation is a long-term task and an
important mission for the international community.
The implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) will be
a gradual process. We hope that all parties can fulfil
their own international obligations, participate actively
in international non-proliferation cooperation, jointly
strengthen global non-proliferation governance and
push for universal and common security. China will
continue its efforts and contribution to that end.

Fourthly, we must ensure the right to peaceful use.
Countries have a legitimate right to enjoy the dividends
of technological advances. That principle is affirmed
by the relevant international treaties and Council
resolutions and by General Assembly resolution
76/234, entitled “Promoting international cooperation
and peaceful use in the context of international
security”, sponsored by China. We should strike a
better balance between development and security both
by responding effectively to proliferation risks and by
reducing unreasonable restrictions, thereby defending
the legitimate rights of all countries and developing
countries in particular.
At this point, it is particularly important and
relevant to ensure that non-proliferation rules are
fully and effectively implemented. Certain countries
are disregarding questions and opposition and
remaining intent on advancing their nuclear submarine
cooperation within the context of a so-called trilateral

Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Pérez Loose for his informative briefing.
We congratulate Ecuador on its chairmanship of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and Ambassador Pérez Loose on the excellent
leadership he has shown during his tenure.
The United States fully concurs with the Chair’s
assessment that resolution 1540 (2004) remains a vital
component of the global non-proliferation architecture
for preventing non-State actors from gaining access
to weapons of mass destruction. While much progress
has indeed been made, we should also highlight the
results of the 1540 Committee’s comprehensive review,
completed on 30 November 2022, which found that
gaps in implementation remain. Accordingly, we
further welcomed resolution 2663 (2022), which the
Council adopted on 30 November to renew the mandate
of the 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts. In that
resolution, the Security Council also tasked the 1540
Committee and its Group of Experts with increasing
their outreach to Member States and other stakeholders
in order to address those gaps, including by hosting
open consultations with all States Members of the
United Nations and other stakeholders and encouraging
States to develop voluntary national action plans and

23-084427/12

S/PV.9293

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

participate in voluntary peer reviews. We look forward
to actively participating in the Committee’s efforts to
pursue that outreach.
Another key feature of resolution 2663 (2022),
intended to encourage implementation, is the sharing
of technical guides that States may find useful when
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). The United States
fully supports making such information available so
that Member States can draw on it, and we look forward
to participating in upcoming discussions on the topic.
We also look forward to improving transparency in the
1540 Committee by adopting much-needed updates to
its internal guidelines to account for and describe the
activities to be undertaken by the Committee’s Group
of Experts, as required by resolution 2663 (2022). The
Group of Experts is one of the most effective tools
at our disposal in supporting the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), and it will be crucial to clarify
its responsibilities so it can engage fully in the activities
that are clearly outlined in the Committee’s mandate.
The possibility that weapons of mass destruction
may be acquired and used by terrorists or other
non-State actors remains one of the greatest threats we
have to international peace and security. Resolution
1540 (2004) is one of the few established, authoritative
international instruments in place to address those
threats, and the 1540 Committee remains a vital tool
for ensuring that the resolution and its implementation
are as strong and effective as possible.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I would first like to thank
Ambassador Pérez Loose and his team for their
strong leadership and tireless dedication to the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). Our appreciation also goes to the Group
of Experts.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) to non-State actors continues to pose one of
the most significant threats there is to international
peace and security. The risk has been magnified by
rapid advances in science and technology and the
increasing accessibility of dual-use technologies.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is a vital component of the global
non-proliferation architecture as the first international
instrument that deals in a comprehensive manner with
preventing non-State actors from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction.
Japan highly values the work of the 1540 Committee
and its Group of Experts in assisting Member States
8/12

23/03/2023

to take concrete actions to fully implement resolution
1540 (2004). However, there remain significant gaps in
implementation among Member States that require our
continued attention and effort. There is much more that
the Committee can do.
In that context, Japan welcomes the recent successful
elaboration of the programme of work, which now
becomes a road map to guide the Committee’s future
work and outlines important Committee activities,
including the elaboration of a multi-year programme of
outreach and the review of internal guidelines regarding
the Group of Experts.
Ensuring the non-proliferation of WMDs requires
an all-stakeholders approach. Japan therefore welcomes
the open briefing to be held later this year and looks
forward to further discussions in an open and
transparent manner with the broader membership and
international, regional and subregional organizations.
The Committee and its Group of Experts must
be empowered to be able to proactively provide their
expertise to support Member States in identifying
key gaps and obstacles and preparing their national
implementation action plans.
Japan has actively contributed to promoting
resolution 1540 (2004) and assisting with its
implementation. For many years, Japan has shared
its expertise on non-proliferation regulations and
measures with our fellow Member States through our
outreach programmes, with a particular focus on the
Asia-Pacific region, which has become a production
and distribution hub in the global supply chain and is at
greater risk of being targeted by non-State actors.
A recent example is the regional meeting in Tokyo
for stakeholders, organized by the Government of Japan
and the Office for Disarmament Affairs, to support
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in Asia.
Member States had an opportunity to hold a dialogue
with South-East Asian countries and other international
partners on match-making solutions for supporting the
universal prevention of the proliferation of WMDs.
In addition, for almost three decades, Japan has
hosted the Asian Export Control Seminars, where
representatives of export control authorities from
the region come together to exchange knowledge and
experiences to better tackle the proliferation risks of
WMDs. Furthermore, Japan played a significant role,
through its financial contributions, in appointing
23-08442

23/03/2023

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the first 1540 Regional Coordinator in the AsiaPacific region.
Japan is committed to playing an even more
proactive role in enhancing the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) in order to prevent the most
dangerous weapons from falling into the hands of
non-State actors, including terrorists.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): I would like to start
by thanking the Permanent Representative of Ecuador
for chairing the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and recognizing the
invaluable work of the Group of Experts supporting the
Committee’s work.
Resolution 1540 (2004) remains an essential part
of the international disarmament and non-proliferation
architecture. It protects all States from the use by
non-State actors of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and the means of delivery of such weapons.
We welcome the continued commitment by all Member
States to the aims of the resolution and to fully
delivering its ambition. The use of weapons of mass
destruction and the illicit acquisition and transfer of
goods and knowledge by terrorists or other non-State
actors remains a grave threat to peace and security,
as we have seen with chemical-weapon use attributed
to Da’esh by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and the United Nations.
As we look ahead we must focus on maintaining
the relevance of resolution 1540 (2004). That should
include further outreach to Member States so that they
can improve their understanding of their obligations,
while paying greater attention to proliferation financing
and greater support for States that ask for assistance in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). We should also
step up our efforts to understand how rapid advances
in science and technology are changing the context in
which States implement the resolution.
The United Kingdom remains committed to
supporting Member States in their implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). We recently supported its
implementation in the Pacific Islands and worked with
partners to raise awareness of proliferation financing in
South-East Asia. We can provide legal and regulatory
expertise, as well as broader support, to States looking
to meet their obligations, strengthen their national
regulatory frameworks and improve their ability
to implement their laws and regulations governing
chemical, nuclear and biological activities.

S/PV.9293

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I would like to thank the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), Mr. Hernán Pérez Loose, for
his substantial briefing on the work of this subsidiary
body of the Security Council and on the Committee’s
plans for the future. In that regard, we are pleased to
note the adoption of its programme of work up until
January 2024. We trust that, under the chairmanship of
Ecuador, the Committee will manage to successfully
achieve its goals in the allotted time.
We are convinced that, for that purpose, it is
necessary to continue to maintain a constructive
atmosphere of cooperation in that subsidiary body
and to improve its work in order to achieve concrete
results within the framework of the implementation of
the 1540 Committee’s mandate. In that regard, we note
the unanimous adoption last year of resolution 2663
(2022), on the extension of the mandate for 10 years,
which confirmed its key elements and outlined a range
of issues facing the Committee. We emphasize among
them the coordination of efforts to provide countries,
upon request, with technical assistance in the processes
of implementing resolution 1540 (2004) at the national
level in order to facilitate the resolution’s full and
successful implementation by all countries.
The Russian Federation remains committed to the
aims and objectives of resolution 1540 (2004), which
remains the only universal international instrument in
the field of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) that requires States to establish
effective national control systems in order to prevent
WMDs and their means of delivery from being acquired
by non-State actors.
We highly value the spirit of global cooperation
in the document, as well as the ongoing recognition of
the importance of the document for the international
community, consistently shored up by practical steps
by Member States to implement the resolution. We are
convinced that the key to the success of the work of the
1540 Committee should also be its attitude of respect
for all States Members of the United Nations and the
consideration of their interests and needs as much
as possible.
Mr. Nanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank His Excellency Ambassador Hernán
Pérez Loose, Permanent Representative of Ecuador to
the United Nations and Chair of the Security Council

23-084429/12

S/PV.9293

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

23/03/2023

Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). I also express my thanks for Mexico’s excellent
work throughout its chairmanship.

remains a long-term task. We therefore need to focus
our attention on implementation. Let me highlight three
priorities in that regard.

My country takes note of the twentieth programme
of work of the Committee, covering the period from
1 February 2023 to 31 January 2024, and wishes
Ecuador every success. The Committee can count on
Gabon’s support throughout its mandate.

First, submitting national reports provides a solid
basis for advancing implementation. We encourage the
eight States that have not yet provided initial reports
to do so. We recognize the importance of international
assistance, both in the submission of national reports
and in the broader implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). In that regard, Switzerland reiterates
its standing offer of assistance, as presented on the
Committee’s website.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is an essential part of the
global non-proliferation architecture, which seeks to
prevent non-State actors from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction, with devastating consequences.
In line with the obligations under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and all
its safeguards agreements, as well as the Pelindaba
Treaty, which establishes a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in Africa, my country supports the Committee’s
mandate and takes a keen interest in the attainment of
its noble objectives.
In that regard, we welcome the efforts made by
States to strengthen measures to prevent non-State
actors from manufacturing, acquiring or transferring
nuclear, chemical or biological weapons.
The strengthening of technical assistance to
States is an essential element in order to promote
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
in conjunction with international, regional and
subregional organizations. The current global security
context, marked by an increasing nuclear threat, serves
to reinforce the relevance of resolution 1540 (2004).
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Hernán Pérez Loose, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and Permanent Representative of Ecuador, for
his briefing, and I congratulate him on his appointment
to that role.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is a key pillar of the
international
non-proliferation
architecture.
In
that regard, we welcomed the adoption last year of
resolution 2663 (2022), as well as the renewal for 10
years of the mandates of the Committee and its Group
of Experts. The fact that the Committee was able to
adopt a programme of work for the first time in three
years is a positive development. As the comprehensive
review on resolution 1540 (2004) pointed out, while
there has been steady progress in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), its full implementation
10/12

Secondly, awareness-raising activities with regard
to resolution 1540 (2004) are important to disseminate
information about its content and thereby bolster its
implementation. We welcome the Council’s decision to
develop a multi-year outreach programme for States.
Based on the status of implementation outlined in the
comprehensive review, the programme should help
to establish a plan and prioritization framework that
will cover national, regional and international events,
including activities organized by the Committee, while
also affording to the Committee and its Group of Experts
the necessary flexibility to exercise its mandate.
Thirdly, the Group of Experts is a key tool of the
Committee to advance the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). Acting under the Committee’s supervision,
the Panel is fully engaged in all its activities, which
include providing international assistance and outreach.
It is therefore important to ensure that the appropriate
framework conditions exist for the Group of Experts
and for the Committee to review its internal guidelines
that concern the Group.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is a key element of
the international non-proliferation regime and is
complemented by other efforts. Multilateral export
control regimes round out that framework, providing
a balance between non-proliferation concerns and
international cooperation. As an active participant in
those mechanisms and as current Chair of the Missile
Technology Control Regime, Switzerland is committed
to their implementation and development. As those
instruments have developed guidelines for their
application, we believe that the experiences gained,
which are in the public domain, can feed into the
discussion on the development of technical guidelines
for the 1540 Committee.
23-08442

23/03/2023

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Ms. Kesse Antwi (Ghana): I would like to begin
by thanking Ambassador Hernán Pérez Loose, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), for his briefing. Ghana
acknowledges with appreciation the progress made in
the work of the Committee since last year.
Global interest in the use of chemical, biological
and nuclear technology for peaceful development uses
will forever be marred by the risks of accidents and
proliferation owing to the dual-use nature of those
technologies. For that and many other reasons, the
role of resolution 1540 (2004) as an important means
of preventing the proliferation of chemical, biological,
and nuclear weapons and their means of delivery
from falling into the hands of non-State actors, such
as terrorists, remains pivotal in the international
non-proliferation and disarmament architecture.
Ghana values and remains committed to the work
of the 1540 Committee. The resumption of most of
the Committee’s work with the easing of coronavirus
disease pandemic restrictions therefore came as a great
relief to us. We welcome the submission of national
action plans by three States, increasing the total
number of such plans to 38, and we further encourage
States that have yet to submit theirs to do so. We are
confident that the twentieth programme of work of the
Committee, covering planned activities for outreach,
assistance, transparency and cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations,
will further accelerate the Committee’s goal for the full
implementation of the resolution by Member States.
We are particularly keen on the inclusion in the
programme of work of the Committee’s agenda to
review existing initiatives available to strengthen, on
request of States, the capacity of their points of contact
to assist in the implementation of the resolution. We
believe that engagement with points of contact will,
among other things, further increase awareness and
provide Member States whose focus may be otherwise
further away from, or those who may be worried about
the dissemination of, weapons of mass destruction
with a better appreciation of what the resolution seeks
to achieve.
The Committee’s work illustrates the impact
and importance of engagement and outreach. We are
optimistic that the Committee’s sustained work will
yield significant progress in the submission of voluntary
national implementation action plans by States.

S/PV.9293

While national ownership is undeniably central to the
implementation of the resolution, experience-sharing,
including through voluntary peer reviews, presents
important means for encouraging States to develop
their own voluntary plans. In that regard, we believe
that maintaining an inclusive process that benefits from
collaboration with relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations and other United Nations
bodies as part of outreach activities is important.
Rapidly evolving technologies, as seen, for
instance, in the case of nuclear science and technology,
serve to reinforce the common refrain that the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is
a long-term task. Consequently, the Committee has its
work cut out for it in its important role in facilitating
assistance to Member States to fulfil their obligations
under the resolution. In that regard, we welcome
unanimous adoption of resolution 2663 (2022), which
extends the mandate of the Committee for a period of
10 years.
In conclusion, we commend the Chair of the
1540 Committee and his team for the diligent and
inclusive manner in which the Committee’s affairs are
conducted. We are also encouraged by the hard work
and persistence of his fellow members of the Committee
and remain immensely appreciative of the support of
the Office for Disarmament Affairs, the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Group of
Experts in their joint efforts to assist the Committee in
carrying out its mandate.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Mozambique.
I thank Ambassador Hernán Pérez Loose, Chair
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for his briefing on
the 1540 Committee’s activities and his leadership of
the Committee.
Let me begin by stating our support for the
Committee’s programme of work for the period from
1 February 2023 to 31 January 2024. I also strongly
reaffirm Mozambique’s commitment to global efforts
against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their delivery systems.
Importantly, resolution 1540 (2004) identifies
terrorists and terrorist groups as key non-State actors
who may acquire, develop, traffic in or use weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery. Zero

23-0844211/12

S/PV.9293

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

23/03/2023

tolerance should apply to supporting non-State actors
in any shape or form in the development, acquisition,
manufacture, ownership, transport, transfer or use
of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their
delivery systems.

with non-State actors and terrorists in particular more
likely to acquire weapons of mass destruction, materials
and related technologies. In that context, all States are
encouraged to implement effective non-proliferation
measures, including relevant internal controls.

We note with satisfaction the successful completion
of the comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004)
with the involvement, through open consultations, of
international, regional, subregional organizations and
relevant civil society organizations.

As part of the commitment and importance
attributed to global non-proliferation efforts, in
2021 Mozambique presented its first national report,
with information on the measures taken to fulfil its
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004).

We welcome the increase to 142 in the number of
Member States that have submitted information on their
focal points for resolution 1540 (2004) and encourage
the resumption of training courses for regional points
of contact as soon as the circumstances allow.

Finally, we reiterate our support for the ongoing
work of the Committee and our expectation of
working closely together. We extend our thanks to the
Vice-Chairs, the Group of Experts, the staff of the
Office for Disarmament Affairs and the Department
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs for the excellent
work done so far and in the hope of carrying out more
productive work.

Providing technical assistance to States is critical to
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). However,
we remain concerned that, during the reporting period,
none of the remaining eight States submitted the first
national reports with information on measures taken to
fulfil the obligations of resolution 1540 (2004).
The international community must continue to
make efforts towards non-proliferation in a context
where technological advances are proving challenging,

12/12

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

23-08442
