General A.11emhly-Twenty-firat Se11ion

60

Article 13
lrrespective of the notifications made under article 8, paragraph S, of the present Protocol, the Secretary-General of
the United Nations shall inform ali States referred to in
article 48, paragraph 1, of the Covenant of the following
particulars :
(a) Signatures, ratificatio11s and accessions under article 8;
(b) The date of the entry into force of the present Protocol
under article 9 and the date of the entry into force of any
amendments under article 11;
(e) Denunciations under article 12.

Article 14
l. The present Pr_otocol, of which the Ghinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall
be deposited in the archives of the United Nations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
transmit certified copies of the present Protoool to all States
referred to in article 48 of the Covenant.

B
The General Assembly,
Considering that the text of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the text
of the International Covenant on Civil and Poli.tical
Rights and the text of the Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
should be made known throughout the world,
l. Requests the Governments of States and ;iongovernmental organizations to publicize the text of
these instruments as widely as possible, using every
meaos at their disposal, including all the appropriate
media of information ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the immediate and wide circulation of these instruments and,
to that end, to publish and distribute the text .thereof.
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

e
The General Assembly,
Considering the advisability of the proposals for the
establishment of national commissions on human rights
or the designation of other appropriate institutions to
perform certain functions pertaining to the observance
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,
1. Invites the Economic and Social Council to request the Commission on Human Rights to examine
the question in all its aspects and to report, through
the Council, to the General Assembly;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member
States to submit their comments on the question, in
order that the Commission on Human Rights may
take these comments into account when considering
the proposals.
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

2214 (XXI). United Nations Cbildren's Fund
The General Assembly,
Taking the opportunity of the twentieth anniversary
of the United Nations Children's Fund to congratulate
Governments, organizations and individuals on their

support of and partnership with the Fund in its two
decades of significant contribution to the well-being of
children throughout the world and to international
solidarity,
Recognizing the value of aid from the United Nations
Children's Fund in helping developing countries accelerate and improve the operation of services benefiting children,
N oting with approval that the United N ations Children's Fund is helping Governments, as part of their
national development plans and programmes, not only
to protect their children and young people, but to ensurc
that they receive a suitable preparation for making their
contribution to the economic and social progress of their
countries,
W elcoming the fact that the training of national personnel in services benefiting children is now one of
the major features of aid from the United Nations
Children's Fund,
Commending the continued close co-operation between
the United N ations Children's Fund and .the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United
Nations Secretariat and the relevant technical and other
agencies in the United Nations family,
Deeply concerned, however, at the magnitude of the
unmet needs of children and youth in the developing
countries and the ever-increasing demands on the resources of the United Nations Children's Fund,
N oting with approval the support in the Economic
and Social Council and the Executive Board of ,the
United Nations Children's Fund for an income goal
of $50 million to be reached by the end of 1969, at
the clase of the United Nations Development Decade,
l. Endorses the activities and objectives of the
United Nations Children's Fund;
2. Urges Governments to increase their contributions to the United Nations Children's Fund and calls
upon supporting organizations, groups and individuals
to intensify their efforts so that the new income goal
may be reached ;
3. Recommends that Governments should includ.e
projects to meet the needs of children and youth in
their over-all development plans.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

2215 (XXI). World social situation
The General Assembly,
Reatfirming the solemn undertaking embodied in the
Charter of the United Nations to promote economic
and social progress and better standards of life in la.rger
freedom,
Recalling its resolutions 1916 (XVIII) of 5 December 1963 and 2035 (XX) of 7 December 1965,
N oting again with deep concern that, despite past
efforts, the world social situation is far from satisfactory,
N oting that progress in the achievement of the goals
and objectives set for the United Nations Development
Decade has been disappointingly slow,
Recognizing the importance of concerted practica!
action in the social field for attaining the goals of the
United Nations Development Decade,

Resolution11 adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Bearing in mind the resolution on the United Nations
Development De<:ade, 10 in which reference is made to
the possibility and advisability of preparing a development charter which would serve as a guide for international co-operation to further economic, social and
cultural development,
C onvinced that the concerted practical action of the
United Nations in the social field should be concentrated, above all, on the solution of the basic social
problems, and should be aimed at creating better
standards of living for man and at guaranteeing respect
for his dignity,
l. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1139 (XU) of 29 July 1966 concerning the reappraisal
of the role of the Social Commission ;11
2. Affirms the main objectives and principies of the
social programme of the United Nations and of the
Commission for Social Development and the methods
and means to be used by the United Nations, Member
States and specialized agencies in pursuit of these objectives, which are set forth in section I of Economic
and Social Council resolution 1139 (XLI);
3. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
request the Commission for Social Development to
prepare: on the basis of the purposes and principies of
the U mted N ations and the specialized agencies and
also on the basis of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Econornic and Social Council
and taking into account the docurnentation submitted
to the Third Committee 12 and the discussions in that
Committee at the twenty-first session of the Assembly,
~ draft declaration on social development which would,
m general terms, define the objectives of social development and _th_e methods and means of achieving them,
and to submtt 1t to the General Assembly for consideration at its twenty-third session at the latest ;
4. Calls further upon the Economic and Social Council to arrange for the specialized agencies to be consulted at appropriate stages in the preparation of the
draft declaration ;
5. Re_quests t~e Secretary-General, the Economic
and_ Social Counc1l and through it the Commission for
Socia~ Development, in co-operation with the specialized
agencies, to ensure that the periodic reports on the
world social situation reflect the over-all social situation
and social trends in different regions of the world and
in countries with differing economic and social systems, taking into account the clase interrelation between
economic and social factors, and to submit these reports,
together with practica! conclusions and recomendations
for the substantial improvement of the programmes
related to the social situation, to the General Assembly
for consideration every three years ;
6. Further requests the Se<:retary-General to prepare
a report on the implementation of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1139 (XLI) and of the present resolution and to submit to the Council, and to the General
A~sembly for consideration at its twenty-second session,
th1s report, together with the revised programmes of
the Commission for Social Development and any recom1º General Assembly resolution 2218 A (XXI) of 19 December 1966, p. 42.
11 By this resolution, the Economic and Social Council
inter alia, decided that the Social Commission should be re~
designated the Commission for Social Development
12 Official Records of the Geneml Assembly T~enty-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 54, documents AÍ6409, A/6434
and A/C.3/L.1419.

61

mendations made, in co11sultation with the Administrative Committee 011 Co-ordination, for strengthening
the co-ordination of the programmes of the United
N ations with those of the specialized agencies in thc
interests of greater conce11tration of efforts on priority
targets;
7. Decides to accord high priority to the consideration of the world social situation at its twenty-second
sess1on.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

2216 (XXI). Freedom of information
The General Assembly,
Considering that because of the elaboration of thc
International Covena11ts 011 Human Rights the Third
Committee was unable to consider the draft Convention
on Freedom of Information and the draft Declaration
on Freedom of Information at the twenty-first session,
Reiterating that freedom of information forms an
important part of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms to the promotion of which the United Nations
is dedicated,
Decides to take up at its twenty-second session the
consideration of the ítem on freedom of information.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

2217 (XXI). International Year for Human Righl8
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1961 (XVIII) of 12 December 1963 and 2081 (XX) oí 20 December 1965 on
the International Y ear for Human Rights,
l. Approves the further programme of measures and
activities envisaged for Member States, the United
_Nations, the specialized agencies and national and other
mternational organizations, which has been recommended by the Commission on Human Rights and is
set out in the annex to the present resolution;
~- lnvi_tes Member States, the specialized agencies,
r~g10nal mtergovernmental organizations and the nat10nal and international organizations concerned to
devote the year 1968 to intensified efforts and undertakings in the field of human rights, including the
measures set out in the above-mentioned programme,
and to keep the Secretary-General informed oí their
plans and preparations;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to make any necessary arrangements to facilitate the co-operation of compete?t regional intergovernmental organizations in observmg _196~ as International Year for Human Rights,
as prov1ded m General Assembly resolution 2081 (XX);
4. Requests the Se<:retary-General to co-ordinate the
rneasur~s and a~tivities undertaken by Member States,
the U:mt1;d Nat10ns, the specialized agencies, regional
or~amzations and the national and international organizat1?ns concerned, and in particular to collect and dissemmate at regular intervals information on activities
contemplated or undertake11 by them in connexion with
the International Year for Human Rights;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
to ~he C?eneral Assembly at its twenty-second session
an mtenm report on the plans, preparations, arrange-
