A /72/PV.74

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

74th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 20 December 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda items 123 and 124 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
Draft resolution (A/72/L.33)
The President: We can all agree on one thing — we
want the United Nations to be able to respond to the
challenges of today in the best way possible. Peace has
always been at the core of the Organization’s work,
but today we have different, more complex threats and
challenges to peace. The signs that conflict is on the
horizon can look different now to how they did in 1945.
And, in many ways, they are harder to identify.
For example, the online recruitment of terrorist
fighters is less visible than traditional conscription.
Furthermore, it is easier to identify planes, tanks
or troops moving across frontiers than it is to track
splintering rebel groups. Different threats require
different responses, which is logical. Likewise, we need
new thinking and structures to solve old, persistent
challenges. We cannot expect to achieve peace today
without adjusting 70-year-old mechanisms and
systems. We must observe and monitor. We must listen
to experiences on the ground and, in doing so, we must
adapt and evolve. Today’s draft resolution A/72/L.33 is
part of that process.
Today’s draft resolution calls for a second
comprehensive report on the United Nations peace
and security pillar. I hope that it will be adopted by

consensus. And for that, first, I would like to express
my sincere thanks to our facilitators, Ambassador
Rugwabiza and Ambassador Mlynár, who had my full
trust and support throughout this process. Secondly, I
would like to thank the States Members of the United
Nations for their constructive engagement. After three
rounds of negotiations, they found agreement — a
delicate balance of interests. We would not have achieved
it without our most valuable tool — dialogue. When
peace is at stake, dialogue is not an option; it is our duty.
Before I conclude, I would like to acknowledge
that some Member States have called for more detailed
information on the proposed reform of the United
Nations peace and security pillar. The next step is for the
Secretary-General to provide a second comprehensive
report to answer those calls. Today we shall take a firm
step in the right direction and, through a consensus
adoption, we will set a constructive tone for future
discussions in this Member State-driven process. There
is more work ahead. I hear the questions and concerns
of Member States with regard to this important process,
and I am confident that the next step will provide the
opportunity to respond to those concerns. I appreciate
the fact that we approached the draft resolution in a
spirit of mutual responsibility. The result is a Member
State-owned draft resolution.
I stand ready to use my convening power to ensure
that Member States own this important process and its
outcome. As we move to the next phase of the process,
let us continue to talk and to listen to one another.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-45681 (E)

*1745681*

A/72/PV.74

The General Assembly will now consider draft
resolution A/72/L.33.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote or
position before the voting on the draft resolution before
us, I would like to remind delegations that explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Morales López (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, let me highlight your leadership,
Sir, as President of the General Assembly, and that
of Ambassador Valentine Rugwabiza, Permanent
Representative of Rwanda, and Ambassador Michal
Mlynár, Permanent Representative of Slovakia, as
facilitators of the vital draft resolution A/72/L.33, which
aims to modernize and update the work of the United
Nations, with earnest and constructive dialogue among
the States Members of the United Nations, committed
to the visionary proposal of Secretary-General António
Guterres, whom we selected to fulfil that complex duty.
I underscore that Colombia fully supports the
draft resolution before the Assembly. It is clear that
achieving global peace and security now requires bold,
effective and swift measures capable of responding to
the needs of the current structure of this Organizational
pillar. As we have stated in various forums and open
discussions pertaining to the draft reform, which
demonstrate transparency and inclusiveness on the part
of the Secretary-General, his team and the office of the
facilitators of the draft resolution, the results of this
modernization exercise will provide a new and improved
structure whose impact is not simply rhetorical.
Each day, 44,000 United Nations employees of
all levels, nationalities and professional backgrounds,
as well as more than 110,000 troops on the ground,
wear the emblem of the Organization as they fulfil
the mandate of the Charter of the United Nations,
whose influence on the lives of millions of people
is undeniable. According to World Bank statistics,
1.2 billion people, approximately one fifth of the
world’s population, have been affected by some form
of violence or armed conflict since 2014, with more
than 200,000 people killed every year. According to
the 2015 statistics of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, 12.4 million people
have been victims of forced displacement, 8.6 million
of them in their own countries.
Saving and improving lives is the primary reason
such reform is vital and urgent. The United Nations,
2/33

20/12/2017

in particular its Secretary-General, the highest-ranking
administrative official of the Organization, must
have the tools necessary to conduct their work, with
political and managerial flexibility, in keeping with the
guidelines of the various mandates, a more coherent
strategy for providing a swift response to meeting needs
on the ground and greater accountability that allows for
ongoing reflection about what works and what does not
so as to allow for more effective operations.
I believe that, if the draft resolution is adopted,
the proposal being discussed will allow us to achieve
tangible results based on our collective efforts to attain
sustainable global peace and build a more effective and
coherent Organization.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote or position before the voting on the
draft resolution before us.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/72/L.33, entitled “Restructuring of the
United Nations peace and security pillar”. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to adopt it without a vote?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/199).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position on the resolution just adopted,
I would like to remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): The
United States wishes to thank you, Mr. President, and
the facilitators for leading a transparent and swift
consultation process on reforming the United Nations
peace and security architecture.
The United States supports the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative to reform the United Nations peace
and security architecture and his efforts to make the
United Nations more field-focused. With more focused,
effective and efficient United Nations operations, the
Organization will be better able to address the needs of
those on the ground.
Any reform that we implement must advance
political solutions and enable the United Nations
system to tailor its responses to the needs of countries
in conflict or transition. My delegation continues to
support the Secretary-General’s efforts to change the
way the United Nations does business. We endorse the
17-45681

20/12/2017

Secretary-General’s vision for management reform of
the Secretariat. Today’s resolution demonstrates that
the Secretary-General has wide-reaching endorsement
from the States Members of the United Nations for
his vision to make the United Nations a stronger and
more relevant institution that can prevent and respond
to conflicts and atrocities. We look forward to seeing
further details in the coming months, and we pledge to
be effective partners in working with all Member States
to help implement that vision.
Mr. Gómez Camacho (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
and the two facilitators, the Permanent Representatives
of Rwanda and Slovakia, for their remarkable work on
resolution 72/199.
Mexico joined the consensus adoption of resolution
72/199 because it supports the efforts and vision of
the Secretary-General. His proposal is geared towards
making the United Nations stronger and better able to
respond to the challenges of sustainable development,
peace and security and human rights. To that end, it is
crucial that the Secretary-General have the full support
of the General Assembly to ensure that the proposal,
which meets the structural needs of the Organization
and is in line with the interests of the States Members
of the United Nations, can be implemented as soon
as possible.
Nonetheless, there is a contradiction. Resolution
72/199, on the reform of the peace and security
architecture, includes no references to sustainable
peace or to resolution 70/262, which was the result
of the 2015 review of the peacebuilding architecture
and whose recommendations are the building blocks
of the Secretary-General’s proposal. It is hoped that
that omission is not an indication of an aversion to
implementing the genuine changes the Organization
needs. We hope that the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of resolution 72/199
will be substantive and will help us to continue to
make progress in understanding and implementing the
paradigm shift of sustainable peace.
We believe that, in the detailed report on the
proposed reform, the Secretariat will maintain the
transparent, clear and timely communication we have
enjoyed to date and that the changes will lead to a more
coherent, transparent and efficient United Nations.
Mrs. Martinic (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Mr. President, and the facilitators of

A/72/PV.74

resolution 72/199, Rwanda and Slovakia, for their efforts
to achieve a consensus-based resolution on an issue of
vital importance to the future of the Organization.
Argentina again welcomes the initiative of the
Secretary-General to take forward the process of the
structural reform of the United Nations, in particular
with regard to the peace and security pillar, with the
understanding that such reform could considerably
improve the Organization’s performance. In that
regard, we agree that the United Nations should
adopt a holistic, strategic and integrated approach to
activities related to conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, sustainable peace and development. We
reiterate that the proposed reform could be a step in
the right direction. It could prevent the fragmentation
of the Organization’s work and enhance coherence
and coordination in the activities of the various pillars
of all phases of conflict, in line with the narrative of
sustainable peace.
I would like to briefly mention some specific
elements of the major reform proposed. We agree on
the fact that it is important to pay greater attention to
the root causes of conflicts and to find solutions based
on national involvement, while highlighting the issues
of prevention and sustaining peace and focusing on the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Likewise,
we support the idea of strengthening the functions of
the Peacebuilding Support Office, bolstering its role as
the linchpin of the three pillars and their link with the
initiatives and instruments of the United Nations.
I would like to conclude by underscoring that
Argentina supports the Secretary-General’s first report
on restructuring the United Nations peace and security
pillar (A/72/525), which promotes the idea of focusing
on prevention. Argentina eagerly awaits a more detailed
report on the implementation of the reforms proposed,
which will be issued later in the seventy-second
session. In that regard, we thank the Secretary-General
for his willingness and efforts to maintain an ongoing
exchange of ideas through consultations with the States
Members of the United Nations, and we encourage him
to continue holding such consultations until the reform
process has been completed.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
As the most universal, representative and authoritative
intergovernmental international organization, the
United Nations is a very effective platform that we
can use to collectively address diverse threats and

17-456813/33

A/72/PV.74

challenges. In the light of such new challenges and
threats, the United Nations should attempt to improve
itself through reform so that it can better shoulder the
responsibilities entrusted to it by the Charter of the
United Nations, promote multilateralism and meet the
needs of global governance.
China thanks the Secretary-General for his
efforts to promote the reform of the United Nations
peace and security pillar. We support the efforts of
the United Nations to further integrate resources,
improve efficiency so that it can better address global
challenges, and play a greater role in the area of peace
and security. China thanks the President of the General
Assembly and the facilitators of the draft resolution, in
particular for convening the intergovernmental process,
during which the opinions of the States Members of
the United Nations are extensively sought so as to
improve the openness and transparency of the process.
The restructuring of the peace and security pillar of
the United Nations will have a profound impact on the
Organization’s work in that area.
The reform programme requires in-depth
discussion, as well as extensive exploration by Member
States, in order for an overwhelming consensus to be
reached. We expect the Secretary-General to submit
a detailed report on the reform programme as soon as
possible. We hope that he will strengthen coordination
and communication with Member States, in particular
with regard to moving forward with restructuring the
peace and security pillar, improving working methods,
paying attention to the views of Member States in
order to accommodate their legitimate concerns and
enhancing the transparency of the reform process. The
next stage of deliberations in the General Assembly
will commence in 2018. Consultations will be held
on substantive issues, including setting up specific
institutions, assigning responsibilities, staffing and
budget. It is hoped that, during the next stage of the
process, we will continue to adhere to the principles
of openness, transparency, democratic consultation and
ownership on the part of Member States, with a view
to reaching consensus through extensive consultations.
China will join other Member States and take active part
in the deliberations with regard to a concrete reform
process for the United Nations peace and security
pillar. It will do its part to improve and strengthen the
work of the United Nations.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation joined the consensus
4/33

20/12/2017

adoption of resolution 72/199, entitled “Restructuring
of the United Nations peace and security pillar”.
We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing in the General Assembly, the most
representative organ of the United Nations, an
intergovernmental discussion about the preliminary
ideas of Secretary-General António Guterres with
regard to the reform of United Nations peace and security
pillar, which are outlined in his report (A/72/525). We
are convinced that, based on transparency and trust,
such an approach can ensure efficiency and have longterm positive effects on implementing the reform. That
approach is especially important as we engage in the
reform process because the changes being made will no
doubt include a political dimension.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s efforts to
enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations. We are
prepared to work with him and other Member States so
that together we might have a mutual understanding of
what the United Nations of tomorrow would look like.
We believe that the discussion among States during
the course of drafting the resolution just adopted,
including what has been said today, will be the basis
for a comprehensive report of the Secretary-General,
as well as discussion by the General Assembly. We
recognize and respect the various points of view that
exist on various aspects of the reform process. We
understand that all these questions will be discussed
in detail so that in the final analysis we might be able
to come up with a mutual understanding. All of that
is the essence of the United Nations, and that is why
we established the Organization, which should be an
indestructible foundation for a multipolar world order.
The basis of the reform process is underlined by
the interrelated nature of the three pillars of the United
Nations: peace and security, development and human
rights. Indeed, these three areas, like all other aspects
of the work of our Organization, are interrelated. That
does not mean that all of these questions must be
dealt with in the same structure. The principles of the
distribution of labour and accountability must underpin
our work to ensure its full effectiveness. That is why we
value highly the attempts of the Secretary-General to
maintain the existing mandates, functions and sources
for financing so as to avoid any duplication of effort.
We believe it important that, in any reform process,
due attention be paid to ensuring equitable geographical
distribution. The United Nations stands to benefit from
17-45681

20/12/2017

that. We believe that the resolution, which will follow a
comprehensive report, will ensure a reliable consensual
basis for achieving the desired reforms.
Mr. Awad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We would like
to thank the representatives of Rwanda and Slovakia
for their efforts, and you, Mr. President, for sponsoring
the negotiations that have resulted in the adoption by
consensus of the procedural resolution 72/199, on the
restructuring of the United Nations peace and security
pillar. The delegation of Egypt would like to seize this
opportunity to stress the following points.
First, an innovative approach should be taken to
effectively address new and emerging challenges along
with other untraditional challenges facing international
peace and security. We therefore need to develop the
tools available to the United Nations so that it can
be more effective and capable of addressing such
challenges comprehensively.
Secondly, Egypt appreciates, in principle, the
importance of the efforts that led to the reform and the
restructuring of the Secretariat peace and security pillar.
In that regard, we take note of the Secretary-General’s
initiative and his preliminary report on the matter
(A/72/525). We reaffirm that the General Assembly
and its subsidiary committees are the only entities that
can adopt any restructuring proposals, by consensus,
following consideration of the comprehensive report
that will be issued by the Secretary-General on the
matter. We look forward to that report.
Thirdly, the delegation of Egypt reaffirms that
any proposals for the restructuring of the peace and
security pillar of the Secretariat must be undertaken
in full respect for the mandates of all United Nations
organs without any amendment to such mandates.
The coordination of the work of the Secretariat must
be undertaken without confusing the roles of the three
pillars of the United Nations .
Fourthly, we emphasize that the restructuring
proposal should contain no controversial concepts
that do not enjoy consensus by Member States. It must
also include a comprehensive framework that ensures
transparency and accountability in the Secretariat and
contributes to the achievement of tangible results in the
countries and societies that are covered by the United
Nations missions.
Fifthly, Egypt underscores that sustainable
development is a right and a stand-alone objective. It

A/72/PV.74

is a unique value that must be achieved effectively,
without preconditions and without prejudice to the
resources and financial allocations dedicated to such
an effort by the Organization.
In conclusion, we look forward to the detailed
report of the Secretary-General on the matter so that
Member States may consider it, discuss it objectively in
the General Assembly and take action on the package
of the proposed amendments in an integrated manner.
Mr. Fox-Drummond Gough (Brazil): At the
outset, Brazil would like to welcome the vision of the
Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, of a more
effective United Nations. The Organization needs to
be nimbler in order to better implement all mandates
in each and every pillar of its initiatives: peace and
security, development and human rights. My delegation
would like to commend the Secretary-General for his
commitment to open, transparent consultations with
the General Assembly throughout the reform process.
Brazil has supported the reform of the peace and
security architecture of the Secretariat. We welcome
efforts to overcome fragmentation and enhance the
prevention framework of the United Nations. We also
welcome the focus on the role of peacebuilding within
the larger framework of reform.
My delegation called for a lean and balanced text for
resolution 72/199. We believe that many assurances have
been put forward in the text and thank the facilitators
for their work. However, my delegation would like once
again to draw attention to the nature of this reform. This
is not a reform of the whole of the peace and security
pillar of the United Nations, which cannot be complete
without reform of the composition and working methods
of the Security Council. The reform we start today with
the adoption of this resolution is limited to the peace
and security architecture of the Secretariat. Brazil
looks forward to the upcoming comprehensive report
of the Secretary-General, in which, we trust, all views
expressed on this issue during the intergovernmental
consultations will be reflected.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I speak on behalf of
the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; the European Free
Trade Association country Liechtenstein, member of
the European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, the

17-456815/33

A/72/PV.74

20/12/2017

Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.

to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide
a geographical basis as possible.”

The EU and its member States welcome the
adoption of resolution 72/199. With this clear and short
text adopted by consensus, the General Assembly
expresses without any ambiguity its strong support
for the Secretary-General and his vision to reform the
peace and security pillar of the Secretariat. We have
now given him the go-ahead to start working and
delivering on this reform, and we look forward to his
detailed report on all the aspects of the new peace and
security pillar, to be discussed in the spring in the
relevant United Nations forums.

This must also take into account the Secretary-General’s
efforts to achieve full gender parity.

As we have said before, the Secretariat must act as
one, building upon the lessons of the past years and past
reforms, while taking into account the specificities of
all the facets of its work on the ground. This institutional
restructuring is a timely opportunity to ensure a twofold
improvement: that the peace and security pillar as a
whole works in a more coherent, nimble and strategic
way; and that it works more effectively with the other
pillars of the United Nations system.
Through such efforts, the Secretariat can improve
its ability to prevent conflict, maintain and consolidate
peace with the aim of sustaining peace. We fully support
this approach, and we believe the Secretary-General
has not only the authority, as provided by the Charter,
but also now our full political endorsement in the first
steps of implementing this vision. There is a substantial
link between reform of the peace and security pillar and
management reform. We believe in particular that more
integrated field support for successful peace operations
is required to respond efficiently to current challenges.
Progress on the other aspects of reform is therefore
essential, and the European Union will continue to
support efforts to that end. We believe that with the
adoption of this resolution, the General Assembly not
only sets in motion the reform of the peace and security
pillar, but also sets a good precedent for the other
aspects of reform.
With regard to paragraph 3, the EU recalls Article
101 of the Charter:
“The paramount consideration in the
employment of the staff and in the determination
of the conditions of service shall be the necessity
of securing the highest standards of efficiency,
competence, and integrity. Due regard shall be paid
6/33

Let me also congratulate the two facilitators for the
great work they have accomplished both in substance
and in process. They were given a clear mandate by the
President of the General Assembly. Over three weeks,
they have been able to produce a clear and concise text
ready for adoption. That is a great job, and they should
be commended for this.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
in explanation of position. The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 123 and 124.
Reports of the Second Committee
The President: The General Assembly will consider
the reports of the Second Committee on agenda items
16 to 26, 63, 121 and 137.
I request the Rapporteur of the Second Committee,
Mrs. Theresah Chipulu Luswili Chanda of Zambia,
to introduce the reports of the Second Committee in
one intervention.
Mrs. Chanda (Zambia), Rapporteur of the Second
Committee: It is an honour for me to introduce to the
General Assembly the reports of the Second Committee
on the agenda items allocated to it by the General
Assembly at its seventy-second session.
These reports, contained in documents A/72/417 to
A/72/428, as well as documents A/72/479 and A/72/484,
include the texts of draft resolutions and draft decisions
recommended by the Second Committee to the
General Assembly for adoption. For the convenience of
delegations, a checklist of action taken in the Committee
has been prepared by the Secretariat, as contained in
document A/C.2/72/INF/1, in English only.
During the main part of the seventy-second session
of the General Assembly, the Second Committee held
27 plenary meetings and four special events, one of
which was a joint formal meeting with the Economic
and Social Council. The Committee also held its annual
dialogue with the Executive Secretaries of the Regional
Commissions. The Second Committee adopted a total
of 41 draft resolutions, 12 of which were adopted with a
vote, and two draft decisions.
17-45681

20/12/2017

Mr. Djani
the Chair.

A/72/PV.74

(Indonesia),

Vice-President,

took

Under agenda item 16, entitled “Information and
communications technologies for development”, the
Second Committee recommends, in document A/72/417,
paragraph 14, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 17, entitled “Macroeconomic
policy questions”, the report of the Committee has
been issued in seven parts. The report under the
chapeau is contained in document A/72/418, and the
recommendations are contained in the following
addenda.
Under sub-item 17 (a), entitled “International
trade and development”, the Second Committee
recommends, in document A/72/418/Add.1, paragraph
13, the adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under sub-item 17 (b), entitled “International
financial system and development”, the Second
Committee recommends, in document A/72/418/Add.2,
paragraph 8, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 17 (c), entitled “External debt
sustainability and development”, the Committee
recommends, in document A/72/418/Add.3, paragraph
10, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 17 (d), entitled “Commodities”,
the Second Committee recommends, in document
A/72/418/Add.4, paragraph 8, the adoption of one
draft resolution.
Under sub-item 17 (e), entitled “Financial
inclusion for sustainable development”, the Committee
recommends, in document A/72/418/Add.5, paragraph
10, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 17 (f), entitled “Promotion of
international cooperation to combat illicit financial
flows in order to foster sustainable development”, the
Committee recommends, in document A/72/418/Add.6,
paragraph 10, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 18, entitled “Follow-up to and
implementation of the outcomes of the International
Conferences on Financing for Development”, the
Committee recommends, in document A/72/419,
paragraph 14, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 19, entitled “Sustainable
development”, the report of the Committee has
been issued in 11 parts. The report under the

chapeau is contained in document A/72/420, and the
recommendations are contained in the chapeau, as well
as in the addenda.
Under the chapeau of item 19, the Second Committee
recommends, in document A/72/420, paragraph 51, the
adoption of seven draft resolutions.
Under sub-item 19 (a), entitled “Implementation
of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of
the World Summit on Sustainable Development and
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development”, the Second Committee recommends, in
document A/72/420/Add.1, paragraph 8, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 19 (b), entitled “Follow-up to and
implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of
Action (SAMOA) Pathway and the Mauritius Strategy
for the Further Implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States”, the Second Committee
recommends, in document A/72/420/Add.2, paragraph
9, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 19 (c), entitled “Disaster risk
reduction”, the Second Committee recommends, in
document A/72/420/Add.3, paragraph 9, the adoption
of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 19 (d), entitled “Protection of
global climate for present and future generations of
humankind”, the Second Committee recommends, in
document A/72/420/Add.4, paragraph 8, the adoption
of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 19 (e), entitled “Implementation
of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly
in Africa”, the Second Committee recommends, in
document A/72/420/Add.5, paragraph 10, the adoption
of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 19 (f), entitled “Convention
on Biological Diversity”, the Second Committee
recommends, in document A/72/420/Add.6, paragraph
9, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 19 (g), entitled “Education for
sustainable development”, the Second Committee
recommends, in document A/72/420/Add.7, paragraph
10, the adoption of one draft resolution.

17-456817/33

A/72/PV.74

Under sub-item 19 (h), entitled “Harmony with
Nature”, the Second Committee recommends, in
document A/72/420/Add.8, paragraph 8, the adoption
of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 19 (i), entitled “Ensuring access to
affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for
all”, the Second Committee recommends, in document
A/72/420/Add.9, paragraph 11, the adoption of one
draft resolution.
Under sub-item 19 (j), entitled “Combating sand and
dust storms”, the Second Committee recommends, in
document A/72/420/Add.10, paragraph 9, the adoption
of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 20, entitled “Implementation
of the outcomes of the United Nations Conferences on
Human Settlements and on Housing and Sustainable
Urban Development and strengthening of the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme
(UN-Habitat)”, the Second Committee recommends, in
document A/72/421, paragraph 14, the adoption of one
draft resolution.
Under agenda item 21, entitled “Globalization and
interdependence”, the report of the Committee is issued
in five parts. The report under the chapeau is contained
in document A/72/422, and the recommendations are
contained in the following addenda.
Under sub-item 21 (a), entitled “Role of the United
Nations in promoting development in the context
of globalization and interdependence”, the Second
Committee recommends, in document A/72/422/Add.1,
paragraph 8, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 21 (b), entitled “Science, technology
and innovation for development”, the Second Committee
recommends, in document A/72/422/Add.2, paragraph
9, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 21 (c), entitled “Culture and
sustainable development”, the Second Committee
recommends, in document A/72/422/Add.3, paragraph
7, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 21 (d), entitled “Development
cooperation with middle-income countries”, the Second
Committee recommends, in document A/72/422/Add.4,
paragraph 11, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 22, entitled “Groups of
countries in special situations”, the report of the
Committee is issued in three parts. The report under
8/33

20/12/2017

the chapeau is contained in document A/72/423,
and the recommendations are contained in the
following addenda.
Under sub-item 22 (a), entitled “Follow-up to
the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries”, the Second Committee
recommends, in document A/72/423/Add.1, paragraph
9, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 22 (b), entitled “Follow-up to the
second United Nations Conference on Landlocked
Developing Countries”, the Second Committee
recommends, in document A/72/423/Add.2, paragraph
9, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 23, entitled “Eradication of
poverty and other development issues”, the report
of the Committee is issued in four parts. The report
under the chapeau is contained in document A/72/424
and the recommendations are contained in the
following addenda.
Under sub-item 23 (a), entitled “Implementation of
the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication
of Poverty (2008-2017)”, the Second Committee
recommends, in document A/72/424/Add.1, paragraph
10, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 23 (b), entitled “Women in
development”, the Second Committee recommends, in
document A/72/424/Add.2, paragraph 10, the adoption
of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 23 (c), entitled “Human resources
development”, the Second Committee recommends, in
document A/72/424/Add.3, paragraph 10, the adoption
of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 24, entitled “Operational
activities for development”, the report of the
Committee is issued in three parts. The report under
the chapeau is contained in document A/72/425,
and the recommendations are contained in the
following addenda.
Under sub-item 24 (a), entitled “Operational
activities for development of the United Nations
system”, the Second Committee recommends, in
document A/72/425/Add.1, paragraph 9, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 24 (b), entitled “South-South
cooperation for development”, the Second Committee
17-45681

20/12/2017

recommends, in document A/72/425/Add.2, paragraph
8, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 25, entitled “Agriculture
development, food security and nutrition”, the Second
Committee recommends, in document A/72/426,
paragraph 23, the adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 26, entitled “Towards global
partnerships”, the Second Committee recommends, in
document A/72/427, paragraph 8, the adoption of one
draft decision.
Under agenda item 63, entitled “Permanent
sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of
the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over
their natural resources”, the Committee recommends,
in document A/72/428, paragraph 17, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 121, entitled “Revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly”, the Second
Committee recommends, in document A/72/479,
paragraph 5, the adoption of one draft decision.

A/72/PV.74

I also wish to thank Ambassador Kapambwe of
Zambia, his Mission and its staff for their encouragement,
and the secretariat of the Second Committee for its
outstanding assistance and support to the Bureau and
to all delegations during our deliberations.
Finally, I take this opportunity to wish all members
of the Assembly and their families very happy holidays.
The Acting President: I thank the Rapporteur
of the Second Committee for having introduced the
report of the Second Committee. I should also like to
congratulate the Chair, Bureau and all members of the
Committee for having improved greatly on the previous
year by concluding their work in such record time.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Second Committee have
been made clear in the Committee and are reflected
in the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is
no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I
shall take it that the General Assembly decides not to
discuss the reports of the Second Committee before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.

Under agenda item 137, entitled “Programme
planning”, as indicated in paragraph 2 of document
A/72/484, no action was required.

The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote.

In conclusion, I should like to highlight the
cooperation that prevailed in the Second Committee.
Though the Committee had to extend its work for one
week to reach a conclusion on all items before it, the
Committee was able to fulfil the mandate entrusted to
it by the Assembly and to complete its work effectively
and constructively. The Committee concluded its work
on 30 November, which is the earliest since the fortyfirst session, of 1986, when the Committee completed
its work on 28 November.

“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee.”

On behalf of the Bureau of the Second Committee,
I convey our appreciation to all the coordinators,
facilitators and negotiators responsible for our
draft resolutions. We thank all delegations for their
constructive participation and commitment.
I also take this opportunity to acknowledge the
leadership of our Chair, His Excellency Mr. Sven
Jürgenson of Estonia, as well as the commitment of
the other members of the Bureau and Vice-Chairs,
Mr. Menelaos Menelaou of Cyprus, Ms. Cristiana Mele
of Italy and Ms. Kimberly Louis of Saint Lucia.

May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that

I should like to advise representatives that we shall
proceed to take decisions on the recommendations
contained in the report of the Second Committee in the
same manner as was done in the Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. This means
that where separate or recorded votes were taken, we
will do the same. I should also hope that we may proceed
to adopt without a vote those recommendations that
were so adopted in the Second Committee. The results
of the votes will be uploaded to the PaperSmart portal.
Before proceeding further, I would like to draw the
attention of members to a note by the Secretariat, in
English only, entitled “List of proposals contained in

17-456819/33

A/72/PV.74

the reports of the Second Committee”, which has been
circulated as document A/C.2/72/INF/1. The note has
been distributed desk to desk in the General Assembly
Hall as a reference guide for action on draft resolutions
and decisions recommended by the Second Committee
in its reports. In this connection, members will find,
in the fourth column of the note, the symbols of the
draft resolutions or decisions of the Committee, with
the corresponding symbols of the reports for action
in the plenary in column two of the same note. For
reports containing multiple recommendations, the draft
resolution or decision number is contained in column
three of the note.
Furthermore, members are reminded that
additional sponsors are no longer accepted now that
draft resolutions and decisions have been adopted in
the Committee. Any clarification about sponsorship
in the Committee reports should be addressed to the
Secretary of the Committee.
Members are also reminded that any corrections
to the voting intention of delegations after the voting
has concluded on a proposal should be made directly to
the Secretariat after the meeting. I count on members’
cooperation in avoiding any interruptions to our
proceedings in this regard.
Agenda item 16
Information and communications technologies
for development
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/417)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 14 of its report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Second Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/200).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 16?
It was so decided.
10/33

20/12/2017

Agenda item 17
Macroeconomic policy questions
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/418)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Second Committee?
It was so decided (decision 72/538).
(a) International trade and development
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/418/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 13 of its report. The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolutions I and II,
one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Unilateral economic
measures as a means of political and economic coercion
against developing countries”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
17-45681

20/12/2017

Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
Draft resolution I was adopted by 130 votes to 2,
with 48 abstentions (resolution 72/201).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution II, entitled “International trade and
development”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,

A/72/PV.74

Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Draft resolution II was adopted by 182 votes to 2
(resolution 72/202).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 17?
It was so decided.
(b) International financial system and development
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/418/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.

17-4568111/33

A/72/PV.74

We shall now take a decision on the draft resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
12/33

20/12/2017

Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
The draft resolution was adopted by 180 votes to 2
(resolution 72/203).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 17?
It was so decided.
(c) External debt sustainability and development
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/418/Add.3)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/204).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 17.
It was so decided.
(d) Commodities
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/418/Add.4)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
17-45681

20/12/2017

Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
The draft resolution was adopted by 182 votes to 2
(resolution 72/205).
The Acting President: May I take that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of sub-item (d) of agenda item 17.
It was so decided.

A/72/PV.74

(e) Financial inclusion for sustainable development
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/418/Add.5)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/206).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda item 17.
It was so decided.
(f) Promotion of international cooperation to
combat illicit financial flows in order to foster
sustainable development
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/418/Add.6)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/207).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Nigeria, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Bolaji (Nigeria): Since the introduction of the
text of resolution 72/207, at the seventy-first session of
the General Assembly, the delegations of Nigeria and
Norway, like some other delegations, have made efforts
to bridge the knowledge gap within the United Nations
with regard to the issue of illicit financial flows. That
has led to the establishment of the interlinkage between
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) and combating illicit financial flows, as well as
strengthening the recovery and return of stolen assets to
their countries of origin. The international community
should no longer turn a blind eye to that fact, which has
been well articulated and accepted in several reports,
such as those of the High-level Panel on Illicit Financial
Flows from Africa and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda

17-4568113/33

A/72/PV.74

of the Third International Conference on Financing
for Development; and in SDG target 16.4, and the
Political Declaration on the Prevention of Drug Abuse,
Illicit Drug Trafficking and Organized Crimes in West
Africa, known as the Abuja Declaration, among others.
Therefore, given the avalanche of information
provided by the various forums that I just mentioned,
my delegation, together with many others, had expected
a more robust outcome from informal consultations.
Nevertheless, resolution 72/207, which we have just
adopted, has enough ingredients to boost international
cooperation aimed at preventing and combating illicit
financial flows — whether originating from tax
evasion, corruption, money-laundering or transnational
organized crime — as well as to strengthen the recovery
and return of illicitly acquired assets, with the hope of
hastening the realization of our ambitious 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. The destabilizing
effects of illicit financial flows on the development
of societies — especially developing ones — and
the slow pace involved in the recovery and return of
stolen assets, including the proceeds of corruption, tax
evasion, transnational bribery and other forms of illicit
flows to requesting States, would otherwise continue to
be a wound on the conscience of the global community.
My delegation would like to use this forum to
appeal to Member States, in furtherance of their efforts
to combat illicit financial flows, to consider requesting,
in the subsequent session, a comprehensive report by
the Secretary-General on this crucial issue, in order to
achieve the 2030 Agenda. Moreover, my delegation is
convinced beyond a reasonable doubt that setting up
an intergovernmental body by the General Assembly
would properly situate and coordinate the various
disjointed mandates in different bodies on the different
dimensions of illicit financial flows and develop an
appropriate instrument for their recovery and return.
It is common knowledge that most developing
countries are yearning for the kind of body that would
ease their frustration in combating illicit financial
flows. That is why my delegation would like to request
early preparations for the upcoming high-level meeting
recommended by the resolution, to be convened by
the President of the General Assembly at its seventythird session. We believe that setting up a robust
environment for the meeting by the President of the
General Assembly at its seventy-third session would be
a valuable legacy for the next session of the Assembly.
It is in recognition of that fact and of the need for all
14/33

20/12/2017

hands on deck that President Muhammadu Buhari
has accepted the clarion call to champion the annual
theme of the African Union for 2018, “Winning the
fight against corruption: a sustainable path to Africa’s
transformation”. In that regard, the resolution would
serve as a veritable platform for collaboration at all
levels towards achieving this onerous task.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate Nigeria’s
readiness to contribute its part, where necessary, to
the holding of the high-level conference on illicit
financial flows and assets recovery, to be convened by
the President of the General Assembly at its seventythird session. Furthermore, to give the required teeth
to this resolution and in preparation for the high-level
conference, Member States are enjoined to demonstrate
the necessary political will to address the seemingly
intractable issue of illicit financial flows by sharing
information and providing technical assistance and
capacity-building to developing countries in order to
ensure that no one is left behind.
The broader picture we all need to see is the positive
impact of combating illicit financial flows and returning
stolen assets for better and more fruitful livelihoods,
rather than focusing on the difficult conditionalities
that may hinder the progress of developing countries
in the long run.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda item 17 and of
agenda item 17 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 18
Follow-up to and implementation of the outcomes
of the International Conferences on Financing
for Development
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/419)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 14 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/208).
17-45681

20/12/2017

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 18?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 19
Sustainable development
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/420)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it seven draft resolutions, recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 51 of its report.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions
I to VII, one by one. Thereafter, representatives will
again have the opportunity to explain their vote on any
or all of the draft resolutions.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Oil slick on Lebanese
shores”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,

A/72/PV.74

Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Papua New Guinea,
Rwanda, Tonga, Vanuatu
Draft resolution I was adopted by 163 votes to 7,
with 9 abstentions (resolution 72/209).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “International Year of Camelids, 2024”. The
Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 72/210).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “World Bee Day”. The Second Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 72/211).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Strengthening the links between all modes
of transport to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals”. The Second Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 72/212).
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is
entitled “International cooperation and coordination
for the human and ecological rehabilitation and

17-4568115/33

A/72/PV.74

economic development of the Semipalatinsk region
of Kazakhstan”. The Second Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 72/213).
The Acting President: Draft resolution VI is entitled
“Sustainable tourism and sustainable development in
Central America”. The Second Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution 72/214).
The Acting President: Draft resolution VII is
entitled “Agricultural technology for sustainable
development”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Barbados,
Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sri Lanka,
16/33

20/12/2017

Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Zambia
Against:
Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Egypt, Guinea, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania,
Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, South Africa,
Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen
Draft resolution VII was adopted by 152 votes to 1
with 29 abstentions (resolution 72/215).
The Acting President: I give the floor to those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote or position on a resolution just adopted.
Mr. Židan (Slovenia) (spoke in Slovenian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): I am greatly
honoured to be able to address the General Assembly
with regard to resolution 72/211, on the proclamation of
World Bee Day.
This is a very important day for Slovenia and the
world. After three years of intensive efforts — both in
terms of the official procedures at the United Nations
and with regard to the rigorous process of informing
countries around the world — the resolution on World
Bee Day has been adopted. Through this initiative,
which began in the fall of 2014 at the suggestion of the
Slovenian Beekeepers’ Association, we have worked
to raise awareness among various stakeholders around
the world at both the political and expert levels. In the
framework of the official procedures, the initiative was
unanimously adopted during the fortieth Conference of
the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) in Rome in July. I would like to take this
opportunity to once again express, on my behalf and on
behalf of Slovenia, my gratitude to all the delegations
for their engagement and strong support throughout the
17-45681

20/12/2017

process. I would also like to thank everyone who helped
bring about the adoption of this important resolution.
I am extremely happy that all the countries of the
world are united in the conviction that ensuring global
food security is one of the key social issues at the global
level and an priority task in the global development of
agriculture. Worldwide, there are 815 million people
suffering from hunger. Caring for bees and other
pollinators is part of the fight against world hunger. The
data compiled by the FAO shows that bees and other
pollinators are invaluable when it comes to ensuring
global food security. A third of all food produced in the
world is dependent upon pollination by bees and other
pollinators. In addition, bees are important to the plants
they pollinate, which in turn are also an important source
of jobs and income for farmers, particularly for small
and family farms in developing countries. Last but not
least, bees also play a significant role in preserving the
ecological balance and biodiversity in nature. As good
bioindicators of environmental conditions, bees alert us
when something is happening to the environment and
that we must take action.
Studies by the United Nations and the International
Union for Conservation of Nature show that the
populations of bees and other pollinators have
significantly decreased, making them more and more
endangered. Various factors are involved in that
phenomenon. Through the annual observance of World
Bee Day, we will draw the attention of the world’s
public and political decision-makers to the importance
of protecting bees, and we will remind ourselves that
we depend on bees and other pollinators.
By protecting bees and other pollinators, we will
significantly contribute to solving problems related
to the global food supply and eliminating hunger in
developing countries. We will halt the further loss
of biodiversity and degradation of ecosystems, and
thereby contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals defined in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development
The declaration of World Bee Day is a
responsibility. We would like to do more to protect bees
and other pollinators, to be more active in preserving
biodiversity and, above all, to be more successful in
the fight against world hunger, in which bees and other
pollinators play a key role in ensuring food production.
This is just the beginning of a demanding process of
protecting bees and other pollinators. In order to be

A/72/PV.74

successful, we must first address the Governments of
all countries, the private sector and non-governmental
organizations. Awareness of the vital importance of
protecting bees must reach every individual. And we
must do more than just talk — we must also act. We
must take concrete action to increase care for bees
and to promote beekeeping everywhere, including in
developing countries.
I am confident that, with international cooperation,
especially by enhancing our joint care for bees, we will
be able to better protect bees and promote beekeeping.
Therefore, I call on the Assembly to join our efforts
and to celebrate World Bee Day together every year on
20 May. Together, we can actively contribute to raising
public awareness of the importance of bees and other
pollinators and to ensuring their protection.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 19.
(a) Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for
the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the
outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development and of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/420/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,

17-4568117/33

A/72/PV.74

Kazakhstan,
Kenya,
Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Micronesia
(Federated
States of), Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Liberia, New Zealand, Norway, Turkey
The draft resolution was adopted by 131 votes to
48, with 4 abstentions (resolution 72/216).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 19?
It was so decided.
(b) Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway and the Mauritius Strategy for the
Further Implementation of the Programme
18/33

20/12/2017

of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/420/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/217).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 19.
(c) Disaster risk reduction
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/420/Add.3)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/218).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 19?
It was so decided.
(d) Protection of global climate for present and
future generations of humankind
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/420/Add.4)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/219).
17-45681

20/12/2017

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 19?
It was so decided.
(e) Implementation of the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/420/
Add.5)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/220).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda item 19?
It was so decided.
(f) Convention on Biological Diversity
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/420/Add.6)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Implementation of the Convention on
Biological Diversity and its contribution to sustainable
development”. The Second Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/221).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda item 19?
It was so decided.

A/72/PV.74

(g) Education for sustainable development
in the framework of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/420/Add.7)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Education for sustainable development in
the framework of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development”. The Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/222).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda item 19?
It was so decided.
(h) Harmony with Nature
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/420/Add.8)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/223).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (h) of agenda item 19?
It was so decided.
(i) Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable
and modern energy for all
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/420/Add.9)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

17-4568119/33

A/72/PV.74

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
20/33

20/12/2017

Abstaining:
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The draft resolution was adopted by 183 votes to 2,
with 1 abstention (resolution 72/224).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (i) of agenda item 19?
It was so decided.
(j) Combating sand and dust storms
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/420/Add.10)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/225).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (j) of agenda item 19?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 20
Implementation of the outcomes of the
United Nations Conferences on Human
Settlements and on Housing and Sustainable
Urban Development and strengthening of the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme
(UN-Habitat)
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/421)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 14 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/226).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
17-45681

20/12/2017

Agenda item 21
Globalization and interdependence
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/422)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Second Committee?
It was so decided (decision 72/539).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 21.
(a) Role of the United Nations in promoting
development in the context of globalization and
interdependence
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/422/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,

A/72/PV.74

Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
The draft resolution was adopted by 184 votes to 2
(resolution 72/227).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 21?
It was so decided.
(b) Science, technology and innovation
for development
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/422/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/228).

17-4568121/33

A/72/PV.74

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 21?
It was so decided.
(c) Culture and sustainable development
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/422/Add.3)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
22/33

20/12/2017

Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
The draft resolution was adopted by 185 votes to 2
(resolution 72/229).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 21?
It was so decided.
(d) Development cooperation with
middle-income countries
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/422/Add.4)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/230).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 21, and of
agenda item 21 as a whole?
It was so decided.
17-45681

20/12/2017

A/72/PV.74

Agenda item 22

Agenda item 23

Groups of countries in special situations

Eradication of poverty and other development issues

Report of the Second Committee (A/72/423)

Report of the Second Committee (A/72/424)

The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Second Committee?

The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Second Committee?

It was so decided (decision 72/540).

It was so decided (decision 72/541).

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 22.

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 23.

(a) Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries

(a) Implementation of the Second United Nations
Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008-2017)

Report of the Second Committee (A/72/423/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/231).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 22?
It was so decided.
(b) Follow-up to the second United Nations
Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/423/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/232).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 22.

Report of the Second Committee (A/72/424/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/233).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 23?
It was so decided.
(b) Women in development
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/424/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/234).
The Acting President: I now call on the
representative of the Sudan, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): We
joined the consensus on resolution 72/234, entitled

17-4568123/33

A/72/PV.74

“Women in development” and adopted under sub-item
(b) of agenda item 23, entitled “Eradication of poverty
and other development issues”, based on our belief in
the major role played by women in the development
and advancement of society. However, we would like
to express our concerns with respect to the wording in
some paragraphs of the resolution.
The judicial and legal system in the Sudan belongs
to one of the main legal systems of the world, from
which its principles, texts and applications are derived.
Therefore, a challenge to one of these systems is a
challenge to the international legal system that has been
agreed upon by the United Nations as an Organization
that brings together the peoples of the entire world,
without exception, with their diversity and different
geographical affiliations, because we all believe
in humankind.
First, some parts of the text in paragraph 32 are
flawed and false owing to a lack of understanding of
the system pertaining to the personal status of Muslims.
Secondly, as I just said, they challenge one of the main
legal systems of the world. For those two reasons, we
disassociate ourselves from those parts of the text.
They are not binding on us at all and we believe they are
not binding on States that adopt the same legal systems.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 23?
It was so decided.
(c) Human resources development
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/424/Add.3)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/235).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 23, and of
agenda item 23 as a whole?
It was so decided.
24/33

20/12/2017

Agenda item 24
Operational activities for development
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/425)
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to take note of the report of the
Second Committee?
It was so decided (decision 72/542).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 24.
(a) Operational activities for development of the
United Nations system
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/425/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/236).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 24.
(b) South-South cooperation for development
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/425/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “South-South cooperation”. The Second
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/237).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 34.
17-45681

20/12/2017

Agenda item 25
Agriculture development, food security and nutrition
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/426)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 23 of its report.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions
I and II, one by one. We first turn to draft resolution
I, entitled “Agriculture development, food security and
nutrition”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi

A/72/PV.74

Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Draft resolution I was adopted by 185 votes to 1
(resolution 72/238).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution II, entitled “United Nations Decade of Family
Farming (2019-2028)”. The Second Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/239).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 25?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 26
Towards global partnerships
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/427)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Second Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report.
We will now take action on the draft decision. The
Second Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 72/543).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 26?
It was so decided.

17-4568125/33

A/72/PV.74

Agenda item 63
Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including
East Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the
occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/428)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 17 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
26/33

20/12/2017

Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Togo, Tonga, Vanuatu
The draft resolution was adopted by 163 votes to 6,
with 11 abstentions (resolution 72/240).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 63?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/479)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Second Committee
in paragraph 5 of its report.
We will now take action on the draft decision,
entitled “Programme of work of the Second Committee
for the seventy-third session of the General Assembly”.
The Second Committee adopted it. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 72/544).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 121.
17-45681

20/12/2017

Agenda item 137 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Second Committee (A/72/484)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Second Committee?
It was so decided (decision 72/545).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 137.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I would like
to thank His Excellency Ambassador Sven Jürgenson,
Permanent Representative of Estonia to the United
Nations and Chair of the Second Committee, the
members of the Bureau as well as representatives for
a job well done. I think Ambassador Jürgenson is the
happiest person today. I also thank the members of the
Second Committee for besting their record over last
year’s. That is something that has not been done for
quite some time. Once again, I thank all colleagues who
worked expeditiously to finish the work of the Second
Committee. I congratulate them.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Second Committee
before it for this meeting.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
Third report of the General Committee
(A/72/250/Add.2)
The Acting President: I would now like to draw
the attention of representatives to the third report of
the General Committee, as contained in document
A/72/250/Add.2.
During that meeting, the General Committee held
an exchange of views to identify next steps aimed at
addressing gaps and duplication in the agenda of the
General Assembly as they relate to the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, in accordance with
resolution 71/323, of 8 September 2017.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
take note of the report of the General Committee on its
third meeting?

A/72/PV.74

It was so decided (decision 72/502).
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/72/L.32)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
introduce draft resolution A/72/L.32.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): Under
agenda item 15, I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/72/L.32, entitled “A world against violence
and violent extremism”.
Let me first express my sincere gratitude to all
the sponsors of the draft resolution and to all other
delegations for their constructive participation and
support during the open consultations conducted by my
delegation. Their interventions and proposals helped
make the draft resolution reflective of the developments
since the adoption of the same resolution two years ago
(resolution 70/109).
This draft resolution is a follow-up to, and an
update of, consensus resolutions 68/127 and 70/109,
which my delegation took pride in, respectively,
submitting to the Assembly in 2013 and updating in
2015. That consensus serves to underscore the universal
recognition of the need to act on the pressing global
challenges of violence and violent extremism. The
idea behind the draft resolution, which was presented
by His Excellency Mr. Hassan Rouhani, President of
the Islamic Republic of Iran, during his address to
the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session (see
A/68/PV.6), was an offshoot of the overarching theme
of his presidential campaign platform, which called for
interaction, tolerance, moderation and prudence over
violence and extremism.
Violent extremism and its side effects, including
sectarian violence, have been on the rise since the first
resolution on this topic was adopted, in 2013. In the
wake of the atrocities committed by extremist groups
in Syria and Iraq over the past four years, as well as
the atrocities committed by Da’esh and other terrorist
groups in various population centres across the globe,
it is important that the General Assembly continue to
focus on these challenges. In our globalized world,
where threats recognize no borders, these challenges
can be thwarted only through the joint efforts of the
entire international community.

17-4568127/33

A/72/PV.74

Dialogue, moderation and tolerance are the most
effective antidotes to violent extremism, which tries
to twist religions and pervert human minds towards
death and destruction. It is therefore important that the
international community and its individual Member
States adopt effective measures along this line and
implement them with a view to dealing with the
conditions conducive to the genesis and the spread of
violent extremism.
In that regard, it is important to avoid associating
violent extremism with any particular nationality or
religion. In fact, those who blame religions and engage
in hate speech against the followers of the divine
religions play right into the terrorists’ hands and help
them to recruit more members and spread such heinous
extremist ideology. By reaffirming this point, the
General Assembly, as the sole universal body, provides
a solid basis for promoting and institutionalizing the
fight against violent extremism and sectarian violence
at their roots.
Apart from certain basic technical updates to the
second resolution on a world against violence and violent
extremism, this draft resolution also incorporates a few
additional elements. It recalls and reaffirms measures
taken at the national and multilateral levels. It recalls the
high-level General Assembly conversation on religion
for peace held on 5 and 6 May 2016. It also recognizes
the efforts made by UNESCO, including through the
organization of the conference on the theme “Internet
and the radicalization of youth: Preventing, Acting and
Living together”, held on 30 October and 1 November
2016. In its operative part, the draft resolution notes the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism and his report (A/72/621) in response to
resolution 70/109 and requests him to report to the
General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
Finally, allow me to express my sincere hope that
this draft resolution will gain the broadest possible
support and be adopted by consensus. That will help
accelerate coordination and cooperation among States
towards addressing the problems emanating from
violent extremism.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.32, entitled
“A world against violence and violent extremism”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
28/33

20/12/2017

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/72/L.32: Azerbaijan, the Central African
Republic, Nicaragua, the Philippines, Turkmenistan
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.32?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/241).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position following the
adoption of the resolution, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Green (Canada): I have the honour of delivering
this explanation of position on behalf of Canada.
Canada is pleased to have joined the consensus on
resolution 72/241, entitled “A world against violence
and violent extremism”. Canada is a strong supporter of
human rights and condemns the targeting of civilians,
which violates international humanitarian law. Canada
also strongly condemns the promotion of racial
discrimination, xenophobia and discrimination on the
grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity or
expression, including by violent extremists.
All citizens have the right to live free from violence
and discrimination. In order to achieve a world without
violence, the rights of all people must be respected.
In addition, the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism recognizes the important
linkage between social exclusion, deficits in human
rights and factors that can motivate radicalizatin to
violence. Canada strongly supports the inclusion of a
reference to the Plan of Action in this resolution.
Recognizing the role of each State in ensuring a
peaceful society, and mindful of the objectives outlined
in this resolution, we urge all States, in particular the
sponsor of the resolution, to comply with their human
rights obligations, including with regard to women,
ethnic minorities and all religious communities.
Ms. Fisher-Tsin (Israel): Israel joined the
consensus in the adoption of resolution 72/241, entitled
“A World Against Violence and Violent Extremism”.
17-45681

20/12/2017

The problem with this resolution is not the message,
but the messenger. Iran, the Member State that brought
this resolution to the attention of the international
community, is the same Member State that is responsible
for what the resolution aims to combat. In fact, this
Member State is the nerve centre for violent extremism
and terrorism everywhere.
This resolution calls for condemnation of incitement
to commit terrorist acts, as well as any attempt at public
justification of terror. However, Iran, the initiator of the
resolution, is the largest sponsor of terror worldwide.
For 38 years, it has threatened, and continues to
threaten, the world. Its proxies butcher innocent people,
and it violates human rights.
The resolution reaffirms the need to promote and
encourage respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Yet the sponsor of the resolution is one of
the worst violators of human rights in the entire world.
Members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and queer community are hanged from cranes; girls as
young as nine years old are married off to grown men;
journalists are arrested for criticizing the regime; and
people in prison are tortured.
Although the Iranian-led resolution claims to
condemn the targeting of civilian populations, the
reality on the ground is remarkably different. Take
Syria, for instance. Iran’s continued support for Bashar
Al-Assad has allowed him to pursue chemical weapons
and use them against his own people. Hundreds of
thousands of people have died as a result. Right next
door, in Lebanon, Iran has provided Hizbullah, its proxy
and recognized terrorist organization, with substantial
financial support. Iran has helped Hizbullah increase
its weapons arsenal to include more than 100,000
rockets and missiles. Hizbullah hides those weapons
in hospitals and schools throughout southern Lebanon,
turning its innocent people into human shields.
With the adoption of this resolution, it is imperative
that we begin by examining the world’s largest sponsor
of violent extremism — the lead sponsor of this
resolution. Needless to say, Iran has already violated
the resolution that they themselves initiated. We hope
that the standards set forth in the resolution will be
followed by all Member States without exception.
Mr. Ababtain (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia today joined its sisterly
countries — the United Arab Emirates, the Kingdom of
Bahrain and the Republic of Yemen — in the consensus

A/72/PV.74

on resolution 72/241, entitled “A world against violence
and violent extremism”, based on our belief in the need
for cooperation and a comprehensive effort to prevent
and combat violent extremism.
The text of the resolution is in line with current
policies with regard to violence and violent extremism,
and we support all efforts that aim to achieve that.
However, we have to be credible and surmount
contradictions, especially when it comes to the security
of our countries and communities. Therefore, we have
to be clear and state that Iran, which sponsored the
resolution just adopted, is the main sponsor of violence
and violent extremism all over the world.
The Houthi-Iranian militia has destroyed Yemen
and its unity. It continues its violation of international
law through its crimes in Yemen and its missile attacks
against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia — the latest of
which occurred yesterday morning. It is not the only
militia in existence. There are other Iranian militias,
such as Hizbullah, which has wreaked havoc in Lebanon
and Syria. Facts and realities prove that Iran supports
extremist groups, starting with facilitating their border
crossings and providing them with weapons and other
prohibited items, to providing them with training,
recruitment and financing. It is important to refer to the
contradictory attitude of Iran, which supports extremist
groups and militias in contradiction to the content of
the resolution. We therefore condemn the support
provided by Iran and underscore the need to prevent
and counter all forms of violent extremism, regardless
of their motives or justifications.
If we want to work together towards achieving
a world free of violence and violent extremism, then
the United Nations must make Iran shoulder its full
responsibility. The Iranian initiative is a true example
of a verse in the Holy Koran,
“... why do you say that which you do not do?” (The
Holy Koran, LXI:2)
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
Just yesterday morning, the General Assembly adopted
a strong resolution (resolution 72/189) condemning Iran
for continuing to commit human rights violations. The
Assembly called on Iran to end the harassment and
detention of journalists and to cease its targeting of
dual and foreign nationals for arbitrary detention. The
General Assembly also voiced its concern about Iran’s
practice of targeting minority religious communities
and called on Iran to comply with its obligations under

17-4568129/33

A/72/PV.74

international law (see A/72/PV.73). Yet 24 hours later, it
is the Islamic Republic of Iran, the largest State-sponsor
of terrorism in the world, that is the sponsor of the
resolution before us (resolution 72/241) — a resolution
entitled “A world against violence and violent
extremism”. Iran’s Government has engaged in abusive
and destructive behaviour — often in clear violation
of its international obligations — that runs directly
counter to the letter and spirit of this resolution.
Instead of promoting peace, Iran’s actions have
fuelled ethnic and religious conflict, directly supported
terrorism and threatened the peace and security of its
neighbours and beyond. Still, the United States joined
the consensus on the resolution. We did so because we
believe in a cooperative and comprehensive effort to
prevent and counter violent extremism. The Iranian
regime’s hypocrisy in sponsoring this resolution does
not change that fundamental belief.
Indeed preventing and countering violent
extremism are core elements of our comprehensive
approach to countering terrorism. It is essential for
the United Nations to strengthen its work to address
the underlying social, political and economic trends
that terrorists exploit. That is why we welcome the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism and why we applauded his remarks on
terrorism and human rights in London last month. We
are also pleased that the Secretary-General will soon
chair the High-Level Action Group on the Prevention of
Violent Extremism. If only Iran shared the SecretaryGeneral’s commitment.
While Iran urges us here in the General Assembly to
unite against violence, its Government actively foments
violence across the Middle East. In direct violation of
Security Council resolution 2231 (2015), the Iranian
regime smuggles illicit weapons and dispatches military
advisers to conflicts from Yemen to Syria to Lebanon.

20/12/2017

In addition, while today’s resolution calls on
countries to protect human rights and fundamental
freedoms in their fight against violent extremism, Iran
does the opposite. It abuses its own people, suppresses
political opponents, persecutes members of religious
and ethnic minorities and imprisons journalists and
tourists on phony charges.
Iran has the highest rate of executions globally, with
more than 530 in 2016 alone. This is a serious cause
for concern, considering the fact that many executions
are carried out without due process and for crimes that
do not meet international requirements. For instance,
Iran continues to impose the death penalty on persons
who committed their alleged crimes as juveniles,
and cruel and unusual punishment abounds. In one
case, a prisoner was forced to endure more than 459
lashes — a barbaric punishment that Iran thought was
fit for a journalist who dared to report on city officials.
Those are the facts of life for the Iranian people
today. Their Government’s cynical sponsorship of this
resolution does not fool us for one second. Although the
United States joined the consensus on the resolution,
we have not forgotten the abuse Iranians endure or
the terror their neighbors experience because of the
Tehran regime, and we will not turn a blind eye to the
violence and violent extremism sponsored by Iran. If
our experience in the Assembly has taught us one thing,
it is this: If we are to promote a world truly against
violence and violent extremism, we cannot allow a
country’s words to provide cover for its actions.
Ms. Mukhametzyanova (Russian Federation)
(spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation joined the
consensus on the adoption of resolution 72/241, entitled
“A world against violence and violent extremism”. We
are grateful to the delegation of Iran for its efforts
to reach an agreement on the resolution and for its
organization of a transparent negotiation process.

Iranian support for Hizbullah has expanded the
group’s arsenal to more than 100,000 rockets and
missiles, magnitudes greater than their capability at
the end of the last war, in 2006 — directly challenging
Lebanese sovereignty and threatening the safety and
security of the State of Israel.

We would like to present our approach to this issue.
We believe that realizing the potential of the resolution
requires additional thinking in the light of the current
level of the threats emanating from terrorism and
extremism. That requires us not to limit ourselves just to
a technical update of the text. Unfortunately, however,
not all delegations were prepared for such work.

At home, Iran has refused to denounce senior
Al-Qaida leaders who take refuge there, and Iran
continues to allow Al-Qaida to move significant funds
and fighters through its territory.

With the adoption of resolution 70/291, on the
review of the implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in July 2016, the
concept of violent extremism was clearly laid out

30/33

17-45681

20/12/2017

within the counter-terrorism framework. We believe
that extremism is not separate from terrorism, as
terrorism constitutes its breeding ground and precursor
and, conversely, terrorism is also a form of extremism.
Efforts to counter violent extremism must be based
on a solid foundation of international law, primarily
the Charter of the United Nations, including the
principles of sovereignty and the equality of States and
non-interference in their internal affairs.
This is all the more important in situations whereby
the ambiguity of this term is being used to promote all
kinds of questionable concepts. In particular, we are
referring to its use as justification for the exemption
from criminal responsibility of reintegrated terrorists,
which only results in their impunity. We cannot agree
with such approaches, nor with the logic that includes
under the terms of terrorism and violent extremism
xenophobia, political radicalization and other similar
phenomena. It does not matter whether these activities
involve unlawful violence or not — extremist
propaganda, especially that which receives foreign
support, can, without violence, undermine the rule of
law, traditions and customs, destabilize the State and
society and lead to massive human rights violations.
In our view, one of the most important tasks for
the General Assembly with regard to the topic under
consideration today is to draw a distinction between
the phenomena of terrorism, violence, extremism and
violent extremism. In that connection, we hope that
further decisions of the General Assembly will help
clarify these phenomena and provide real added value
to the introduction of terminology on violent extremism
in United Nations counter-terrorism efforts, which is an
effort that began two years ago.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
I now call on the observer of the European Union,
who wishes to make a statement following the adoption
of resolution 72/241.
Mrs. Cujo (European Union): The European Union
and its member States are pleased to have joined the
consensus on resolution 72/241, entitled “A world
against violence and violent extremism”.
We are strong supporters of preventing and
countering all forms of violent extremism, including
discrimination on the grounds of sex, race, color, ethnic
or social origin; genetic features; language; religion or

A/72/PV.74

belief; political or any other opinion; membership of
a national minority; property; birth; disability; age; or
sexual orientation.
We also very much welcome the reference to the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action on Preventing Violent
Extremism, as preventing violent extremism conducive
to terrorism is key in our fight against terrorism.
Finally, we would like to recall that, in order to
reduce the appeal of violent extremism, States must
respect international human rights, promote good
governance and uphold the rule of law. We urge all
States, including the sponsor of the resolution, to
comply with their human rights obligations, including
with regard to women, as well as persons belonging to
ethnic, sexual and religious minorities.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 15.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(f) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences
Note by the Secretary-General (A/72/107)
The Acting President: As indicated in document
A/72/107, since the terms of office of the representatives
of Bahrain, the Central African Republic, France,
Namibia, Paraguay, the Russian Federation and Sri
Lanka will expire on 31 December 2017, it will be
necessary for the President of the General Assembly to
appoint seven members to fill the resulting vacancies.
Those members will serve for a period of three years,
beginning on 1 January 2018.
Following consultations with the Chairs of
the Group of African States, the Group of Eastern
European States and the Group of Western European
and other States, the President of the General Assembly
has appointed Botswana, France and the Russian
Federation for a period of three years, beginning on
1 January 2018.
May I take it that the Assembly takes note of
those appointments?
It was so decided.

17-4568131/33

A/72/PV.74

The Acting President: I should like to remind
members that one seat from the Group of African
States, two seats from the Group of Asia-Pacific States
and one seat from the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States still remain to be filled for a term of
three years, beginning on 1 January 2018.
I should also like to remind members that one
seat from the Group of Asia-Pacific States, for a term
beginning on the date of appointment and ending on
31 December 2019, remains vacant.
Following consultations with the Chair of the Group
of Asia-Pacific States, the President of the General
Assembly has appointed China to fill that vacancy on
the Committee on Conferences for a term of office
beginning on the date of appointment and ending on
31 December 2019.
I should furthermore like to remind members
that one seat from the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States remains to be filled for a term
beginning on the date of appointment and expiring on
31 December 2018. I sincerely urge those groups to
submit their candidates as soon as possible.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda
item 115.
Before giving the floor to the speaker in exercise of
the right of reply, I would like to remind members that
statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited
to 10 minutes for the first intervention and five minutes
for the second, and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I now call on the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dibaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to thank the President and all delegations for
the widespread support lent to resolution 72/241,
adopted earlier.
I asked for the floor to also say a few words about
the statements made by the representatives of the Israeli
regime, the United States of America and Saudi Arabia.
In her statement, as usual, the representative of
the Israeli regime levelled accusations and allegations
against my country that are all baseless and nothing
but a bunch of lies. The anger and fury of that regime
against the resolution, which is aimed at combating
extremism and violence, is quite understandable and
32/33

20/12/2017

was reflected in the hate speech that she read out today.
It is quite understandable that an occupying entity that
has created an apartheid system in the territories it
occupies and controls cannot tolerate efforts to promote
moderation, tolerance and respect for human rights and
the rights of peoples. In that sense, the Israeli delegation
has deemed the resolution to be against itself.
The speaker represents a regime that has occupied
the lands of other nations for many decades and places
people in the occupied lands under harsh policies
and practices and under siege — practices that have
been condemned time and again by the international
community. The regime practices one of the most
extremist policies ever contemplated and put in place
by a ruling entity in the contemporary world, while
shamelessly flouting and violating every norm and
principle of international law and the civilized world. We
are — and, it is safe to say, all humankind is — against
the policy of putting people under occupation and siege
and of denying them their basic rights and necessities,
as the Israelis do to the people living in the occupied
territory, including Gaza.
There is no doubt that the occupation, suffering and
humiliation that the Palestinian people have endured
for so long and the atrocities that the Israelis have
committed against them in so many cases, including
against Gaza, are a major source of anger and bitterness
in our region. The Islamic Republic of Iran has done
everything in its power to fight, and support the
fight against, violent extremism, and it encourages
moderation in the region surrounding us.
Let me say a few words about what we heard from
the representative of the United States delegation.
Almost a year ago, the United States adopted a new
agenda, which apparently requires the levelling of
baseless accusations against my country. To justify and
advance that agenda, the United States representatives
have tried not to miss any opportunities to repeat a
host of the same and similar lies against my country.
Among other things, that agenda consists of advancing
the interests of the Israeli regime in the region and
precluding the realization of the Palestinians’ right
to self-determination. It also focuses on taking undue
advantage of some countries in the region by exploiting
them and creating false bogeymen. And it requires the
United States Government to try to divert regional
and international attention from the real issue in our
region, which is the occupation and its side effects,
including the Israeli apartheid policy, its settlement17-45681

20/12/2017

building activity and so on, as well as fictional and
delusional claims such as those made by the United
States representative today.
It is not a coincidence that, right after the recognition
of Al-Quds as the Israeli capital by the United Staes
Administration and the massive condemnation it
received, the United States went into high gear in its
baseless claims against Iran. What we heard today is
indeed a continuation of the policy of deception and
raising dust to keep the United States interventionist
policy in the region out of the public eye. It is ironic that
the Government that has destabilized the whole region is
now accusing Iran of conducting a destabilizing policy.
The constructive role of the Islamic Republic of
Iran in the region stands in stark contrast to that of the
United States and some of its allies, in particular the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which should be blamed for
most of the problems of our region. While the United
States continues to prioritize its own narrow political
interests and shortsighted goals in our region, the
Islamic Republic of Iran is making great sacrifices to
combat terrorist groups throughout the region. While
the United States is pursuing policies to weaken
Governments in the region, Iran is providing assitance,
at the request of legitimate Governments, in combating
terrorism and violent extremism.
The United States Government’s project of regime
change inflicts untold suffering and hardship on the
people of our region. A plethora of evidence suggests
that the so-called moderate opposition that the United
States supports in Syria and elsewhere have public and
private alliances with well-known terrorist groups and
differ from them in neither their methods nor their
ideology. Nevertheless, the United States Government
continues to arm, train and finance such extremists.
The past illegal interventions and aggressions by
the United States in different countries of our region
have created fertile ground for the spread of extremist

A/72/PV.74

ideology. The extremist elements who are wreaking
havoc in our region are influenced by takfiri ideology
and recruit their soldiers out of the misery created by
the United States illegal presence and irresponsible
actions in our region.
The fountainhead of extremism that promotes and
legitimizes terrorism and violations of basic human
rights lies within the fanatical mindset and ideology
centre in Saudi Arabia. Should the world decide to
tackle and eliminate violent extremism, it must confront
this primary host and facilitator of violent extremism.
The House of Saud works against the best interests of
the world, both in the West and the Muslim world. For
decades, Saudis have lavishly financed their intolerant
and extremist creed abroad. Billions of dollars have
been spent on exporting fanatical Saudi ideology to
various much poorer nations worldwide over the past
three decades.
Saudi Arabia provides the most significant source
of funding for terrorist groups worldwide. Saudi Arabia
remains the critical financial support base for Al-Qaida,
the Taliban, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
and other terrorist groups. The Saudis and some of their
allies have put hundreds of millions of dollars and tons
of weapons in the hands of anyone who would fight
against the Government in Syria — whether it be the
Al-Nusra Front, Al-Qaida or other extremist elements.
Saudi Arabia, the principal financier of the
911 hijackers, has not ended its efforts to spread its
extremist ideology. ISIS was the product of Saudi
ideas, Saudi money and Saudi organizational support.
Saudi ideology propagates a hateful mindset towards
unbelievers that literally includes everyone except its
own followers. As such, Saudis are not only teaching
such a mindset domestically, but they are also
enthusiastically exporting it abroad.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

17-4568133/33
