S/2015/518*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 July 2015
Original: English

Seventh report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) and covers developments pertaining to the issues of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives, since the issuance of my previous report, dated 29 April 2015
(S/2015/298).
2.
During the reporting period, bilateral relations between Iraq and Kuwait
strengthened further. On 28 May 2015, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq,
Ibrahim al-Jaafari, met in Kuwait with the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah al-Khaled al-Hamad al-Sabah, on the
sidelines of the forty-second meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. Sheikh al-Sabah reaffirmed the support of the
Government of Kuwait to the Government of Iraq, as well as its commitment to
assist current efforts to restore Iraq’s stability, security and unity. On 1 June, the
Department of Foreign Relations of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq officially received
the credentials of the new incoming Consul General of Kuwait to Erbil. On 10 June,
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Kuwait announced a contribution of $200 million
to ease the humanitarian crisis in Iraq. On 17 June, a planeload of 20 tons of
medicine and medical supplies arrived in Iraq as part of the air bridge of relief
supplies provided by the Government of Kuwait as a sign of solidarity with the
people of Iraq.
3.
Budgetary constraints and limitations set by the security and economic
situation in Iraq have hampered work on the search for missing Kuwaiti and third country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. The
Government of Iraq, however, is persisting in its efforts to achieve results. In this
regard, the Minister for Human Rights of Iraq, Mohammed Mehdi al -Bayati, headed
the Iraqi delegation at the ninetieth session of the Technical Subcommittee of the
tripartite mechanism, as well as the fortieth meeting of the Tripartite Commission,
which were held in Kuwait on 18 and 20 May, respectively, under the chairmanship
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.

* Reissued for technical reasons on 23 July 2015.

15-11374* (E)

090715

*1511374*

100715

S/2015/518

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, or their remains
4.
On 21 April, following the briefing by the Iraqi Ministry of Human Rights on
the importance of maintaining the momentum in its work despite the difficult fiscal
situation, the Council of Ministers approved the budget allocation from the
emergency reserves for the Ministry’s activities on the missing persons file for the
second half of 2015. On 7 May, the Iraqi interministerial committee on missing
Kuwaiti nationals convened under the aegis of the Ministry of Human Rights to
discuss the plan of action for the remainder of 2015, including scheduled excavation
and exploratory missions, as well as the availability o f witnesses and information on
potential burial sites.
5.
During the reporting period and in carrying out his responsibilities under
resolution 2107 (2013), my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs
continued meeting with relevant Iraqi and Kuwaiti interlocutors to urge forward
movement on this important humanitarian file. During his visit to Kuwait from 18 to
21 May, my Deputy Special Representative met with the Kuwaiti National
Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs, the Minister for
Human Rights of Iraq, and the Ambassador of Iraq to Kuwait, Moh ’d Hussein
Moh’d Bahr-Aluloom. The Chair and members of the National Committee for
Missing Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs stressed the need for the Government
of Iraq to create new dynamics and look at different search methods and modalities
that could achieve tangible results, particularly within the already available forensic
and technological resources in Iraq.
6.
For his part, the Minister for Human Rights of Iraq emphasized his country’s
strong commitment to carry on fulfilling its obligations in the search for the missing
persons. He noted that all politicians in Iraq were aware of Iraq’s international
obligations and its duty towards Kuwait, whom they see as their closest regional
partner. The Minister, however, noted that the current liquidity crisis was seriously
hindering progress on the file.
7.
The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) participated as an
observer in the ninetieth session of the Technical Subcommittee of the tripartite
mechanism, which was held on 18 May in Kuwait. During the meeting, the parties
agreed to review the present state and the efforts carried out so far to come up with
new ideas and approaches to reinvigorate the file and achieve tangible results. To
that end, it was decided that experts would be involved in future meetings to
acquaint members of the Technical Subcommittee with the available technology that
has proven successful in the field to assist the Sub committee in devising a holistic
strategy.
8.
During the session of the Technical Subcommittee, Saudi Arabia stated that its
national authorities had difficulty in identifying the location of a potential burial site
on its border with Kuwait. That information had been shared following the
provision of additional details by a witness. Consequently, the Government of Iraq
requested support from Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and other relevant members in
providing relevant documents from their respective archives. The Government of
Iraq indicated it would also seek further clarification from the witness.
9.
My Deputy Special Representative attended the fortieth meeting of the
Tripartite Commission on 20 May in Kuwait, during which the members of the

2/4

15-11374

S/2015/518

Commission supported the renewal of the observer status of UNAMI within the
mechanism for another year.
10. On 1 June, my Deputy Special Representative met in Baghdad with the Head
of the Department of International Organizations and Cooperation in the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Ambassador Ahmed Bamarni, who acknowledged technical,
financial and logistical problems in the search for the missing persons. Ambassador
Bamarni expressed his commitment to raise with the Minister of Finance the need to
secure liquidity and to ensure that the Ministry of Human Rights was able to cover
the current needs of the operation.

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
11. The current reporting period failed to register any major forward movement
with regard to property. In his meetings with Iraqi authorities, my Deputy Special
Representative has stressed the need to maintain momentum in this important area.
He urged both sides to consider convening the Joint Property Committee, which last
met in June 2014.

IV. Observations
12. I welcome the positive and constructive relationship and cooperation between
Iraq and Kuwait across all aspects of mutual interest. Kuwait’s pledge to provide
$200 million in humanitarian funds to alleviate the suffering of internally displaced
persons in Iraq is particularly commendable. The expanding partnership between the
two States is a strong indicator that the ties will only grow closer with time and
hopefully lead to full normalization of relations. I believe that the spirit of mutual
support that currently exists should be built upon to bring new momentum on the
file of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives, so that concrete results are achieved on this
important humanitarian issue.
13. I commend the commitment of the Government of Iraq to continuing work on
this file while trying to address the multiple challenges that the country is facing.
I further welcome the decision of the Council of Ministers to allocate the necessary
funds for the activities of the Ministry of Human Rights in support of the search for
the missing persons for the second half of 2015, even while faced with severe
budgetary constraints. I note with regret, however, that continued efforts have not
led to substantial progress on the file. It has been 11 years since the last set of
human remains was found in excavation. And it has been 25 long years that the
families of the missing persons have been waiting to learn the fate of their loved
ones.
14. I recognize the need to reassess the sole reliance on traditional search
methods, as they have proven inconclusive with the passage of time. I am confident
that reviewing the activities carried out to date and exploring alternative search
methods will help to overcome the standstill. With this in mind, I urge the
Government of Iraq to consider employing modern technology and new approach es
to devise a holistic strategy on the way forward.

15-11374

3/4

S/2015/518

15. The tripartite mechanism, under the able chairmanship of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, remains vital in addressing the issue of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals. I am grateful that the observer status of
UNAMI has been extended, allowing it to continue to play a supporting and
facilitating role in this important humanitarian commitment. I am pleased that a
positive and constructive atmosphere of partnership and cooperation prevails among
the members, showcasing their enduring dedication. I welcome proposals and
innovative ideas on the way forward to be tabled at the upcoming meeting of the
Technical Subcommittee in September 2015.
16. I note the lack of progress with regard to the missing Kuwaiti property. I call
on the Government of Iraq to bring in innovative search methods and targeted
information campaigns to locate the national archives. I further encourage the Joint
Property Committee to meet regularly to bring needed progress on the file.
17. I further encourage the Government of Iraq to use the expertise and assistance
of UNAMI in facilitating its efforts in the search for missing Kuwaiti persons and
property. I reiterate the strong commitment and dedication of UNAMI and my
Special Representative and Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs in
playing the mandated role in full measure.

4/4

15-11374
