S/PRST/2017/18

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 October 2017
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 8063rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 5 October 2017, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Identical letters
dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council (S/2016/53)”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“Following the completion of the 12-month mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Colombia (the Mission) on 25 September 2017, the
Security Council welcomes the remarkable achievements in Colombia
following the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Long Lasting Peace reached between the Government of Colombia and the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia — People’s Army (FARC-EP).
“The Security Council takes note of the report from the Secretary General of 25 September (S/2017/801) and welcomes the assessments,
recommendations and lessons learned therein. The Security Council expresses
its intention to take them into account in the context of its ongoing efforts to
enhance the overall effectiveness of United Nations missions.
“The Security Council recalls resolutions 2261 (2016) and 2307 (2016)
and congratulates the parties on the historic progress made since the signing of
the Final Agreement including the culmination of the ceasefire, the cessation
of hostilities, the process of laying down of arms and the transformation of the
FARC-EP into a political party, bringing over five decades of conflict between
them to a close. The Council pays tribute to the political will of the p arties in
achieving these milestones and to the leadership and spirit of cooperation they
demonstrated in calling for the United Nations to partner with them in an
innovative tripartite monitoring and verification mechanism (MVM). The
Security Council emphasises that their determination and commitment has
ensured that Colombia’s peace process continues to be a source of inspiration
for the resolution of conflicts globally and retains the potential to set an
example for peace processes elsewhere in the world.
“The Security Council expresses its gratitude for the exemplary manner
in which the Mission, led by Special Representative of the Secretary -General,
Jean Arnault, accomplished the two tasks mandated to it by the Security
Council, based upon the agreement by the Parties, in having coordinated the
MVM for the monitoring and verification of the ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities and overseen the laying down of arms process. The Security Council

17-17567 (E)

061017

*1717567*

S/PRST/2017/18

underscores that this work played a vital role in supporting the successful
implementation of the corresponding provisions in the peace agreement. The
Council welcomes the Mission’s work with the MVM to promote a gender sensitive approach. The Council expresses its appreciation to the Mission for
delivering the swift, flexible and tailored support envisaged by the Council
and demonstrating the potential of the United Nations at its best.
“The Security Council also expresses its gratitude to the observer contributing countries, particularly those from the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States (CELAC). The Council also acknowledges the
two guarantors of the peace process, Cuba and Norway and the two
accompanying countries, Chile and Venezuela.
“The Security Council notes the equally important work still a head to
implement the specific security, political and socio -economic provisions of the
Final Peace Agreement and reaffirms the need for both parties to fulfil their
commitments to achieve a lasting peace. In that regard, the Council recalls
resolutions 2366 (2017) and 2377 (2017) which established and mandated the
United Nations Verification Mission to verify implementation by the
Government of Colombia and the FARC-EP of the process of political,
economic and social reincorporation of the FARC -EP and the implementation
of personal and collective security guarantees. The Council trusts that the
work of the Verification Mission will be a strong source of s upport and
encouragement for Colombia’s peace process.”

2/2

17-17567
