United Nations

S/PV.6157

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6157th meeting
Tuesday, 7 July 2009, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rugunda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Quarrey
Ms. Rice
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office for West Africa
(S/2009/332)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-39336 (E)

*0939336*

S/PV.6157

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Office for West Africa (S/2009/332)
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Said Djinnit,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Office for West Africa.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Djinnit to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Costa to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/332, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Office for
West Africa.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Said Djinnit and Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa.
I now give the floor to Mr. Said Djinnit.
Mr. Djinnit: I feel particularly privileged to
address the Security Council on the situation in West
Africa and the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa (UNOWA) over the last six months.
Let me start by stressing the obvious, which is that

2

West Africa is part of the African continent. Therefore,
the search for solutions to West African problems
cannot be dissociated from the overall peace efforts on
the African continent
The trends of conflicts in Africa show that, since
the early 1990s, West Africa has been a laboratory for
peace and security. On the one hand, the subregion has
had more than its fair share of violent conflicts, with
dire consequences for development, stability and
human security. On the other hand, however,
experience shows that West Africa has learned much
from that difficult experience and has emerged as one
of the African subregions with the strongest
determination and the most effective institutional
framework to respond to challenges posed by political
instability and armed conflict.
The commitment of West African peacekeeping
forces, the Economic Community of West African
States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) in Liberia and
Sierra Leone and other contributions by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and its
member States to efforts aimed at addressing the
conflicts that afflicted the subregion, including in the
Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau and Togo, are a
testimony to the strong political will of West African
leaders and people to remain at the forefront of peace
efforts in their subregion.
The report before you (S/2009/332) presents the
state of peace and security in West Africa over the past
six months and the efforts deployed by the United
Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) to support
initiatives aimed at addressing the challenges of peace
and stability in the subregion. The report underscores
the progress in the overall peace and security situation
in the subregion, especially the positive developments
registered in post-conflict recovery and peacebuilding
and progress in the area of governance and the rule of
law.
More precisely, the determination of West Africa
to address its crises decisively with the support of the
United Nations and the wider international community,
as well as its efforts to strengthen institutions,
governance and the rule of law and to enhance the role
of civil society including women, has led to an
important reduction in the scope and level of violence
across the subregion. Indeed, there is currently no open
armed conflict going on in West Africa. The impact of
armed violence on State institutions and societies,

09-39336

S/PV.6157

illustrated, for instance, by the number of refugees and
internally displaced persons, has significantly
decreased.

It was particularly welcome in West Africa that
the Council, in its presidential statement dated 5 May
2009, expressed

Peace operations in Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and
Sierra Leone are steadily moving forward towards
post-conflict recovery and peace consolidation. In
Guinea-Bissau, the first round of presidential elections
has just been concluded and declared free, fair and
transparent, while the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau is transforming itself
into an integrated office for better coordination of
activities with all stakeholders so as to tackle the
formidable peacebuilding challenges in that country.

“its deep concern over the resurgence of
unconstitutional changes of government in a few
African countries” (S/PRST/2009/11, p. 1)

It is important to emphasize that the significant
progress achieved by West Africa in the area of peace,
security and stability remains extremely fragile, as the
root causes of conflict and instability persist. In some
cases, this progress is reversible, as illustrated by the
recent democratic setback in Mauritania, the prevailing
crisis in the Niger and other looming crises in the
subregion. Moreover, a number of growing or
emerging challenges, which include terrorist activities
in the Sahel band, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
governance problems, drug trafficking and organized
crime, jeopardize ongoing peace efforts in the
subregion. The potential impact of those threats on
international security should not be underestimated.
Meanwhile, the social and economic situation
remains precarious, as a result of the combined effects
of factors such as high demographic growth, declining
economic
growth,
rapid
urbanization,
youth
unemployment, climate change and food insecurity.
That is further exacerbated by the impact of the global
economic and financial crisis on West African
economies, which is deepening and is increasingly
destabilizing.
Allow me to highlight three specific challenges to
peace and security in West Africa that have continued
to require special attention and considerable efforts
during the past six months. The resurgence of
unconstitutional or violent changes of Government
emerged as one of the most alarming threats to peace
and stability in West Africa. Considering the strong
destabilizing effects of such events, the Security
Council decided, a few weeks ago, to focus on the
challenge of unconstitutional changes in Africa.

and called attention to
“the possible violence that may accompany such
events as well as the negative impact on
economic and social welfare of the people and the
development of affected countries.” (ibid, p. 1)
Against that background, allow me to recall that
all of the unconstitutional changes of government that
have taken place in Africa recently, with the exception
of the case of Madagascar, occurred in West Africa. A
failed coup attempt has also been reported in the
subregion in the period under review.
The United Nations and its Office for West Africa
have been playing an active role in the collective
efforts that have been deployed to address the political
crises
that
have
emerged
following
those
unconstitutional changes of government. In Mauritania,
efforts spearheaded by the Facilitation Team,
comprising Senegal, the African Union and the United
Nations, culminated in the signing, in early June, of a
framework agreement between the main political
forces, which paved the way to the return to
constitutional order in the country and the preparation
of presidential elections scheduled for 18 July 2009.
The leadership provided by Senegal and the
Facilitation Team and their determination, combined
with the unprecedented example of collaboration
between international organizations and individual
countries in promoting a consensual way out of the
crisis in Mauritania, should be commended and
emulated when tackling similar situations in the
subregion and the continent as a whole.
Meanwhile, in Mauritania we are faced with the
challenge of creating conditions for a free and fair
electoral process, despite a very tight schedule and a
rather difficult political environment, as a result of the
mistrust and conflicting interests among the various
parties represented in the consensual transitional
institutions, including the Independent Electoral
Commission.
In Guinea, efforts continue within the framework
of the International Contact Group, albeit in a context

09-39336

3

S/PV.6157

of mounting concerns about the pace and timing of the
transition. The forthcoming meeting of the
International Contact Group scheduled for 16 and
17 July in Conakry should provide the opportunity for
a critical review of the situation in that country in the
light of the commitment of the authorities to the time
frame leading to elections before the end of the year.
On that occasion, the International Contact Group is
also expected to devise ways and means to revamp the
process.
In Togo, UNOWA, in liaison with ECOWAS, has
been encouraging the main stakeholders to create
propitious conditions for organizing peaceful and
democratic presidential elections in 2010. It has also
been collaborating closely with the United Nations
country team, the Government and ECOWAS to
address critical issues related to security and elections.
Closely related to unconstitutional changes of
government in West Africa is the recurrent question of
security sector reform. Council members will recall
that the mission of the Security Council to West Africa
from 26 June to 5 July 2003 noted in its report that
“in each country which has been a source of
instability in the subregion in recent years the
issue of the reform of the security sector is of
paramount importance”. (S/2003/688, para. 68).
Six years later, the challenge of security sector
reform remains a pending and burning issue in a
number of countries in the subregion. As part of its
activities on security sector reform, the United Nations
Office for West Africa has initiated a process aimed at
clarifying the role of the security sector and other
institutions and enhancing their capacity in providing
security during electoral processes in West Africa. This
initiative, jointly carried out with ECOWAS, United
Nations country teams and Governments, is going on,
with interventions planned in countries where critical
elections are scheduled in 2009 and 2010.
There are other recurrent security challenges in
West Africa. Drug trafficking is currently one of the
most prominent. Indeed, the subregion has emerged as
an important route of transit for drug trafficking,
particularly of cocaine from Latin America to Europe,
with drug trafficking networks taking advantage of the
weaknesses of West African States, including porous
borders, abundant unemployed youth, widespread
corruption and poverty. The measures taken by West
African States, with the support of the United Nations,

4

to combat drug trafficking and criminal activities —
especially the ECOWAS regional action plan to address
the growing problem of illicit drug trafficking,
organized crime and drug abuse in West Africa —
deserve unflinching support.
In addition to the important contribution the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
has been making in supporting subregional efforts at
addressing this plight, UNOWA is expected to play an
increasing role in channelling efforts towards
achieving common goals, including those outlined in
the ECOWAS plan of action. Tomorrow, here in New
York, ECOWAS, the Department of Political Affairs,
UNOWA, UNODC, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and INTERPOL will launch the West Africa
Coast Initiative. This joint programme is aimed at
building the capacity of the police and law
enforcement agencies in four pilot countries — Côte
d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau —
thus allowing them to more effectively prevent and
combat organized crime and drug trafficking. I take
this opportunity to appeal for the full support of
Security Council members and the international
community as a whole for these and other efforts to
facilitate the implementation of the ECOWAS action
plan.
Before concluding, I wish to stress that, to be
effective in West Africa, action on cross-border and
regional challenges to peace and security should take
place as part of a broader, comprehensive strategy of
conflict resolution and crisis prevention. In this
context, UNOWA will continue to promote and
strengthen a regional and integrated approach to crossborder issues in the subregion.
The United Nations, through its various entities,
has been providing a highly appreciated contribution to
assist the subregion to face its daunting socioeconomic and development challenges. In this respect,
UNOWA will pursue its efforts aimed at promoting
synergies within the United Nations regional system
and situating the role and contribution of each entity
within the overall objective of the United Nations, that
of achieving lasting peace, stability and progress in the
subregion, and its vision of delivering as one.
Collaboration with national authorities, civil
society and other international actors, in accordance
with their respective mandates, will remain a priority.
UNOWA will continue to work closely with regional

09-39336

S/PV.6157

organizations, especially ECOWAS, which play a
critical role in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts. In particular, it will pursue the
promising avenue of triangular collaboration between
the United Nations, ECOWAS and the African Union
that it has promoted in the past months, especially in
preventive action.
In my capacity as Chairman of the CameroonNigeria Mixed Commission and of the Follow-Up
Committee on the implementation of the Greentree
Agreement, I, along with my team, will continue to
provide support for the ongoing demarcation process of
the boundary between the two countries. Particular
attention will be given to promoting confidencebuilding measures between the two countries,
addressing the problems faced by the affected
population along the boundary and encouraging
bilateral cooperation in tackling common security
threats in the Bakassi peninsula and beyond, with the
support of partners in the international community.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the Security
Council for the attention it continues to devote to West
Africa and for its support to the United Nations Office
for West Africa.
The President: I thank Mr. Djinnit for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Antonio Maria Costa.
Mr. Costa: Let me start by congratulating the
Council, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Djinnit, because,
during the past three years, I have brought to the
Council’s attention — in this very Chamber — the
threat posed by drug trafficking to the security of West
Africa. All concerned have responded pro-actively.
Today, I am pleased to report, on the basis of the
evidence that was disclosed in the World Drug Report a
few weeks ago, that the volume of drug trafficking
through the region of West Africa seems to be
diminishing, and significantly so. It is evident from the
lower volume of seizures in West Africa — there have
been none, zero, in 2009 so far — and from the sharp
decline in the number of air couriers coming from West
Africa to Europe. That decline has been major — about
a 35 per cent drop over a few months.
Again, I congratulate Member States in the
region, the Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Economic Community of West

09-39336

African States (ECOWAS) and the Special
Representative for responding so effectively to the
crisis.
Of course, the situation remains very volatile.
Around 20 tons of cocaine are still transiting through
the region every year, valued at about $1 billion at its
destination, mostly the European market. There is no
guarantee, therefore, that the downward trend will
continue.
Recent upheavals in Guinea-Bissau and in Guinea
show that there are powerful forces with a stake in
illicit activity. Until the underlying conditions of
vulnerability
in
the
region
—
poverty,
underdevelopment and inadequate governance — are
addressed, the region will remain attractive to those
who operate outside the law and abuse authority for
personal gain.
There are also other risks. First, we know that
drug trafficking is being displaced from West Africa to
the Sahel in North Africa, and especially down the
south-west coast, towards Southern Africa. Traffickers
are simply diversifying the routes, having met
opposition in West Africa.
Secondly and more important, drugs are not the
only illicit flows or the only illicit activity. Today, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
is releasing a threat assessment on transnational
trafficking in West Africa. I think it has been
distributed to Council members. It is a brand-new
document, not yet released to the press. It contains a
great deal of data and many graphs, showing that West
Africa is still under attack by smugglers of arms,
people, counterfeit medicines, toxic waste, cigarettes
and oil and other natural resources. In short, organized
crime makes West Africa much more prone to political
instability and, of course, much less able to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals.
As Ambassador Djinnit has already mentioned, in
order to tackle the threat posed by organized crime,
UNODC has teamed up with the Department for
Political Affairs, Ambassador Djinnit’s United Nations
Office for West Africa, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the International
Criminal Police Organization to support the action plan
of the Economic Community of West African States
against drugs and crime, the implementation of which
is to be monitored by the Security Council. We are
establishing transnational crime units in Guinea-

5

S/PV.6157

Bissau, Sierra Leone, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire to
complement peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. I
believe that to be innovative and promising as well.
My Office is also providing technical assistance
to strengthen criminal justice and crime-fighting
capacity, for example in Cape Verde and GuineaBissau, and soon in Mali and Sierra Leone. Our
support for the judicial police in Guinea-Bissau has
been instrumental in assisting the commission
investigating the killings of the President and the chief
of army.
Working together with DPKO — and this is
something that is new for us — we have put police
advisors on the ground. But much more is needed
throughout the region to support the process of
security-sector reform. Too often, the monopoly that a
State has on the use of force is abused for the
enrichment of a select few. Indeed, the recent military
and other coups underline the need for civilian
oversight of armed forces and for the restoration of the
constitutional order, as we are now seeing in
Mauritania.
Affected States also need the hardware to
confront criminal groups, which are often better
equipped than the police itself, or even the army. A
number of West African presidents and senior ministers
have appealed to have their countries provided with the
means to protect their borders, their coasts and their
airspace. I urge all members of the Council to answer
that call and to provide the hardware, patrol boats,
helicopters and radar that are desperately needed to
defend the sovereignty of those countries against the
onslaught of organized crime. The bottom line is to
strengthen the rule of law in West Africa. That is vital
for efforts to reduce vulnerability to organized crime
and the corruption that enables it. I urge the
Governments of the region to implement United
Nations conventions against corruption and organized
crime.
In conclusion, I invite all the members of the
Council to put the situation in West Africa in a global

6

perspective. We must not overlook the fact that most
illicit activity is only transiting via West Africa. It is
not originating there and it is not ending there. Rich
countries, particularly in Europe, should assume their
responsibilities by curbing their appetite for drugs —
as indeed drugs transiting through West Africa are
bound for Europe — cheap labour and the human
beings who are modern-day slaves being smuggled
through the region. In particular, my Office is asking
rich countries to stop using West Africa as a dumping
ground for weapons, waste and fake medicines.
The report to which I just referred includes some
terrible statistics pertaining to oil bunkering, which
derives from the theft of 10 per cent of the region’s oil
output, as well as to sources of pollution, corruption
and revenues for insurgents. Eighty per cent of the
cigarettes marketed in North and West Africa is of
illicit origin. Fifty to 60 per cent of all medications
used in West Africa is counterfeit or substandard.
Africa is a major destination for electronic waste,
including old computers and telephones. A good
percentage of European e-waste, in fact 8.7 million
tons, goes to Africa. All of that must come to an end.
I began by thanking and congratulating all the
members of the Council, for our experience has shown
that joint action can indeed contain crime. In addition
to the statistics I have just reported, we have seen that
success with the Kimberly Process against blood
diamonds and the Bamako Convention on hazardous
wastes. We hope to see the same results with the Praia
process against drug trafficking. Let us therefore unite
to disrupt other forms of illicit activity, which are
causing so much pain in Africa. I thank the Council for
its support.
The President: I thank Mr. Costa for his briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

09-39336
