United Nations

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6472nd meeting
Friday, 21 January 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Čolaković/Mr. Jerkić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bosnia and Herzegovina)

Members:

Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Pontes
Mr. Huang Hongjiang
Mr. Calderón-Velásquez
Mr. Marchetti
Mr. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Eick
Mr. Gupta
Ms. Tawk
Mr. Edokpa
Mr. Vaz Patto
Ms. Eloeva
Ms. Rulumeni
Mr. Harvey
Mr. Banks

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Institution-building
Letter dated 10 January 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2011/16)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-21335 (E)

*1121335*

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I again wish to remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than four
minutes, in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously. I would also like to remind
delegations with longer statements that they may
circulate them in writing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Costa
Rica.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking the delegation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina for its initiative in convening
this open debate. I would also like to thank Deputy
Prime Minister José Luis Guterres of Timor-Leste,
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Ambassador Peter
Wittig for their opening briefings.
Costa Rica has decided to participate in this
important debate because we believe that we can
contribute some pertinent ideas and experiences on
institution-building as a way to consolidate peace and
improve the well-being of people in the aftermath of
conflict. To recall the historical background, in 1948
our country went through a brief civil war brought on
by elections disputes. What made this case different
from so many others was that the victorious
Government junta soon handed over power to the
legitimately elected authorities, abolished the army and
convened an assembly that issued the Constitution that
still governs us today. Those institutional decisions,
along with longstanding political, economic and social
values and dynamics, explain our continued stability
and internal peace in a region that has so often been
affected by conflict.
During the 1980s, when wars were bloodying
Central America, our country played a key role in
setting a course towards peace. On 7 August 1987, the
Presidents of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras and Nicaragua signed the accord known as
Esquipulas II, in which they committed themselves to
initiating national dialogue processes aimed at ending
internal hostilities, holding free and fair elections and
forging a peaceful and democratic future.
The success of this process was primarily the
result of the willingness of local actors, who were
exhausted by violence and aware that the imminent end
to the Cold War would cease to fuel hostilities.
However, the active participation of the international

2

community and the existence of regional leadership to
guide those efforts also played an essential role. That
leadership was embodied by Presidents Vinicio Cerezo
Arévalo of Guatemala and Óscar Arias Sánchez of
Costa Rica, who was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize
for his efforts. For their part, the Organization of
American States and the United Nations were able to
coordinate efforts to promote national and regional
willingness to support the process and ensure the
implementation of agreements.
Various lessons can be learned from this situation,
as reflected in the elements to which I have just referred.
What was key to consolidating peace, however, was
understanding that a cessation of hostilities would be to
little avail if the regional agreement and the national
accords that ensued in Nicaragua, El Salvador and
Guatemala did not address the root causes of the
conflicts. That understanding was also the reason for the
decision to set up local political, institutional and
socio-economic follow-up mechanisms, along with
valuable international support.
Central America’s evolution since that time also
led us to understand that if challenges are not
addressed in time they can weaken peace processes,
place democracy at risk and even damage relations
between neighbouring nations. Our region buried its
internal wars, promoted democratic processes and
opened up uncertain paths towards improving people’s
well-being. However, this did not necessarily bring
with it a vigorously inclusive development process, an
end to violence — now criminal in nature — or the
widespread consolidation of democratic institutions
and practices. Today some Central American countries
are among the world’s most violent. Moreover, one
country recently violated the principles of sovereignty
and territorial integrity. To varying degrees, all of this
endangers peace and coexistence at both the local and
regional levels.
But from those missteps come important lessons
about post-conflict institution-building, to which I
should now like to turn.
First, we should design policies that, in addition
to promoting post-conflict stability and economic
development, also contribute to the widest possible
enjoyment of their benefits. Social inclusion is key to
peace.
Secondly, in countries with a large percentage of
young people such as ours, it is crucial to increase

11-21335

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

opportunities for youth in the areas of education,
recreation and employment. Without that, both the
temptations posed by gangs and organized crime and
the continuing cycle of poverty may prove to be
unavoidable.
Thirdly, the establishment of institutions,
including political parties, must be accompanied by
good political practices. Without observing such
practices, institutions can become victims of corruption
and manipulation, or become simply window dressing
for authoritarianism, arbitrary rule and adventurism.
Fourthly, the effectiveness and independence of
judicial authorities is another key factor to lasting
peace, given that the judiciary is the ultimate resort for
the peaceful resolution of conflicts and the most
obvious barrier to impunity and crime.
Fifthly, we must keep in mind that it is more
difficult to entrench a genuine culture of democracy
and peace than to establish institutions. Peace and
democracy education is therefore essential.
Finally, fostering an independent and vigorous
civil society, a free and honest press and a culture of
accountability also substantially increases prospects for
peacebuilding.
To sum up, we believe that actions should lead to
comprehensive approaches to conflicts, both in order to
resolve them and to consolidate the progress made. The
role of the United Nations, and of the Security Council
in particular, is key to that end; as is the guidance
provided by the Peacebuilding Commission. An
essential part of the mission of the United Nations must
be working as part of the ongoing processes of conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, including
the promotion of development, institutions and a
culture of peace and democracy.
That necessarily implies a joint effort by all
organs and agencies of the United Nations at every
stage of those processes, as well as the determination
not to act only when weapons are fired but when
threats appear. That is something that must of course
start with a serious political commitment.
The President: I
representative of Uganda.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Lukwiya (Uganda): I thank the presidency of
the Council for organizing this important debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding. I also thank the Secretary-

11-21335

General, the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste,
and the Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission for
their insightful statements this morning.
Uganda welcomes the increasing emphasis on the
need to ensure that post-conflict peacebuilding activities
are carried out in a more coordinated, coherent and
effective way. Post-conflict countries face a number of
challenges, including insecurity, weak or non-existent
State institutions, the resettlement of internally displaced
persons and refugees, reconstruction and economic
recovery, which are often compounded by lack of
resources. It is therefore essential that peacebuilding
efforts be underpinned by recognition of the need to
address the root causes of conflict and to build effective
national institutions for sustainable peace and
development.
In this regard, the primary responsibility for
re-establishing and building the institutions of
governance lies with national authorities, supported by
international partners, including regional organizations
and the United Nations. In Uganda’s experience, the
building of national institutions requires identifying
key priorities based on a country’s specific needs. This
should be followed by developing and agreeing on a
national strategy to address them, and by mobilizing
the requisite political, financial and technical support
and resources. Given the competing demands on scarce
resources, it is important to sequence implementation
beginning with the most urgent priorities. These
include guaranteeing security of life and property,
national reconciliation, adherence to the rule of law,
and promoting democratic governance. It is also
important to develop and implement a national
economic recovery programme.
In order to build effective national institutions in
post-conflict situations, these must enjoy popular
support and legitimacy to overcome the distrust and
suspicion that follow conflict. One way to achieve
public trust and legitimacy is by ensuring that
institutions are responsive to the needs of the
populations and that decision-making is consultative
and participatory. There is also a need to focus on
delivering tangible dividends, including the provision
of basic services and the improvement of the standard
of living of the population. In cases where gross
violations of human rights have been committed,
justice must be done so that those responsible are held
accountable.

3

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

The major challenge post-conflict countries face in
building national institutions is mainly the lack of
financial resources and technical expertise in various
fields. We welcome the increasing engagement of the
United Nations, through the Peacebuilding Commission,
regional and international partners, and international
financial institutions in support of national capacity
development and improving mobilization of resources
for peacebuilding. The best and most sustainable
approach is to build on existing national human
resources and capacities. Where technical expertise and
assistance are provided, emphasis should also be placed
on building national capacities to undertake those
responsibilities.
Finally, we look forward to the imminent
completion of the Senior Advisory Group’s review of
international civilian capacities and its recommendations
for improving the international response by
strengthening the availability and appropriateness of
civilian capacities for post-conflict peacebuilding. Of
particular interest will be proposals on how best to
mobilize and organize specific civilian capacities from
the global South and among women, and on how to
ensure that their deployment enhances the building of
national capacities. Uganda reiterates the importance of
women’s full participation in post-conflict peacebuilding
and involvement in institution-building.
The President: I give
representative of Morocco.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
My delegation congratulates you, Madame, on your
country’s leadership and proactive work since
assuming the presidency this month. There is no doubt
that today’s debate will complement those we have
already held on the important issue of peacebuilding
and the ways and means of guaranteeing the building
or rebuilding of State institutions in order to maintain
peace in the post-conflict context.
While we associate ourselves with the statement
made by the representative of Bangladesh on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement, my delegation should like
to focus on the following points.
Since 1992, the total number of armed conflicts
has been reduced by 40 per cent. According to the
World Bank, the financial costs of ongoing conflicts
throughout the world, and in particular in Africa, are
estimated at some $54 billion. These figures
underscore the magnitude of the work that remains to

4

be done and the critical value of strengthening the
institutional capacities of States in the post-conflict
context. The emergence of lasting peace often involves
the management of the critical phase of transition
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In that
transition phase, rebuilding and strengthening the
institutional capacities of States emerging from conflict
is of particular importance, given the numerous
dangers of backsliding.
In that respect, coordination between local and
international stakeholders is critical to stabilizing the
host country. It has been noted, however, that one of
the main challenges to peacebuilding is ensuring the
consistency and coordination of the work of
international actors. Too often, the United Nations and
its international partners act without sufficiently
involving the authorities of the host country. A space
must be created in which the host country can take
ownership of the project in order to lay the foundations
of lasting peace.
These observations encourage us to focus our
collective thinking on the best way to take the existing
institutional capacities of the host country into
consideration and to strengthen them. We must not
misidentify our objectives. Peacebuilding missions
must support and not compete with national
institutional capacities. Thus, a United Nations postconflict presence must ensure that national strategies
are formulated with the host country with a focus on
priorities that include the strengthening of the
institutional capacities of the host, the restoration of
the rule of law, and reform of the security and judicial
sectors.
In the framework of such a vast undertaking, it is
critical that United Nations efforts be effectively
coordinated in order consistently to address the
establishment of peace, peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and development so that swift and effective action can
be taken immediately after a conflict. The
Peacebuilding Commission plays a key role in that
respect.
During the transition between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, the United Nations has a key role to
play in assisting national authorities from the very
outset in drafting a strategy to establish and strengthen
State institutional capacities. It goes without saying
that international partners must align their financial,
technical and political support with that strategy. The

11-21335

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

Kingdom of Morocco stresses the importance for
national authorities to take ownership of peacebuilding
and to shoulder as soon as possible the responsibility
for rebuilding State institutions, restoring the rule of
law, revitalizing the economy and reforming the
security sector and the judiciary so as to ensure that
basic services are provided to meet the basic needs of
the people.

In conclusion, peacebuilding cannot be effective
without establishing robust institutional capacities
based on the rule of law and good governance. The best
way to ensure that a State can move towards peace is to
develop its institutional architecture by consolidating
the rule of law and guaranteeing more effective and
inclusive public administration on behalf of the
population concerned.

In that regard, an integrated approach to
peacebuilding must be developed by creating synergies
and necessary coordination between national and
international structures. Numerous lessons can be
drawn from the work of the various country
configurations of the Peacebuilding Commission, in
particular those linked to the implementation of
institutional capacity-building programmes. It should
be
underscored
that
the
establishment
or
re-establishment of State institutions goes hand-inhand with economic revitalization. Socio-economic
activities have a quick impact and help to strengthen
State institutional capacities in the post-conflict period.
Emphasis should therefore be placed on such catalytic
areas as youth employment, infrastructure development
and the provision of such basic services in the areas of
sanitation, drinking water and health.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.

We cannot emphasize enough that the
peacebuilding phase is crucial to stabilizing a country.
Statistics indicate that 40 to 50 per cent of all conflicts
are the result of relapse. That points to the great
importance of peacebuilding, which is above all a
collective undertaking. The challenges it presents
cannot be overcome without the active involvement of
the international community in strengthening State
institutional capacity. That illustrates the crucial need
for arriving at a partnership approach to peacebuilding
between the host country, the United Nations and
donors. In that regard, we welcome the increased
coordination and coherence between the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the World Bank in the area of
peacebuilding, whose goal must of course be to
establish that same spirit of partnership.
Given that peacebuilding is above all more of a
civilian than a military endeavour, it is essential to
ensure necessary civilian capacities in critical areas of
host country institutional recovery, especially in the
areas of training, public administration and judicial and
good-governance capacity-building.

11-21335

Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, Japan extends
its congratulations to Bosnia and Herzegovina on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
Japan convened an open debate on peacebuilding at the
Council last April (see S/PV.6299). We are thus
heartened by the holding of this meeting, which serves
to highlight the success of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a country that has experienced the post-conflict
peacebuilding process, as well as to provide
encouragement for others currently undergoing that
process. We also appreciate the briefings by the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. José Luis
Guterres of Timor-Leste and Ambassador Wittig of
Germany, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC).
Japan attaches a great importance to institutionbuilding. Based on our own experience in
reconstruction, valuing national ownership is the
primary principle of our development assistance. In
that context, discussion on the role of the Security
Council in promoting institution-building is relevant. I
would like to offer three points from Japan’s
perspective.
First, the Security Council should utilize the PBC
more proactively. I shall return to this issue later.
Secondly, there is a global shortage of civilian
capacity for institution-building. There is therefore an
urgent need for fostering such capacity. In order to
facilitate the training for and the expeditious
deployment of such capability, we believe that the
Security Council must review and implement the
conclusions of the upcoming report by Mr. Guéhenno
in a timely manner.
Thirdly, as the mechanism for partnership in
peacebuilding is complex and involves various
stakeholders, the Security Council must promote strong
leadership on the ground to enable United Nations

5

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

representatives and the Government concerned to work
together towards solutions, taking into account the
specificity of the situation. We also hope that the
Secretary-General will appoint strong special
representatives, giving particular consideration to
women candidates. We hope that Member States will
cooperate in submitting appropriate nominees.
Concerning the PBC, the Security Council should
tap further into its potential. We believe that will
contribute significantly to the Council’s decisionmaking process.
First, the PBC has been holding consultations on
some countries on the agenda more frequently than the
Security Council itself, including with the participation
of the countries concerned and international
organizations. Building a stronger link between the
deliberations at the two bodies will contribute to
providing solutions to various peacebuilding issues.
Last year, Japan facilitated the holding of an informal
dialogue of the Council with the PBC. The Security
Council should consider holding such informal
dialogues on a more regular basis, which will also
contribute to better relationships with host countries.
Secondly, the PBC can be used as a forum for
discussing exit strategies for peacekeeping missions.
Liberia could serve as a test case in that regard when
determining whether we can arrive at a successful exit
for peacekeeping mission in order to handover to
peacebuilding partners. We also heard from the
representative of Timor-Leste today that his country
needs a smooth transition from peacekeeping to
assistance from development partners. In that context,
it is worthwhile to consider placing a country on the
agenda of the PBC in order to provide more effective
international support in the transition phase. The PBC
could increase the number of countries on its agenda
and seek to determine the best strategies to assist postconflict countries based on lessons learned.
Thirdly, the PBC is also a valuable forum for
raising international awareness and mobilizing
resources. With that in mind, Japan intends to add
approximately $13 million to the Peacebuilding Fund.
We hope to utilize the Fund to more effectively fill the
gap between peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We urge
other countries to contribute to the Fund as well.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Japan’s
appreciation for the holding of today’s meeting focused
on institution-building, which is a fundamental element

6

of the peacebuilding process. Japan will continue to
contribute actively in this field, including through
exploring the expanded utility of the PBC.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Peter
Shwaiger, Deputy Head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Shwaiger: Let me start by thanking Bosnia
and Herzegovina for organizing this debate on
institution-building in the context of post-conflict
peacebuilding. Your country, Madam President, has
first-hand experience of the importance of a topic such
as this and how deserving it is of the Council’s
attention. I also want to thank the Secretary-General,
the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste and
Mr. Peter Wittig, in his capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), for their statements
this morning.
The following countries align themselves with
this declaration: the candidate countries Turkey,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Iceland and Montenegro; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Serbia; the European Free Trade Association country
Norway, member of the European Economic Area; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Armenia.
“Nothing is possible without men, but nothing is
lasting without institutions”. That is a quote from Jean
Monnet, the chief architect of European unity. The late
Richard Holbrooke, the chief architect of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s Peace Accord, once invoked those
words when arguing that one cannot build peace
without building institutions. As the concept paper
(S/2011/16, annex) for today’s debate underscores,
national authorities are in the lead here, but the
international community has an important supporting
role to play. From our side, for the sake of brevity, let
me highlight just three elements that we think are
particularly relevant today: coordination, civilian
deployment capacities and civil society involvement.
First is better coordination of the different
international actors on the ground, including
international financial institutions and bilateral donors.
The Secretary-General’s 2009 report on peacebuilding
(S/2009/304) stated that it was incumbent upon the
United Nations to spearhead such coordination,
especially in the earliest phase. It also stated that that

11-21335

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

calls for stronger, more effective and better supported
United Nations leadership teams on the ground.
However, as the Secretary-General also acknowledged,
those United Nations leadership teams, as well as the
wider international community, need more clarity from
New York on the roles and responsibilities of the
various United Nations entities for the critical
peacebuilding sectors. We hope to see further advances
towards a more rational division of labour, including
through incentives to cooperate and harmonize, and we
encourage the Secretariat, funds and programmes to
press on with the reforms.
Also, the potential of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) should be further unlocked through
a strengthened link with the field so that United
Nations leadership teams on the ground can profit more
from its strategic guidance and political clout,
including when it comes to institution-building.
Furthermore, I would like to reiterate here the
Secretary-General’s remark that the Security Council
could profit more from the PBC’s recommendations in
the Council’s own early consideration of post-conflict
situations, especially when there is a peacekeeping
mission on the ground. That would help to tie a
mission’s activities into the wider coordinated
peacebuilding and institution-building effort in a
particular country. Let us not forget that successful
institution-building, particularly in the security and
justice sectors, helps pave the way towards the
sustainable exit of any peacekeeping mission.
The second element that I want to mention is
civilian deployment capacities. The European Union
attaches great importance to the review currently under
way in that area. A key task of the review’s Senior
Advisory Group is to develop proposals to ensure that
the deployment of civilian experts in post-conflict
countries serves the goal of building national capacity.
We look forward to receiving the results of that civilian
capacities review soon, and hope that they will be in
the form of concrete and realistic objectives and
recommendations, to be given appropriate follow-up.
The goal is a more demand-driven, dynamic and
flexible civilian deployment that builds on existing
national capacities and exhibits a strong South-South
character. We hope that the review will chart a path to,
for example, the increased global availability of
civilian experts for post-conflict situations and the
seamless interoperability of civilian capacities within
the United Nations system and between the United

11-21335

Nations and other key players, such as regional
organizations.
Another important point for us is the enhanced
deployment of female civilian experts, in the spirit of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the Secretary-General’s
action plan on ensuring women’s participation in
peacebuilding. Post-conflict institutions cannot be
effective unless they are gender-equitable.
The third and last element that I will mention is
civil society involvement. Bolstering civilian oversight
mechanisms and local civil society organizations and
giving those organizations a seat at the peacebuilding
table from day one will enhance the legitimacy and
demand-driven nature of both the priorities and the
institutions devised there. That is what guides much of
the European Union’s institution-building assistance
around the world.
For example, in Timor-Leste, in the framework of
cooperation with Portuguese-speaking countries, the
European Union, at the request of the Government and
together with the United Nations Development
Programme, is working hard to strengthen the capacity
of Parliament and the media. Among other things, we
will provide media training to parliamentarians and
organize seminars for journalists on the role and the
functions of parliament in the democratic process.
Furthermore, the European Union has recently
funded extensive research on participatory approaches
to justice and security sector reform in a number of
conflict-affected countries. We are happy to share the
results of that exercise with interested partners. Finally,
European Union security sector reform programmes,
developed jointly with Governments in places such as
the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, revolve around increased
civilian and parliamentary oversight and accountability
to citizens.
It is important to draw strategic lessons, as we are
doing today, and to make them available in field
manuals. At the same time, we are aware that one-sizefits-all solutions do not exist and that institutionbuilding efforts will always have to be tailored to the
specific post-conflict conditions on the ground. As the
concept paper points out, national actors know those
conditions best, and that is one reason that they should
be in the lead. At the end of the day, successful
institutional development cannot be transplanted from
elsewhere, but is home grown. That is why we are

7

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

always happy to hear from the countries themselves,
for example through today’s statement by Deputy
Prime Minister José Luís Guterres, whose country now
chairs the Group of Seven Plus and co-chairs the
International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and
Statebuilding.

To harness the synergy and increase the
possibility of success on the ground, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and sustainable development should be
pursued in parallel. In addition, both entry and exit
strategies need to be planned from the initial stages, as
well.

Supporting home-grown institutional development
has long been at the heart of much European Union
assistance, be it in the Balkans, the Middle East, Africa,
Afghanistan or Haiti. We would like to reaffirm our
commitment to pursuing that cause and to working with
national authorities, the United Nations, other
international actors, civil society organizations and the
people in post-conflict countries themselves.

Peacebuilding operations should be executed in a
way to further strengthen and respect national
ownership and the priorities of the recipient countries.
The ultimate goal of peacebuilding is to stabilize the
post-conflict situation and to establish a basis for longterm sustainable development. Institution-building is
inherent in that formula for success. To that end,
international organizations, financial institutions and
civil society also have an integral role to play.

The President: Before I give the floor to the next
speaker, I wish once again to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): I will
surely limit my statement to four minutes.
At the outset, I would like express my
appreciation to you, Madame President, for organizing
this meaningful open debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding and institution- building.
The scourge of armed conflict causes massive
loss of life and unquantifiable societal loss. At the
same time, it also severely destroys the key institutions
of the nation and, eventually, the Government cannot
function properly in support of the daily life of the
people. Sixty years ago, the Republic of Korea suffered
a devastating and sustained conflict. Therefore, we
recognize that fact all too well.
After the cessation of conflict, the building of
institutions should commence at the earliest possible
juncture. Indeed, post-conflict institution-building
should be part of a holistic peacebuilding approach.
Working side by side with humanitarian relief and
long-term development assistance are important
features. The window of opportunity in post-conflict
situations is short-lived. Therefore, it must be seized
upon to prevent a relapse into violence, which happens
mostly within the first decade following a conflict.

8

In that regard, partnership among all stakeholders
should be strengthened, with the Peacebuilding
Commission playing the role of facilitator. Within the
United Nations system, relations among the
Commission, the Security Council and the General
Assembly need to be further defined in a more strategic
and coordinated manner. Outside the United Nations
system, we need to make further efforts to establish
constructive relations with the Bretton Woods
institutions, including the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, as well as regional and
non-governmental organizations. Considering the
increasing role of the private sector in the
peacebuilding arena, we also need to continuously
engage civil society and other players in the private
sector.
Institution-building must ensure that the basic
capacity of a nation is restored at the earliest possible
time in order to stabilize the fragile post-conflict
situation. The rule of law, effective governance and
security-sector reform are the areas that require the
highest priority. Our efforts in any new peacebuilding
area of responsibility need to be focused on restoring
those basic functions of a country for both short-term
and longer-term sustainable success.
Once again, closer linkage and coordination
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission is crucial in carrying out peacebuilding
mandates and helping countries to meet multifaceted
post-conflict demands in the field. The challenges
identified during the first few years of the
Commission’s operation only reinforce the importance
and critical value of this linkage. Consolidating and

11-21335

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

bolstering this relationship will help rebuild lasting
institutions in post-conflict areas.
An essential goal of peacebuilding is to present a
blueprint of political and socio-economic development
for the recipient country, with due consideration to
both its potentials and limits. In this process, the
building of sustainable institutions is the fundamental
groundwork for a country to effectively recover from
conflict. In conjunction with effective institutionbuilding, we believe that particular emphasis should be
placed in the areas of vocational training and education
for youth in order to ensure a more prosperous future
for all.
In bringing my remarks to a close, I would like to
highlight that just half century ago, the Republic of
Korea was a country striving to recover from a
devastating war. With the timely and efficient
assistance of the international community and the
United Nations, we were able to attain stability and
development in a relatively short period. From our own
experience, we understand and value the importance of
institution-building activities.
Against that backdrop, Korea has been
contributing to the Peacebuilding Fund on a regular
basis and has been a member of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission during
the past few years. We hope that Korea’s peacebuilding
activities within the United Nations will offer a
valuable opportunity for us to utilize our past
experiences. We want to help facilitate the efforts of
post-conflict countries to rebuild and develop their
institutions and societies and, in turn, the dreams of
future generations.

effectively. Considerable work remains to be done to
develop our understanding of best practices and the
practical tools to do the job.
New Zealand has been an active participant in
peacebuilding efforts in our region and beyond,
including as a significant contributor to United Nations
and United Nations-mandated operations in TimorLeste, Bougainville, Afghanistan and Solomon Islands.
I would like to share the following lessons we have
drawn from our past involvement in institutionbuilding in post-conflict societies.
First, missions with an institution-building
component must make national capacity-building a
core consideration in their planning and operations
from day one. That requires a careful assessment of
existing domestic capacities and priority capacitybuilding needs from the earliest stage of mandate
formation. It is crucial that those assessments also
include how the benefits of institution-building can be
spread beyond capital cities to regions and local
communities. It is important that consideration be
given to how a mission’s activities can best foster
national capacities and, conversely, how to avoid
displacing such capacities or stifling their emergence.
Effective institution-building also requires a clear
definition of the specific objectives being pursued and
of how assistance will transition to traditional
development partners once those have been achieved.
At the same time, it is important to balance that clarity
in direction and goals with sufficient flexibility to
enable mission leadership to adapt to changes on the
ground.

Ms. Cavanagh (New Zealand): I would like to
thank the delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina for
convening today’s open debate. In the interest of time,
I will deliver a shortened version of my statement.
Hard copies of the full version are being circulated.

Secondly, institution-building must be pursued in
accordance with nationally agreed priorities and
objectives. That is crucial to ensuring national
ownership, effective coordination and a greater chance
that capacities built will be sustained over the long
term. An inclusive approach to priority-setting is
required. Local communities and civil society play a
crucial role in holding together conflict-affected
societies.

Experience has shown that laying the foundations
for effective Government institutions is fundamental to
securing durable peace. However, despite the global
community’s best efforts, it is easier to point to
examples of qualified failure than to any of unqualified
success. Put simply, institution-building is inherently
difficult. No clear blueprint exists for doing it

Thirdly, institution-building assistance must be
grounded in a clear-eyed assessment of what capacities
are appropriate and sustainable over the long term.
Missions must ensure that the institutions they help
develop are capable of surviving their departure
without placing excessive strain on host Governments.
To do otherwise is to risk generating expectations that

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.

11-21335

9

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

cannot be fulfilled or to set States up for long-term
dependence on external assistance.
Fourthly, coordination of institution-building
assistance is crucial to ensuring its coherence and
effectiveness. Important strides have been made within
the United Nations system on delivering as one. But
that remains a work in progress. It is particularly
important that clarity be established early on among
actors and leadership teams on the ground regarding
respective
roles
and
responsibilities.
Better
coordination is also required with other actors, notably
international financial institutions, bilateral donors and
civil society. In particular, we welcome ongoing efforts
by the Secretary-General to enhance United NationsWorld Bank coordination on post-conflict institutionbuilding. Significant scope still remains to make such
coordination work more systematic and effective.
Fifthly, there must be a clear recognition of which
institution-building tasks Council-mandated missions
should lead on and which tasks other actors are better
equipped for. United Nations missions have a crucial
role in carrying out immediate stabilization tasks, in
supporting the early development of core State
institutions essential for maintaining stability and
security, in the early articulation of institution-building
priorities and in facilitating the delivery of assistance
by others. However, many institution-building
challenges remain better suited to agencies and donors
with a longer-term focus and with a greater
accumulation of relevant skills and experience.
Finally, there is an urgent need to enhance the
United Nations ability to identify and deploy relevant
civilian expertise in a timely manner. Effective
institution-building requires a complex and diverse mix
of skills. Recent experience has made it clear that
existing mechanisms for generating such expertise are
inadequate. Too often the expertise provided is
determined by available supply, rather than identified
need. Too often the process of identifying and deploying
experts drags on for a year or more. And too often the ad
hoc manner of its supply results in a plethora of actors
with differing approaches and advice.
If we are truly serious about the United Nations
playing a leading role in post-conflict institutionbuilding, there is an urgent need to significantly
strengthen the United Nations ability to rapidly
identify and deploy appropriately skilled civilian
experts. To achieve that, the Secretariat requires greater

10

flexibility to mobilize and utilize existing expertise
within the United Nations system. It needs to explore
more flexible arrangements for utilizing the resources
offered by Member States. We also need to consider
how the United Nations can better draw on external
pools of relevant civilian expertise, particularly those
from the global South. We hope the upcoming report of
the review of international civilian capacities will
provide concrete suggestions in these areas.
We have much to learn about how post-conflict
institution-building is best carried out and much work
to do to provide ourselves with the tools necessary to
undertake these tasks successfully. But it is vital that
we do learn the lessons, both positive and negative,
from our collective experiences to date, if we are to
meet the goals we have set ourselves in this area.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Morgan Sotomayor (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation would first like to commend
the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina for its
initiative in convening this debate. Mexico agrees with
the importance that Bosnia and Herzegovina places on
the need to include institution-building as a principal
element in peacebuilding strategies.
We also recognize the fact that when conflicts are
resolved through a peace agreement or ceasefire
between the parties, there is a greatly increased risk
that those conflicts could break out anew in the postconflict phase. However, such occasions also provide
opportunities to build the basic capacities needed to
ensure that peacebuilding efforts take hold. Success is
most likely if the political will and readiness to forge
consensus on the part of national actors, however
minimal, are seized in a timely and rapid way under the
favourable political conditions that generally emerge in
the phase immediately following the signing of a peace
agreement or ceasefire.
When there is no civil authority, the top priority
for the population is the reestablishment of a feeling of
security. Once progress is made in the area of security,
a variety of measures need to be implemented, such as
the restoration of Government institutions that are seen
as representing the whole population and having
sufficient legitimacy to introduce reforms to transform
systems and structures from the past that may have
contributed to the socio-economic inequality that led to
violence.

11-21335

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

During our recent membership of the Security
Council, Mexico noted that, in general, in countries
emerging from protracted conflict, attention is focused
on humanitarian assistance and recovery as immediate
priorities. In that regard, support for institutionbuilding is left to a later stage, which undermines the
capacity of the State to put in place conditions for
stability, national reconciliation, respect for human
rights and the promotion of long-term development.
My delegation would like to recall that, during
one of our terms as President of the Council, we
convened a debate on the strengthening of the rule of
law in the context of the maintenance of international
peace and security. On that occasion, the importance of
post-conflict capacity-building was recognized, in
particular building civil society capacity as a key
element for strengthening the rule of law and laying the
foundations of lasting peace.
Mexico believes that one essential task of the
Council is to set mandates for peacekeeping operations
that strengthen the rule of law within countries in or
emerging from conflict. My country therefore
appreciates and welcomes the fact that the Security
Council is increasingly incorporating this concept into
its decisions.
In that context, we reiterate that the immediate
priority in post-conflict situations must be supporting
the country to restore its institutions, including in the
initial phase, with the establishment of internationally
supported transition institutions, but also with the
decisive involvement of local capacities to ensure
national ownership and subsequent self-sustaining
development.
In these efforts, as recognized in the report
(S/2010/393, annex) of the 2010 review of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), co-facilitated by
Mexico, the Peacebuilding Commission must play a
more relevant role in providing advice and in drafting
and implementing peacebuilding strategies. It must
also strengthen its coordinating role and its strategic
relationships with other United Nations bodies,
regional organizations and international financial
institutions.
It is important for the PBC to ensure that
international assistance is in keeping with national
priorities and assists in building institutional capacities
in crucial peacebuilding areas. Mexico reiterates the
importance of establishing greater international civil

11-21335

capacities in a fast, effective, coherent and coordinated
way in countries emerging from conflict. In particular,
we should take advantage of the capacities of the
southern hemisphere and the potential of women,
taking account of their crucial role in peacebuilding
processes. In that regard, we hope that the next report
of the Secretary-General on post-conflict peacebuilding
will include recommendations for strengthening the
capacity of the international community and the United
Nations to support national institutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Acharya (Nepal): At the outset, let me
express my delegation’s sincere appreciation to you,
Madam President, for having organized this important
debate and prepared a comprehensive concept paper
(S/2011/16, annex). Nepal has emerged from conflict
and is making efforts to consolidate the gains made in
the areas of peace, stability and development. We are
therefore aware of the importance of deliberations such
as these.
Peacebuilding is an important new dimension of
our work, which calls for targeted but coherent and
coordinated efforts on the political, security,
humanitarian and development fronts. These efforts
cannot be made in the absence of effective networks
for institution-building. In the aftermath of conflict,
many State institutions either collapse or become
dysfunctional. Even short-term goals such as delivering
humanitarian assistance and basic services become
extremely difficult, let alone the provision of
functional, effective governance, which is the
foundation of economic revitalization and sustainable
development. It is therefore important to give due
priority to the institution-building aspect in planning
and setting mandates for United Nations field missions,
whether they come under the political, peacekeeping or
peacebuilding category.
Here it is also important to stress the critical role
of institution-building in the context of a civilian
capacity-building review process. We cannot
overemphasize the importance of capable State
institutions in restoring people’s hope for a better
future. The credibility and legitimacy of a Government
emerging from conflict is critical, and very much
depends upon ensuring basic services for people.
Institutions are important bridges for restoring trust
between the State and citizens. It is critical for there to

11

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

be a minimum level of political willingness to take the
country from conflict to peace, stability and economic
development via concrete programmes.
Institution-building cannot be done in a political
vacuum. Gender mainstreaming and the participation
of civil society must be factored in during the
peacebuilding process. North-South, South-South and
triangular cooperation should be fully utilized in
building institutions in a post-conflict situation.
National leadership and ownership are key
ingredients of sustainable peacebuilding. They can be
strengthened only by capacity-building and institutionbuilding. National leadership will take into account
local sensitivities and the political context in a
coherent manner. We should encourage all national
stakeholders to engage in dialogue, identify the best
possible solutions to their problems and play a leading
role in the implementation process. The country must
be engaged in a meaningful way so as to ensure that it
remains in the driver’s seat, confident in a sustained
and durable peacebuilding process.
The international community should lend all the
support needed to achieve such a transition. The
process following a devastating conflict is a gradual
one, but there is no alternative to it. And institutionbuilding plays a very important role in that.
It has already been established that sustained
attention, long-term predictable and flexible financing
and strong technical cooperation are important for
preventing countries from relapsing into conflict. If
these conditions can be achieved, it will be possible to
consolidate peace and distribute its dividends more
widely among the general population.
The Peacebuilding Fund has proven its usefulness
in terms of flexible financing. But that is not enough.
The World Bank and the other development partners
must come up with sufficient financing and technical
cooperation to invest in nationally owned development
agendas. Institution-building should be an integral part
of that. United Nations coordination will ensure the
coherence of these efforts.
It is pertinent to recall that one of the aims in
creating the Peacebuilding Commission was to focus
attention on the institution-building efforts needed to
recover from conflict. In that regard, country-specific
configurations have a specific responsibility to
encourage all stakeholders to work coherently on the

12

basis of an agreed peacebuilding strategy. Some
institutions may need to be revived, while others may
need to be created. But in doing that, we must ensure
that there is strong buy-in to the process among all
national stakeholders.
It is evident that a strong sense of partnership
among United Nations missions and agencies, Member
States, regional organizations, international financial
institutions and national stakeholders must be
developed. In doing so, restoring and creating
necessary State institutions and developing capacities
should be made top priorities so as to ensure that
peacebuilding functions are carried forward in a
sustainable manner. Specific benchmarks and a
coordinated strategy are critical. The ultimate goal of
international support measures is to create an effective
State that can deliver peace and prosperity to its people
on its own. That will only be possible by strengthening
institutions in the countries themselves.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
Bosnia and Herzegovina for convening today’s debate.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and Deputy Prime Minister Guterres of
Timor-Leste for his insightful comments today. TimorLeste itself is a nation that has faced immense
challenges but has demonstrated strong, effective
leadership over its own institution-building process. It
is to be congratulated on its commitment to sharing
that experience with others and on continuing to call
for more effective international support to post-conflict
States, including as Chair of the Group of Seven Plus,
to which Australia is very pleased to provide support.
I also would like to thank the outgoing Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Wittig, for
his contribution to the debate. Australia remains a
strong supporter of developing a more organic
relationship between the Council and the Commission.
Australia’s own experience over the past decade
in
supporting
post-conflict
institution-building,
particularly in Timor-Leste, the Solomon Islands and
Bougainville, Papua New Guinea, has yielded many
lessons. Perhaps most important, and one that has been
central to the debate today is that national leadership
and ownership are fundamental to success. Assistance
should support national priorities and objectives, and
careful consideration must be given to how assistance

11-21335

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

can best foster national capacities
importantly, avoid stifling them.

and,

more

The process of institution-building — and it is a
process — must be timely, flexible and sustainable.
Planning and implementation need to start as soon as
possible in the project, and also progress at a pace and
in a manner appropriate to local needs. We must avoid
imposing ill-fitting models and ensure that we harness
and strengthen existing capacities as we seek to
develop them further.
It is important to ensure strong coordination
among international actors. We must garner available
expertise in a coherent manner. Australia encourages
opportunities
for
South-South
and
triangular
cooperation, and for enhanced cooperation with
regional organizations — something we ourselves have
tried to do, for example, through our leadership of the
Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands.
Assistance obviously should be extended beyond
capitals to the subnational level, civil society and the
private sector. We need to strengthen the fabric of
stable and prosperous communities through political,
security, service delivery and economic institutions.
We must recognize and promote the role of women,
who must be empowered to contribute to decisionmaking and the implementation of institution-building.
Institution-building in any environment is
obviously complex. Institution-building in post-conflict
situations clearly presents even greater challenges.
That is why it is important that we share ideas and best
practices.
The United Nations has a vital role to play in
peacebuilding owing to its unique legitimacy and
comparative advantages. We encourage the Security
Council to consider institution-building when setting
mission mandates, but to do so while also giving
consideration to the role that other actors should play.
It should also continue to mandate integrated United
Nations missions to ensure comprehensive approaches.
We would also encourage better definition of roles and
responsibilities in key peacebuilding sectors within the
United Nations system.
My own country has been pleased to contribute to
the work of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) over
the past year. We believe very clearly that the PBC can
play a stronger role in supporting post-conflict
institution-building, particularly by monitoring progress,

11-21335

assisting coordination and providing expert guidance to
the Council. The Council should increasingly draw on
the PBC’s advisory role. We endorse the comments
made earlier today by Ambassador Grauls of Belgium
on behalf of Brazil, Canada, Jordan and Switzerland in
their respective capacities as Chairs of the PBC’s
country-specific configurations.
We also encourage greater coordination between
the United Nations and the World Bank and other
regional development banks, given their influential role
in institution-building.
Obviously, we need to use our resources to
greatest effect. In that regard, we look forward to the
conclusion of the forthcoming review of international
civilian capacities, which we hope will enhance the
United Nations effectiveness in supporting postconflict institution-building, including by increasing its
ability to draw on truly relevant expertise in response
to defined needs from the global North and the global
South.
We stand ready to contribute expertise through
the Australian Civilian Corps, which we established in
2009 specifically to provide skilled personnel to
support countries experiencing or emerging from
conflict or natural disasters.
At times, the challenges of institution-building
can obviously seem overwhelming. The international
community must be realistic in its expectations, set
clear objectives and coordinate and sustain support for
institution-building over the long term, regardless of
the challenges; otherwise post-conflict success does
not happen. This work requires patience, but it is
critical, given the centrality of strong national
institutions in delivering robust and sustainable peace.
The President:
representative of Peru.

I

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Gutiérrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to thank the Security Council, in particular the
delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the timely
convening of this debate and the drafting of the
concept paper (S/2011/16, annex), which helps the
Council to give greater thought to key elements of a
more effective Peacebuilding Commission and
contributes to the organization and planning required to
implement the recommendations emanating from the
review process.

13

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

Peru attaches the greatest importance to adopting
comprehensive and multidimensional strategies for
peacebuilding in post-conflict situations. Such
strategies promote security, development and good
governance in close coordination with all United
Nations system agencies. The adoption of a needsdriven or a demand-driven approach and the prevention
of a resurgence of conflict are crucial pillars in the
design of a comprehensive strategy. In that regard, we
believe that a needs-driven approach must take account
of the specificities of each case and of national
priorities, thereby facilitating a targeted response.
In his report on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict, the Secretary-General pointed out
priority areas in which peacebuilding work should be
conducted simultaneously. One of the key main areas
involves the importance of a cross-cutting and holistic
security strategy in which priority is given to
development and institution-building. The crosscutting strategy reflects the need to include early
peacebuilding efforts during the implementation of
peacekeeping processes.
In order to prevent a resurgence of conflict, it is
imperative to rebuild and bolster the institutional
capacities of the country in question. Institutionbuilding is an indispensable factor of sustainable
socio-economic development. A comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy, which must include provisions
for institution-building, should be based on national
ownership and a prior assessment of existing national
capacities. In that way, international support and
cooperation will fill the gaps where capacity is lacking
and strengthen the areas where there are weaknesses.
The implementation of the Agenda for Change and the
poverty reduction strategy in Sierra Leone could serve
as useful examples in evaluating positive aspects and
areas for improvement through a lessons-learned
approach.
In implementing the strategy, it is imperative to
establish mechanisms for inclusion to ensure the
maximum involvement of society and the public and
private sectors. Such an approach will mend the social
and political fabric as a framework for the rule of law
and will lay the foundation for the country’s
reconstruction. In that regard, we should recall that
the empowerment of women and the gender
perspective are key factors in generating capacity and
in the peacebuilding process, as underscored in the
Secretary-General’s report.

14

Particular attention must also be paid to job
creation and training for young people who are
unemployed or underemployed, and who are a highrisk and potentially disruptive factor in the transition to
peacebuilding and institution-building. It is also
essential to sustain close and ongoing coordination
with local stakeholders and partners providing
international assistance, with particular emphasis on
regional cooperation, South-South cooperation and
North-South triangular cooperation. This will ensure
the implementation of a needs-driven strategy on the
ground and take account of the experience and
expertise of the partners.
Peru believes that determining the origin of a
conflict and the need for a transition towards peace and
for the rebuilding process — and therefore for early
peacebuilding efforts and a preventive dimension —
are aspects that must be taken into account when the
mandate of a peacekeeping operation is first
established. These considerations must be part of the
groundwork for a comprehensive peacebuilding
strategy, including in rebuilding and strengthening
institutional capacities.
The Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission,
in
particular
its
Organizational
Committee, have a crucial role to play in drafting
mandates for peacebuilding operations and in
formulating and implementing the aforementioned
comprehensive strategy. Mechanisms must therefore be
established so that the Peacebuilding Commission, as a
subsidiary body of the Council and the General
Assembly, can develop active and frequent
coordination with both the Security Council and the
General Assembly.
Finally, I reiterate the importance my country
attaches to the Peacebuilding Commission maintaining
its primary advisory and catalytic role within the
system, which ensures the consistency, flexibility and
effectiveness of the work of the United Nations in
peacebuilding processes and in implementing the
Secretary-General’s action plan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this important debate and
wish you every success in fulfilling the highly
responsible duties of Security Council President.

11-21335

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

Our appreciation also goes to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and the Deputy Prime Minister of TimorLeste, His Excellency Mr. José Luís Guterres, for their
insights into today’s topic. Ukraine’s long record of
participation in United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts in Timor-Leste and almost
20 other States, including most of the Group of Seven
Plus countries, makes this debate quite relevant for my
country.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union. As a member of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission, my
delegation supports the statement delivered by the
Commission’s Chair, Mr. Peter Wittig, the Permanent
Representative of Germany. I would also like to make a
few brief points in my national capacity.
First, we fully agree with the philosophy of the
concept paper (S/2011/16, annex) before us that
national ownership is an indispensable condition for
the establishment of effective core State capacities,
leading to the creation of a stable and viable State. My
delegation also recognizes that the purpose of
institution-building is to reduce the dependence of
post-conflict Governments on the international
community and to promote self-reliance. Yet the fact
that the majority of post-conflict countries relapse into
violence within 10 years leaves no doubt about the
need for extreme prudence in planning the transition of
responsibilities from the international community to
national authorities, especially in the security sector.
Secondly, consensus between domestic and
international stakeholders on a broad peacebuilding
agenda is a sine qua non for the success of the
institution-building and peacebuilding endeavour as a
whole. If there is a lack of understanding on either
side, there will be no chemistry between them and,
ultimately, no tangible progress in securing lasting
peace.
Thirdly, given the crucial significance of postconflict institution-building to the success of the
overall peacebuilding efforts, my delegation shares the
belief in the necessity of integrating the institutionbuilding perspective, tailored to each country and
situation, into the mandates of respective United
Nations missions from their early stages.
Fourthly, we believe in the transformative power
of the relevant regional and subregional organizations
in connection with peacebuilding. Nowhere are the

11-21335

benefits of this soft power more evident than in
Europe, with the European Union as a case in point.
There is a great deal of transformative potential with
other European bodies, such as the Council of Europe
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). That is why we see merit in exploring
the idea of putting together the best practices and
lessons learned of these organizations and sharing
them, wherever appropriate, with interested partners in
other regions. As a prospective Chair of both the
Council of Europe and the OSCE, in May to November
2011 and in 2013, respectively, Ukraine is ready to do
its share.
Fifthly, the Peacebuilding Commission is ideally
placed to bring together external State and non-State
actors with the aim of securing the creation of credible,
legitimate, accountable and resilient institutions in
countries emerging from conflict. In view of this, the
Peacebuilding Commission should play a leading role
in enabling the United Nations system to establish an
integrated approach to institution-building. If the
Commission is to be fully up to this task, greater
synergy between the Security Council, General
Assembly, Economic and Social Council and
Peacebuilding Commission is needed.
Having a long, solid record of contributing to
peacebuilding through active military and police
engagement in missions under the auspices of the
United Nations, Ukraine could be instrumental in
assisting the advancement of the institution-building
agenda. My country has capacity and is open to
considering providing civilian expertise, particularly in
the areas of justice, security sector reform and
governance, and the training of domestic professionals
from fragile States with the aim of further boosting
their local civil service capacities.
The concept paper rightly notes the supporting —
yet in some cases instrumental — role of humanitarian
relief and rehabilitation assistance, especially in the
immediate aftermath of conflict or humanitarian
disaster. In this respect, Ukraine is proud of its
contribution to the Central Emergency Response Fund
in response to the United Nations appeal for Haiti.
Today’s debate will be taken into account by my
delegation in the context of Ukraine’s current
membership in the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Economic and Social Council, UN-Women and other
relevant organs. It will also serve as a valuable

15

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

reference in the case of Ukraine’s election to the
Security Council for the term of 2016-2017.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)
in our capacity as NAM coordinator in the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Let me begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important debate on the issue of
institution-building in the context of peacebuilding in
post-conflict countries. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste
and the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission for
their respective statements delivered this morning.
This debate is a very timely initiative, as it is
taking place as the review of the peacebuilding
architecture has just been concluded and the review of
international civilian capacity is in its final stage. We
believe that this debate will add important value to all
relevant
processes
in
further
streamlining
peacebuilding activities and bringing about sustainable
peace in post-conflict countries.
While we recognize that each and every postconflict situation is unique, our experience is that there
are some commonalities across all conflict or postconflict situations. They negatively impact the regular
work of a society by causing damage to physical,
psychological and social structures. They shatter
institutions, take a toll on human lives, break social
bonds and hinder regular activities. The institutional
and other capacities previously created in society or
embedded in the bond of social dynamics are either
broken or remain dormant, and are not readily
available to steer the peace process or to make it
sustainable.
Therefore, the onus is on us, the international
community, to work towards the achievement of
sustainable peace by enabling national actors to rebuild
their institutions, revitalize their economies and
rejuvenate their peaceful lives. This process entails
ensuring national ownership in all peacebuilding
activities, including institutional capacity-building.
Sustainable peace can be achieved only when the
process is shared and owned by those ultimately
benefiting from the peace dividends. It is national
actors who clearly understand the inherent values and

16

normative priorities of their particular society. Given
the diversity in post-conflict situations, the
international community, in consultation with the
relevant stakeholders, needs to find commonalities
among national protagonists to advance their common
development agenda. This requires broader political
will within the international community and at least a
minimal willingness on the part of the different
factions in the post-conflict countries.
International support in such dynamic and
evolving situations is to be based on broad political
willingness and adequate and predictable resources.
Efforts skewed towards unduly benefiting one group at
the expense of others are likely to exacerbate a
situation, igniting the causes of conflict. Active
participation by members of civil society and by local
and traditional authorities, including marginalized
groups, may ease the situation and contribute
significantly to ensuring national ownership for
achieving peacebuilding goals through a common
vision of national development. The full and effective
participation of women can further strengthen the
process.
We agree with the concept paper (S/2011/16,
annex) that building institutional capacity in a postconflict country is a difficult task. However, it is not
impossible. It requires coordinated efforts, constructive
willingness, appropriate needs assessment and defining
norms and standards. The volatile post-conflict
environment is largely defined by a lack of vital
resources, including physical infrastructure, human and
financial capital and appropriate social bonds. While
some of that stems from a lack of adequate confidence,
mostly it has to do with insufficient financial
resources, technical expertise and institutional skills.
No supply-driven approach will suffice. On the other
hand, a demand-pull approach coupled with national
training and exchange programmes may help. In
addition, the provision of adequate and timely
resources is indispensable. In that context, the
Movement believes that the following points must be
kept in mind while planning and conducting postconflict institution-building activities.
First, any activity relating to peacebuilding in a
post-conflict country must be based on the principle of
national ownership. In that regard, institution-building
activities should also encompass national priorities,
taking into account the reality and necessities of the
people who are the potential clients of the initiative.

11-21335

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

Second, effective partnership must be forged
among all Member States so that the varying capacities
among them can complement each other and strengthen
post-conflict institution-building efforts.

Last but not least, efforts must also include a
mechanism for including North-South and triangular
cooperation. That would renew the strength of
partnerships and complement South-South cooperation.

Third, gender mainstreaming and the role of
women in post-conflict peacebuilding cannot be
overemphasized. The institution-building process and
its outcome should ensure gender perspectives as
appropriate. While crafting such norms and standards,
sufficient attention must be given to ensuring that the
concerns of women in the host country are adequately
taken into account so as to empower them to
effectively participate in the post-conflict country’s
economic, political, social and security-related
activities.

In conclusion, the Movement believes that the
building of institutions in post-conflict countries must
be based on a fair appreciation of the circumstances of
justice and on the prevailing social situation for which
the norms and standards are being postulated. They
should reflect a collective thought process premised on
the needs and concerns of the people who will
ultimately uphold the institutions.

Four, organizational coordination must be
addressed. Without prejudice to the functions and
powers of the other principal organs of the United
Nations, the General Assembly must play the key role
in the formulation and implementation of institutionbuilding activities. In this context, the Peacebuilding
Commission should play a central role in providing
policy guidance and strategies in conducting
institution-building activities.
Five, there has to be cooperation among the
different United Nations organs. Post-conflict
peacebuilding activities should be conducted through
intense and effective consultations among the main
organs of the United Nations, while duly emphasizing
their respective areas of competence.
Six, the role of peacekeepers and early
peacebuilding activities need to be properly
recognized. In that regard, the significant role of
peacekeepers
will
further
strengthen
early
peacebuilding activities. Furthermore, these activities
need to be identified by the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture in cooperation with the
national Government, including the views of troopcontributing countries in relevant areas.
Seven, with regard to South-South cooperation,
countries of the South have similar socio-economic
experiences that need to be utilized in the process. In
addition, the diverse capacities and skills in the South
can be replicated suitably in the form of lessons
learned and the development achieved from previous
experience in nation-building.

11-21335

As a supporting partner, the international
community must advance its capacities through
institutional, technical, financial, human and other
assistance in which it has the capacity to do so. The
process must forge the effective participation of all
stakeholders, including women, civil society and
marginalized groups, so as to address the root causes of
conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative to Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I would like to express
our appreciation for the organization of this open
debate, as well as to thank you personally, Madame
President, for the opportunity to share our views on
this important subject.
The frequency with which the Security Council
addresses post-conflict peacebuilding signals, first, the
importance that the international community attaches
to the issue as a preventive tool against the recurrence
of conflict through the establishment of sustained
security and stability, which are prerequisites for the
maintenance of peace and development; and, secondly,
an acknowledgement of the Council’s responsibility to
fulfil the commitments undertaken to support countries
that have emerged from conflict.
We share the views expressed by many speakers
calling for more systematic attention to post-conflict
peacebuilding. We believe that this should continue to
be frequently reflected in the deliberations of the
Security Council.
Time and again we have seen how conflicts
re-emerge in the absence of functioning institutions
that reflect a common understanding within a society.
Although lessons have been learned and various
approaches have been refined as the international

17

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

community has tackled such conflicts, the tendency
continues to be for a top-down approach that at times
ignores the specific context, roots and causes of a
given conflict.
Institution-building, especially in post-conflict
countries, must be done at all levels of society, with
particular attention paid to the uniqueness of each case,
in order to reach consensus and create a governing
framework. It is important that the programmes
adopted be country-specific, needs-based and targetoriented to ensure continued adherence by the affected
population. This would safeguard success and assist the
population in building upon existing national capacities
in a more consolidated and effective manner.
In that context, effective institution-building
during the different phases of the process requires
coordination among the Peacebuilding Commission
and all relevant actors, including international financial
institutions, United Nations entities, regional
organizations and civil society, including women, local
experts and other stakeholders.
With respect to the relationship between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council,
we believe that, given limited resources, they should
work closely together and use each other’s knowledge
and expertise of a specific country’s conflict to clearly
identify priorities in order to most effectively use such
resources towards peacebuilding efforts. For that
cooperation to be workable, both bodies must try to be
as flexible as possible to address conflicts in a timely
and efficient manner, as each conflict will pose unique
problems and require specific solutions.
Armenia remains committed to post-conflict
peace initiatives and believes that the Council should
further advance development initiatives by supporting
peacebuilding mechanisms that help countries
emerging from conflicts in their recovery, reintegration
and reconstruction efforts, which are aimed at creating
foundations for sustainable peace and development.
The successful implementation of this agenda
requires a basic level of political will and
determination on the part of all players as
preconditions for peacebuilding. With those political
conditions in place, the ability of the United Nations or
any other intergovernmental or regional actor will be
enhanced and supported.

18

Armenia therefore welcomes the Bosnian
initiative to hold this open debate. This is an
opportunity to recap and reflect on our past
experiences in dealing with the issue of post-conflict
peacebuilding and to highlight priorities for united,
practical actions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): First of all, I would like to
thank Bosnia and Herzegovina for organizing this open
debate on post-conflict peacebuilding, with a special
focus on institution-building, which is a prevalent
challenge in a number of societies that have just
emerged from conflict. This debate, under Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s first-ever presidency of the Security
Council, has special significance. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a country with extensive first-hand
experience of the subject before the Council. In the
15 years since Dayton, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
undergone a difficult process of peacebuilding,
transition and recovery, and it continues along the path
to ensuring further progress in institution-building,
integration into Euro-Atlantic structures and overall
prosperity.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his statement and the Deputy Prime Minister of TimorLeste, His Excellency Mr. José Luis Guterres, for
sharing his insights into Timor-Leste’s experiences in
institution-building. My thanks also go to Ambassador
Wittig, outgoing Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), for his contribution to the
Commission’s role in promoting and supporting an
integrated and coherent approach to peacebuilding,
including women’s participation.
Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the European Union.
I would like to stress the importance of the
Secretary-General’s 2009 report on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304), as
well as to welcome the continuous attention paid to the
issue of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.
It is widely recognized that in the aftermath of
large-scale violence, the needs of the people tend to be
far greater than the capacity of national or international
actors to meet them. Given that imbalance, national
and international efforts in the early post-conflict
period should focus primarily on meeting the most

11-21335

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

urgent and important peacebuilding objectives, such as
establishing security, building confidence and trust in
the political process, delivering initial peace dividends
and expanding core national capacity.

security, humanitarian and development considerations.
Security and development partnerships must be
strengthened to include global, international, regional
and local actors as well as civil society.

We believe in the importance of providing
support for basic safety and security, including the
protection of civilians; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; strengthening the rule of law;
demining and supporting security-sector reform.
Peacekeepers should be able to contribute in the early
stages of peacebuilding, where they are best positioned
to do so.

We recognize the important role of the PBC as an
intergovernmental body tasked with developing
peacebuilding strategies and providing enhanced
coordination for countries that have transitioned from
war to peace. We support strengthened institutional
arrangements among various United Nations actors,
along with closer cooperation between the Security
Council and the PBC. In that respect we welcome the
statement made by the representative of Belgium on
behalf of Brazil, Canada, Jordan and Switzerland in
their capacities as Chairs of the PBC’s country-specific
configurations.

A secure environment is crucial to the
implementation of peacebuilding tasks, whether by
national or international actors. Societies emerging
from war face a high risk of relapse into conflict. It is
therefore essential that international efforts facilitate
and support their transition from short-term
stabilization
to
long-term
security.
Capacity
development is at the heart of peacebuilding. It is
crucial to help create national structures to manage
tensions and mediate between various societal
interests, with a view to preventing a return to
violence. Capacity development is also the main
approach to stronger and more resilient State-society
relations based on trust and inclusiveness, as it leads to
the reactivation of core State functions and helps the
State to re-establish legitimate governance throughout
the country.
It is imperative that national ownership — which
must often be strengthened through a step-by-step
process — focus on capacity-building of core
Government functions and on national actors. In that
context, the international community and regional and
subregional organizations should partner with postconflict societies to assist with institutional capacitybuilding, promoting the rule of law and strengthening
civilian institutions, including ministries, the
parliament and the judiciary.
International assistance must be allocated to
support State institutions with a view to establishing a
basis for competent and legitimate governance. In the
process, dependence on international assistance must
be gradually but steadfastly reduced, and self-reliance
promoted.
Peacebuilding requires coherent, comprehensive
and consistent efforts by many different actors working
together. It demands the integration of political,

11-21335

It is crucial that we prevent the persistent
violence, intimidation and discrimination against
women and encourage their participation and full
involvement in post-conflict activities, especially as
women can be important drivers of recovery and
development in peacebuilding processes. Slovenia
welcome the 2010 report of the Secretary-General on
women’s participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466),
including the seven-point action plan.
The establishment of the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality should further contribute to the
effective implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008). Last year, Slovenia adopted its
national action plan for the implementation of both
resolutions. One of the main objectives of the action
plan is to increase the involvement of women in
peacebuilding and peacekeeping missions.
While the past 20 years have witnessed a decline
in the number of international armed conflicts, there has
been an emergence of internal conflicts, mostly in lowincome countries, due to horizontal inequalities along
ethnic, religious and regional lines associated with civil
wars. It is thus clear that numerous peacebuilding
challenges still lie ahead and that we must turn to
lessons learned and best practices when tackling those
challenges in the future. When embarking upon
sustainable post-conflict reconstruction, we should
ensure and commit to long-term institution-building, as
that will ultimately strengthen the processes and conduct
necessary to peacefully manage conflicts at all levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.

19

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Starčević (Serbia): The Republic of Serbia
welcomes the format of this open debate in the
Security Council on institution-building within the
post-conflict peacebuilding process. Charged with
responsibility for safeguarding international peace and
security, the Council can only benefit from such
debate. The delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
should be congratulated for its initiative. The
statements by the Secretary-General; Mr. José Luís
Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste; and
Ambassador Peter Wittig, current Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, have given us three
important perspectives germane to the issue under
discussion, while the statements by members and
non-members of the Council alike demonstrate vivid
interest in this question.
These are complex problems that call for specific
answers — from the elimination of the humanitarian
consequences of a conflict to assistance in organizing
the election process and the building of new
institutions, or the rebuilding of old ones. Yet the need
for institution-building is a global problem that affects
countries in almost all parts of the world that have
experienced a conflict. It therefore calls for global
action.
The Republic of Serbia believes that post-conflict
institution-building is among the most important
efforts in securing peace, stability and sustainable
development. For those efforts to be successful, it is
necessary that all actors in the international community
render a contribution, including the United Nations,
regional organizations and Member States that
participated in the conflict directly or indirectly or are
located in the immediate vicinity, as well as
non-governmental organizations.
The United Nations system should be at the
forefront of all activities, primarily through its
organs — the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral,
the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United
Nations Development Programme and the specialized
agencies of the United Nations.
Bearing in mind that the Republic of Serbia is
part of a region that experienced a very difficult period
starting two decades ago, we are well aware of the
needs and caveats of a peacebuilding process. We
approach it with understanding and responsibly.

20

We firmly believe that there is a need for all
countries of a region that has been engulfed by conflict
to engage actively. We have made every effort to make
our full contribution to post-conflict peacebuilding
through a policy of promoting good-neighbourly
relations — one of our most important foreign-policy
priorities — through a policy of reconciliation in the
region and through building free and democratic
institutions.
The Republic of Serbia is a signatory party and a
guarantor of the implementation of the Dayton-Paris
Peace Agreement. It gives its unwavering support to
the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
is supportive of all decisions based on the agreement of
the three constitutive peoples of that State.
Last year, the National Assembly of the Republic
of Serbia adopted a resolution condemning the crime at
Srebrenica. Serbia cooperates actively with the
international presences in Kosovo headed by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo deployed in the province pursuant to resolution
1244 (1999) and supports activities aimed at improving
the living conditions for all inhabitants of Kosovo. We
showed our readiness to quickly start a dialogue with
Pristina in accordance with resolution 64/298.
President Boris Tadić has met the leaders of the other
countries of the region on a number of occasions. My
country has thus clearly shown its resolve to contribute
to peace and stability in the Western Balkan region.
The Republic of Serbia is also of the opinion that
full reconciliation in the region will be greatly helped
if justice is fully served through national and
international institutions with regard to all individuals
who committed crimes during the conflict.
Serbia considers institution-building in the postconflict period to be a process that, because of its
complexity, calls for the synergy of internal
stakeholders and international actors, a thorough
assessment of the causes of conflict and a global
approach combined with specific solutions. The role of
the United Nations system in this area will always
remain vital. We also support the proposal to
strengthen the consultative role of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission.
The Republic of Serbia has been active, and will
continue to be so, in support of United Nations
activities on building institutions in conflict-affected
areas. We shall also continue our support through our

11-21335

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

participation in United Nations peacekeeping missions.
My country fully concurs with the view that the
purpose of institution-building is to progressively
reduce dependence on the international community and
promote self-reliance. We also agree that there must be
at least a basic level of consensus and political will
among the leading national stakeholders for
institutional development to succeed.
Accordingly, an honest analysis of the events
leading to the conflict and of the deeds and mistakes
that caused it is necessary to avoid similar pitfalls in
the future. New institutions and their procedures must
be designed so as to maximize the chances for avoiding
a repetition of past mistakes. Those who do not
remember history are condemned to repeat it, as
Santayana said. Countries that have gone through
conflicts need enlightened leaders and enlightened
institutions, and people must stand up for them if they
care about their future and the future of their children.
Work on promoting sustainable peace, stability
and development is the best prevention against the
resurgence of conflict. The cost of conflict is so high
that it is incumbent upon us to make every possible
effort to succeed in our endeavours to build peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Andrabi (Pakistan): Madam President, the
Pakistan delegation would like to thank you for
arranging today’s debate and for your insightful
concept paper (S/2011/16).
Today’s debate coincides with the mandatory
review of the Peacebuilding Commission, which
concluded late last year, and the review of the
international civilian capacities, which is in its final
stage. I hope that our deliberations today will
complement the work of both these important review
processes.
The theme of institution-building can be placed
within the broad rubric of priorities identified by the
Secretary-General in his report on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304). The
Secretary-General’s priorities included safety and
security, support for political processes, provision of
basic services, restoring core government functions and
economic revitalization. Similar priorities are also
outlined in the President’s concept paper.

11-21335

The international community can optimize its
institution-building efforts in conformity with priorities
of the countries concerned for ensuring national
ownership of all peacebuilding initiatives. To that end,
our approach must be people-centric and tailored to
specific needs or circumstances. It should not be seen
as outside interference. That is important for the
longevity and resilience of the nascent institutions built
in a post-conflict setting.
I wish to highlight four points in answer to the
very pertinent questions raised in the President’s
concept paper.
First, institution-building should be factored into
a mission’s mandate from its inception. That can be
done by focusing on security sector reform together
with strengthening national capacity to manage
intercommunity conflicts. Whenever such mandates are
devised, peacekeepers have always played an important
role, despite resource constraints.
As a leading troop contributor with vital stakes in
the success of the peacekeeping operations, Pakistan
has been supportive of mandates that ensure local
capacity-building to prevent relapse into conflict. That
is evident from our record in the Security Council, as
resolutions 1509 (2003) and 1565 (2004), which
authorized strengthened missions in Liberia and the
Democratic Republic of Congo respectively, were
supported by Pakistan during its term in the Council.
Pakistani troops also participated in those challenging
missions.
At present, nearly 10 United Nations
peacekeeping missions are performing a broad range of
peacebuilding activities, which also include institutionbuilding. Therefore, the role of peacekeepers in postconflict institution-building cannot be ignored. It will
be important to provide for the needs of peacekeepers
so that they can better perform their role. In this
regard, vital responsibility rests with the Security
Council, where these mandates are formalized, and
with the Secretariat, where the resources are provided
to back them.
Secondly, institution-building in a post-conflict
situation can be greatly facilitated by a targeted focus
on the development aspect of peacebuilding. Priority
areas could include the employment of youth and
women, engaging the private sector, building local
entrepreneurship, revitalizing the economy and
developing service-based infrastructure. Such an

21

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

approach will, on the one hand, build national
ownership
and
engage
all
stakeholders
in
peacebuilding endeavours and, on the other, will
reinforce the notion of the people-centric approach,
bringing the benefits of peacebuilding to the common
man’s doorstep.
Thirdly, organizational coordination within the
United Nations is essential to avoid duplication. We
note that an Integration Steering Group (ISG), which
includes peace and security, humanitarian and
development actors across the United Nations, is in
place in the Secretariat for policy coordination in
18 countries where there is both a mission and a
country team. The ISG can enhance the Secretariat’s
responsiveness to the institution-building demands.
Finally, the Peacebuilding Commission, with its
unique composition, is ideally placed to establish an
integrated approach to institution-building and to
address the gaps in transition. In this context, I will
propose that a working group on institution-building
could be created within the Commission’s
Organizational Committee or within its countryspecific configurations. Alternatively, a dedicated
theme of institution-building could be added to its
existing Working Group on Lessons Learned. That
would allow the Commission to optimize its advisory
role for all principal organs of the United Nations, not
just the Security Council, on the subject of postconflict institution-building.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Mr. Seruhere (United Republic of Tanzania):
Madam President, I thank you for convening this
timely debate on post-conflict peacebuilding and
institution-building. The United Republic of Tanzania
fully supports the concept of and need for institutionbuilding and sees it as an indispensable requirement for
preventing post-conflict communities from relapsing
into conflict. I have trust and confidence in your
leadership qualities, Mr. President, so I have no doubt
that you will stir this debate to a fruitful conclusion.
We welcome the statement of the Chairperson of
the Peacebuilding Commission, His Excellency
Ambassador Peter Wittig, Permanent Representative of
Germany; that of the Non-Aligned Movement, read by
the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh,
Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen; and the joint
statement of the Chairs of the country-specific

22

configurations for Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone,
Liberia and Burundi, read by His Excellency
Ambassador Jan Grauls, Permanent Representative of
Belgium.
Speaking from past and recent experience, the
United Republic of Tanzania supported in practical
ways the successful processes that ended conflicts in
southern Africa and the Great Lakes region. The vision
of my country has always been to see the
transformation of post-conflict societies into a space of
sustainable peace and security of States and peoples,
stability as well as shared growth and development.
That wisdom is, as a matter of fact, enshrined in the
Dar es-Salaam Declaration on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes
Region, adopted in November 2004.
The former Secretary-General of the United
Nations, Kofi Annan, once said that there is no security
without development and no development without
security. We draw inspiration from the wisdom of both
the Dar es-Salaam Declaration and the dictum of Kofi
Annan. In order realize that inspiration in the Great
Lakes region, where peacebuilding processes are
ongoing — and, indeed, elsewhere — institutionbuilding is critical. It is also critical that such
institutions lead ultimately to lifting living standards of
the people in the post-conflict stages. That way they
can also attain the Millennium Development Goals and
reach desirable human development indices.
“Peace-building: institution-building” will benefit
not only post-conflict societies but also the entire
world and the international community. The United
Republic of Tanzania says so because, as experienced
in the Great Lakes region and elsewhere, local wars
suck in other countries from near and far. Thus
preventing conflicts and the recurrence of conflicts is
beneficial to all humankind.
It is desirable and paramount that all Member
States and the international community provide support
of every kind to institution-building in post-conflict
societies and their neighbours in order to establish,
consolidate and promote good governance, democracy,
rule of law, respect for human rights, security and
stability, as well as economic growth, development and
integration. Where that cannot be done by supporting
individual States, it should be accomplished through
subregional and regional approaches.

11-21335

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

The President: I give the floor to the Chargé
d’affaires of the Permanent Observer Mission of the
African Union.
Mrs. Mungwa: I would like to begin by
presenting the apologies of the Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations, His
Excellency Ambassador Téte Antonio, who has
travelled to Addis Ababa for the meetings of the
upcoming African Union summit and was therefore not
able to attend this meeting in person.
We join previous speakers in commending you,
Mr. President, for initiating consideration of the wellfocused theme of this debate, which is extremely
pertinent for Africa. We are grateful to the SecretaryGeneral, the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste,
and the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission
for attending this meeting in person, and for their
pertinent remarks delivered to the Council earlier
today. Thank you also, Mr. President, for the concept
paper (S/2011/16) that you provided for the guidance
of this debate, and also for the presidential statement
delivered early in the meeting today.
As a matter of high priority to Africa, postconflict reconstruction and development as a whole is
one of the issues addressed in a range of policy
instruments of the African Union, beginning with its
Constitutive Act and including the Protocol Relating to
the Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union.
In their remarks in the debate this morning,
representatives of various African States mentioned the
African
Policy
Framework
on
Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development, which was adopted
by the Executive Council during its 7th Ordinary
Session, held in Sirte, Libya, in July 2005. We would
like to note that this was one of the very first policy
instruments adopted by the African Union, just three
years after its establishment in 2002, to indicate the
importance of the issue at the level of the African
Union. This Policy Framework details the concepts,
principles, approaches and even the benchmarks that
are concerned with the important topic of post-conflict
reconstruction and development as a whole. A
significant amount of the content is devoted to the
question of institution-rebuilding and building.
Previous speakers have mentioned the concept
paper. we are very pleased to note that the international
community has mentioned a lot of the elements

11-21335

contained in the concept paper and in the African
Policy Framework to which I have referred.
I do not think that I can do justice to presenting
the Policy Framework. In the interests of time, we
would simply highly recommend that policy instrument
to members of the Council and all stakeholders.
In adopting the Policy Framework on PostConflict Reconstruction and Development, the
Executive Council of the African Union indeed
addressed the need to build the institutions of the
African Union, which would then drive the task of
post-conflict
reconstruction
and
development,
including institution-building. This included a
ministerial committee on post-conflict reconstruction
and development, to be established to provide political
support and resource mobilization for implementation
of the Policy Framework. It is also envisaged that the
ministerial committee will interface with the United
Nations Peacebuilding Commission at the highest
level.
Various member States of the African Union are
also leading key efforts for post-conflict reconstruction
and development through the establishment of
institutions such as the African Centre for Study and
Research on Terrorism, based in Algiers, and through
the commendable initiative to establish an institution
for post-conflict reconstruction and development
announced by the Permanent Representative of Egypt
in his intervention in the Council today.
While
building
necessary
continental
institutions — which I have just mentioned — to
support the task of post-conflict reconstruction and
development as a whole, the African Union has also
taken a number of concrete steps towards translating
the Policy Framework into concrete actions at the level
of concerned member States. These have included the
establishment of the Post-Conflict Reconstruction
Committee on the Sudan, as mentioned by the
Permanent Representative of South Africa in his
remarks earlier today. We seize this opportunity to
commend the outstanding leadership of South Africa
on this issue.
The African Union also maintains field offices in
a number of member States that are facing the complex
situation of having to rebuild after conflict, such as
Burundi, Chad, the Central African Republic, Côte
d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, the Sudan and Somalia, in
order to provide permanent support and to accompany

23

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

them with the arduous tasks they face in consolidating
peace and rebuilding the institutional, policy and
human development fabric that is often devastated by
conflict.

continuing support of the Council on this issue,
including on a number of initiatives launched within
the context of the recently concluded Year of Peace and
Security in Africa.

As others have today, we take this opportunity to
commend the Peacebuilding Commission for its work
on the five African countries under its consideration.
We would like to take the opportunity to re-pledge and
restate the support of the African Union and its
intention to continue working closely with the
Peacebuilding Commission. Please also allow me to
take this opportunity to recall the sentiments expressed
to the Security Council late last year by the African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security, regarding
Somalia in particular (see S/PV.6409).

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Benin.

We would also like to underscore the importance
of strengthening various institutionalized and interagency frameworks of cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations for effective institutionbuilding and recovery in post-conflict countries in
Africa. The growing cooperation between the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, as well as frameworks such as the
recently launched African Union-United Nations Joint
Task Force on Peace and Security, will, we believe,
play a crucial role in guiding institution-rebuilding in
African countries emerging from conflict.
Furthermore, the African Union looks forward to
the implementation of the outcome of the review of the
Peacebuilding Commission. We are also very pleased
with the ongoing cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations regarding the
strengthening of international civilian capacities. We
also look forward to the review of the Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union
that is being implemented by the Peacebuilding
Commission. We are convinced that all of these
frameworks will contribute to strengthening the entire
process of institution-building in the aftermath of
conflict.
With these brief remarks, we again welcome the
Council’s consideration of today’s theme, and we take
this opportunity to reiterate the African Union’s
appreciation to the Security Council and United
Nations for their unwavering support for post-conflict
reconstruction and development in Africa as a whole,
among all the other areas to be focused on. The African
Union remains ever grateful and looks forward to the

24

Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
first like to warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your country’s presidency of the Security Council and
on the professionalism with which you are conducting
its work for the month of January. I also congratulate
your predecessor, the representative of the United
States. I welcome the significant contribution of the
Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste to our debate
this morning. I would also like to thank you, and
through you the other members of the Security
Council, as well as the Secretary-General, for their
valuable contributions to this open debate on
institution-building in the framework of post-conflict
peacebuilding.
Institution-building is a crucial factor in
stabilizing and strengthening sustainable peace in
countries emerging from conflict. Its modalities must
be studied in order to identify the conditions necessary
for it to succeed fully in the countries affected. In this
regard, I would like to share some modest reflections
with the Council.
One of the most difficult and key challenges is to
ensure that countries emerging from a devastating
conflict do not relapse into violence. Here, I welcome
the importance that the Council attaches to the efforts
of the international community to promote peace
processes. The first cardinal principle is to respect the
need for national ownership based on the specifics and
realities of each country concerned. The sole aim of
external support should be to strengthen national
capacities in order to establish and restore State
institutions, centrally and locally. It must also mobilize
civil society in order to credibly legitimize the exercise
of power and the modalities for managing public
affairs. The aim is to ensure as early as possible that
peacebuilding plans launch a participatory and
inclusive process that can restore basic services and
restart economic activity in order to bolster confidence
in and commitment to the peace process.
In designing different plans, we must seek to
identify national capacities and establish a partnership
with them so as to enable the established legal

11-21335

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

authorities to be self-sustaining, to develop their own
expertise and ultimately to be capable on their own of
providing essential services and of earning legitimacy
in the eyes of their people. In order to help achieve
such a partnership between local actors and external
contributors, the United Nations must focus on
knowledge transfer and require it as an essential
criterion when recruiting external actors. The
permanency of the institutions established depends on
this requirement, and the Security Council should
supply the directives necessary in that respect.
In this context, Benin has solved the problem of
transfer of expertise by designating, for each foreign
expert recruited to supervise a project, a national
counterpart assigned to work in tandem with him or her
in order to ensure that projects under way can be
effectively carried out. Such experts are as likely to
come from countries of the South as of the North, but
they will come increasingly, we hope, from the South.
We hope that the forthcoming report on civil capacity
will address these issues.
Successful institution-building, in our opinion,
involves strengthening analytical capacities and
designing national strategies for a country’s recovery
and development, while establishing an optimal
balance between the structural and functional
approaches. That will allow us to determine whether
new institutions must be established or if coordination
and cooperation mechanisms can be set up to carry out
specific functions to meet particular needs. Identifying
and meeting needs effectively requires the
establishment of a hierarchy of true priorities on the
ground in order to create the conditions necessary to
the success of activities under way, even in the face of
the fact that, in a post-conflict country, every need can
seem to be a priority.
Nonetheless, laying the groundwork in close
cooperation with national actors can help to identify
the absolute top priorities. Such work can help decide
which measures to take immediately and which to
implement in the short- and medium terms, with the
criterion for setting deadlines being their importance to
maintaining functions crucial to people’s lives and the
stabilization of the country. Such work must also seek
to identify the most vulnerable populations to target for
emergency programmes and the restoration of basic
services.

11-21335

In any case, it is always necessary to better
integrate all efforts involved, including those relating
to the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons; to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes; and to institution-building
and the restoration of economic activity. This can be
promoted through the granting of local procurement
contracts through peacekeeping operations in order to
rebuild local production capacity. That helps to
generate resources locally in a way that can promote
ownership of the recovery process. Thanks to its
purview and broad membership, the Peacebuilding
Commission is particularly sensitive to the causal links
that can lead to a better analysis of data collected on
the ground, which in turn can bring synergy to efforts
to help synchronize peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts.
In that context, the Council can make use of the
lessons learned by the Peacebuilding Commission in its
work in various theatres of operation in the countries
on its agenda. The mandates of peacekeeping
operations must incorporate peacebuilding perspectives
that take institution-building and the need for
synchronization into account at an early stage. That
will help to shorten the duration of peacekeeping
operations and to transition as soon as possible into
less complex peacebuilding missions designed to last
longer because of the nature of their tasks and related
long-term objectives.
The idea of devoting a part of the peacekeeping
budget to financing priority peacebuilding activities in
the countries affected must be expanded in order to
alleviate pressure on the resources of the Peacebuilding
Fund so that the Fund can truly serve the aims of
conflict prevention in the broad sense of the term,
including not only preventive institutional or
operational support activities, but also post-conflict
activities.
Current international affairs have many lessons to
teach us on the need to demonstrate greater flexibility
in applying criteria for the use of the Fund. It must
remain a rapid-reaction instrument for promoting
multilateral preventive diplomacy in all its forms and
for supporting Member States in difficulty, whether or
not they are classified as fragile States.
The President: I give
representative of Botswana.

the

floor

to

the

25

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Botswana attaches
great importance to the promotion of institutionbuilding, which is one of the main ingredients of the
concept of post-conflict peacebuilding. In this
connection, Sir, I wish to express my delegation’s
appreciation for your initiative to hold this open debate
on the subject.

Botswana also believes that post-conflict
peacebuilding can succeed if we put a high premium on
national ownership not only of the actual
reconstruction activities, but also in determining the
development priorities for which international
assistance is being provided, as well as control of
resource allocation.

We welcome the participation earlier in the day of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban-Ki moon, in these
deliberations, as well as the presence of the Deputy
Prime Minister of Timor-Leste. Their personal
involvement in this debate demonstrates the high
importance of the subject matter. I extend the same
appreciation to the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Permanent Representative of
Germany, for his continue high level of interest and
effective stewardship of the Commission.

Botswana maintains that it is important for the
international community to strike when the iron is still
hot in promoting post-conflict institution-building.
Short-term humanitarian relief should therefore be
accompanied by efforts to build facilities for schools,
water reticulation, primary health care and related
services, as well as the revitalization of key economic
sectors.

Botswana believes that peace, security and
stability are prerequisites for attaining higher levels of
development and quality of life. The promotion of
positive values and practices such as tolerance,
consultation, democracy, effective governance and the
rule of law are of vital importance to the rebuilding of
institutions that can drive major reconstruction in
countries emerging from conflict. Botswana therefore
wishes to emphasize the importance of supporting
institutional development as a crucial step towards the
prevention of conflict and laying the foundation for
sustainable socio-economic development, peace and
security. Botswana also believes that investing in
reconstruction
and
rehabilitation
of
physical
infrastructure, as well as in social and economic
programmes, is a vital part of post-conflict
reconstruction.
My delegation would like to underscore the
importance of ensuring that assistance given to
countries emerging from conflict is always
accompanied by the establishment of legitimate State
machinery in order to safeguard the interests and
welfare of citizens. This is the surest way of
consolidating the gains of peace, which could also go a
long way towards enabling the effective delivery of
basic services for human development, trade,
investment and security. The rebuilding of credible
judicial and law enforcement systems is also of vital
importance so that the country is properly anchored in
the rule of law, which is a necessary ingredient in the
promotion of durable peace and the prevention of
relapse into conflict.

26

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
Botswana’s commitment to continuing to provide
assistance and develop partnerships, within the limits
of its capability, for the consolidation of peace and
security, particularly on the African continent.
Regional economic and social integration in Africa
cannot succeed as long as pockets of instability and
lawlessness disrupt the establishment of stable and
effective administrations.
We support the promotion of cooperation at the
bilateral, regional and international levels and among
the various United Nations entities, as well as the role
played by international financial institutions. We also
urge the United Nations, through the advice of the
Peacebuilding Commission, to continue to promote
post-conflict institution building as a thematic and
programme area.
The President: I give
representative of Argentina.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
know that I am the last speaker this afternoon, so I will
be brief. In any event, I should like to begin by saying
that Argentina always welcomes the opportunity to
participate in the open debates of the Security Council.
The United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, have a key responsibility in the maintenance
of international peace and security. They have a central
role to play in post-conflict situations, building lasting
peace, and establishing a sound foundation for
sustainable development.

11-21335

S/PV.6472 (Resumption 1)

One major challenge faced today by the
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, is supporting countries recovering from
conflict and seeking to build peace. As the SecretaryGeneral underscores in his report, an effective response
by the Organization requires a comprehensive and
coordinated strategy that is based on the identification
of priorities by local authorities and establishes clear
objectives and timelines. That task requires the
development of assistance activities in the
humanitarian field, politics, security, the restoration of
the rule of law, the promotion of development, and the
protection and promotion of human rights. The task
ahead is therefore enormous.
In considering the matter at hand, I should like to
focus on three central aspects.
First, we believe that peacebuilding is primarily a
national task and responsibility. Clearly, faced with
diminished or destroyed local capacities in the wake of
a conflict, we need to rely on the support of the
international community. International, regional,
subregional and non-governmental organizations have
a central role to play in developing institutions, but
always based on guidance and priorities established by
local authorities. We underscore the importance of the
participation and responsibility of authorities in the
country emerging from conflict in the design phase of a
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy and in
identifying priorities and resources to be used in that
strategy. These authorities will be involved throughout
the entire rebuilding process, ensuring a consensual
response in addressing the true causes of conflict more
effectively and legitimately. In that regard, I would like
to underscore the point made by the Deputy Prime
Minister Guterres to the effect that a nation cannot be
built on the basis of another nation, since there is no
common model that can be applied to all.

11-21335

Secondly, I wish to note the statement in the
concept paper prepared by the delegation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for this debate that “it is… too late to
start developing institutional capacities when
peacebuilding efforts are already at the exit strategy
phase” (S/2011/16, annex, p. 2). On the contrary, it is
immediately following a conflict that there are the
greatest challenges to and the greatest opportunities for
starting institution-building.
As I have said on many occasions in this Council
on behalf of my delegation, in particular in reference to
the situation of Haiti, we must promote peacebuilding
so that the presence of the United Nations and the
international community will not be necessary. The fact
that local authorities have the institutional capacity to
shoulder their responsibilities will be the gauge of the
success of the Organization’s work.
Finally, I wish to stress the important role played
by regional and subregional organizations in conflict
prevention, management and resolution, in line with
the provisions of Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter and the need to strengthen the capacities of
regional systems to support countries in post-conflict
recovery and reconstruction.
In addition, I underscore the key role of the
Organization in post-conflict peacebuilding and its
privileged position in coordinating the international
community’s various initiatives, ensuring that all
efforts contribute to the goal of institution-building and
are in line with national priorities.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

27
