S/PV.7124

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7124th meeting

Saturday, 1 March 2014, 4.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Lucas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Luxembourg)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Ogwu
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

14-25030 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1425030*

Ukraine

S/PV.7124

The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council in the month of
March 2014, I should like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to Her Excellency
Ms. Raimonda Murmokaitė, Permanent Representative
of Lithuania, for her service as President of the Council
during the month of February. I am sure that I speak on
behalf of all of the members of the Council in expressing
my sincere thanks to Ambassador Murmokaitė and her
delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which
they guided the work of the Council last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2014/136)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I welcome the presence among us today of the
Deputy Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Jan
Eliasson, and I give him the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: Since the Council
was briefed yesterday by Assistant Secretary-General
Fernández-Taranco (see S/PV.7123), there have been
reports of continued serious developments in Ukraine.
In Crimea, key sites such as airports, communications
and public buildings, including the regional parliament,
reportedly continue to be blocked by unidentified armed
men. There are further reports of armed personnel
taking control of regional administration buildings in
several cities in the East and South of Ukraine.
The new Crimean Prime Minister, Sergei Aksenov,
today released a statement appealing to President
Vladimir Putin to provide assistance in “ensuring peace
and tranquillity on the territory of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea”. In the same statement, he
announced that he was taking control of security in

2/7

01/03/2014

Crimea “on a temporary basis”. He told all security
personnel to declare allegiance to him rather than to the
authorities of Kiev. Following the reported deployment
of additional Russian troops and armoured vehicles
to Crimea, the Russian Federation’s upper house of
Parliament today approved the request of President
Putin for Russian forces to be used in Ukraine “pending
the normalization of the public and political situation in
that country”.
At the same time, in this fluid situation, however,
there are some encouraging signs. One of them is
the reported announcement from Kiev just now of
the intention to broaden the Government to include
representatives from eastern Ukraine. We also note
that the calls for dialogue among all other interested
parties, both inside and outside Ukraine, appear to be
resonating.
Referring to the Security Council discussions
yesterday about Robert Serry’s fact-finding mission
and his possible visit to Crimea, Mr. Serry was in
touch with the authorities of the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea. He came to the conclusion that a visit to
Crimea today was not possible for logistical reasons.
In his statement today, Mr. Serry noted that if he had
travelled to Crimea, he would have conveyed, on behalf
of the Secretary-General, a message for all to calm the
situation down and to refrain from any actions that
could further escalate an already tense environment.
Robert Serry will travel to Geneva today, where he will
brief the Secretary-General on his mission to Ukraine
and discuss further possible steps.
The Secretary-General is gravely concerned that
the situation has further deteriorated since yesterday’s
meeting of the Council. In that regard, let me reiterate
the Secretary-General’s important messages, conveyed
in his statement of today:
“The Secretary-General continues to closely
follow the seriously and rapidly unfolding events
in Ukraine, including developments in Crimea, and
is gravely concerned about the deterioration of the
situation.
“The Secretary-General reiterates his call
for the full respect for and preservation of the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine.
“He calls for an immediate restoration of calm
and direct dialogue between all concerned to solve
the current crisis.
14-25030

01/03/2014

Ukraine

“The Secretary-General will be speaking with
President Vladimir Putin of Russia shortly about
the situation in Ukraine.”
Let me say in closing that at this crucial moment it
is important to recall the mission of the Organization. It
always seeks the peaceful settlement of disputes. That
is the essence of the Charter of the United Nations and
should serve as our primary guide in this situation.
Now is the time for cool heads to prevail.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I thank you very much,
Madam, for agreeing to have this meeting at such short
notice. I thank Mr. Eliasson for his comments and
for presenting to us the statement of the SecretaryGeneral, which is very promising. What I am going
to say now, including the recent information about the
developments in Ukraine, in particular in Crimea, was
sent to all the missions this afternoon,
The situation continues to deteriorate. As I said
yesterday (see S/PV.7123), Russian troops illegally
entered the territory of Ukraine in the Crimean
peninsula on the ambiguous pretext of protecting the
Russian-speaking population of Ukraine. A few hours
ago, the upper house of the Russian Parliament, the
Federation Council, unanimously authorized the use of
military force against Ukraine upon the request of the
President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin,
but the troops are already there and their number is
increasing every hour.
However, such action by the Russian Federation
constitutes an act of aggression against the State of
Ukraine and a severe violation of international law,
posing a serious threat to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of our country, as well as peace and stability
in the whole region. The Russian Federation is not
complying with its obligations as a State guarantor of
Ukraine under the Budapest Memorandum, obliging
Russia, as well as other permanent members of the
Security Council, to refrain from the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity of Ukraine. It is a
dangerous challenge to the very principle of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Russia officially rejected the Ukrainian proposal to
hold immediate bilateral consultations under article 7 of
the Treaty on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership

S/PV.7124

between Ukraine and the Russian Federation of 1997.
The Russian Federation has brutally violated the
basic principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
obliging all Member States, inter alia, to refrain from
the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State.
Facing the announced military intervention in
Ukraine, the Government of Ukraine requested that this
meeting of the Security Council be held. We call upon
the Security Council to do everything possible now
to stop aggression by the Russian Federation against
Ukraine. There is still a chance.
Ukraine calls on the guarantor States to react
immediately in order to prevent intervention. We call
for international monitors of the situation in Ukraine
with regard to the aggression of the Russian Federation.
We urge all States Members of the United Nations to
demonstrate solidarity with the Ukrainian nation to
protect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
country and the very basic principles of the United
Nations, currently brutally violated by a permanent
member of the Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to members of the Security Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would like to express my
sympathy to you, Madam President, because under your
presidency we have just wasted two hours discussing
the format for this meeting. We agreed that only three
people would speak in an open format: Mr. Eliasson, my
Ukrainian colleague Mr. Sergeyev, and the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation. As I
understand it, some of my Security Council colleagues
already intend to depart from that agreement, but what
can we do when there is a game without rules?
I would like to thank Mr. Eliasson for his briefing
and I support his conclusion that, in the current
situation, cool heads must prevail. Unfortunately, I
must note that my Ukrainian colleague did not choose
to follow that advice, and what I heard in his statement
was a number of terms characterizing the situation in
Ukraine and the actions of the Russian Federation to
which we cannot agree at all.
We are discussing a crisis that should not have taken
place. There was no objective reason whatsoever for it
to happen. There was and remains our fraternal country
of Ukraine, our neighbour. If we talk about this in terms

14-250303/7

S/PV.7124

Ukraine

of the situation last autumn, it has a democratically
and legally elected President, Mr. Yanukovych. He
undertakes his functions on basis of the parliamentary
majority in a democratically elected Parliament. His
country is certainly dealing with serious economic
challenges, and the leadership of Ukraine had serious
decisions to make. In particular, it needed to decide
whether to join or sign an association agreement with
the European Union. That is a complex decision.
One of the mistakes made the Ukrainian leadership
was perhaps its last-minute recognition that this
association agreement could have significant economic
consequences for Ukraine.
In such conditions, the Ukrainian leader, President
Yanukovych, took a completely constitutional decision
that was fully in line with the prerogatives of the
Head of any State, namely, to refrain from signing
an association agreement with the European Union.
That did not mean, as many have said, that there was
a complete repudiation of a European orientation; he
simply had to weigh the circumstances that had arisen
at that time. Therefore, I repeat, his decision was fully
within the prerogatives of the Ukrainian leadership.
This raises a question: Why did that problem need
to result in street demonstrations? Why do those street
demonstrations need to be encouraged from abroad
by members of the European Union? Why did the
representatives of several countries of the European
Union need to appear at those meetings, which were
ignited by protests against a decision taken by the
Ukrainian leadership? Why did some officials need to
talk about stirring up the public and opposition leaders?
Why did there have to be such crude interventions in
the internal affairs of a sovereign State?
There is another question that must be asked.
I do not want to condone the actions of President
Yanukovych during the crisis in reaction to the
protests. Many things could be said in that regard, but I
will just reiterate the facts. A leader of the opposition,
Mr. Yatsenyuk, was offered the post of Prime Minister.
Why did he not accept that proposal? Why continue
to escalate the situation? Mr. Yatsenyuk could have
formed a Government. If he had wanted to sign an
association agreement with the European Union, he
could have — and then he would have been responsible
for the catastrophic economic consequences for the
country if he had done so. Moreover, there will be
presidential elections in Ukraine in 2015, and if the
people do not like President Yanukovych’s position,

4/7

01/03/2014

they can elect another President. That has happened
before. Mr. Yanukovych lost an election and other
Presidents were elected in Ukraine.
Why continue to whip up the situation? Why are
some of our Western colleagues trying to prolong the
confrontation? Why are they bringing armed militants
into the streets? Why do those armed militants need to
throw Molotov cocktails at the police? Why are they
going after the police? Have we heard any censure
of these activities from the Western supporters of
democracy in Ukraine? We, for one, have heard not one
word from any of the many institutions that promote
democracy. It is therefore unclear why they even exist,
if they do not react to such manifestations.
As a result of the emergence of the crisis, an
agreement between President Yanukovych and the
opposition was signed on 21 February. It contained
the signatures of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of
Germany, France and Poland. It was a very important
agreement. At a later stage, it would have provided an
opportunity to defuse the crisis. Under the agreement,
a national unity Government was to be formed within
10 days, constitutional reforms were to be undertaken,
a new constitution was to be adopted, and presidential
elections were to be held by December 2014. The
opposition and its leaders pledged not use force. They
were to surrender their weapons to whomever was
supposed to keep them.
Why was that agreement not implemented? Why
were threats aimed at President Yanukovych that
resulted in his having to leave Kiev? Why, with all
the traumatic changes that have taken place, was the
first action of the Ukrainian Parliament and its new
membership a decision to change the law on language,
which accorded Ukrainian minority communities — not
only Russians but others as well — the right to use
their own languages? Why was that decision taken the
very first day? This was not the result of a political
coalition or process. One opposition leader sought to
assert himself, claimed victory and tried to impose his
will on the people. I would not venture to estimate their
numbers, but there are a number of political groups
whose membership includes radical extremists working
in the field of Ukrainian security.
What has occurred over the past few days, which
is the reason for our meeting today? A very difficult
situation has arisen in Crimea and the eastern part of
Ukraine in recent days. There has been a lot of concern,

14-25030

01/03/2014

Ukraine

and in Crimea in particular. People have come in from
Kiev with the clear intention of repeating what they have
done in Kiev and in the western Ukraine by replacing
the regional governments. That has created great
concern in the eastern part of the country, especially in
the Republic of Crimea.
In those circumstances, the Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Crimea, Mr. Aksyonov, made
a statement that was referenced today by Mr. Eliasson,
in which he said:
“In spite of the agreement that was reached
with the central authorities concerning the
inadmissibility of the appointment of leaders of
power structures without the consent of the Supreme
Council of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, in
violation of the norms of the Constitution of the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the Ukrainian
laws governing the police, yesterday, 28 February,
Mr. Igor Avrutsky was appointed chief of the local
Crimean militia. That appointment, the presence of
unidentified armed groups and military equipment,
and the inabaility of the power structures of the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea to effectively
control the situation on the territory of the Republic
have led to disorder and the use of firearms.”
I will now quote the statement issued today by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Russia.
“On the night of 1 March, unknown armed
people sent from Kiev attempted to storm the
Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea. As a result of those perfidious
provocations, there were casualties. The decisive
action of self-defence groups prevented the attempt
to overrun the Ministry. These developments
confirm the aspirations of certain well-known
political circles in Kiev to destabilize the situation
on the peninsula. It is very irresponsible to stir
up tensions in the Crimea, which is already very
tense.”
In those conditions, Mr. Aksyonov, Prime Minister
of Crimea, went to the President of Russia with a
request for assistance to restore peace in Crimea.
According to available information, the appeal was
also supported by Mr. Yanukovych, whose removal
from office, we believe, was illegal. As a result of that
appeal, the President of Russia, in accordance with
our constitutional procedures, sent to the Federation
Council the following request.

S/PV.7124

“With respect to the extraordinary situation
in Ukraine and threats against the lives of
Russian citizens, our compatriots, and members
of the military contingent of the armed forces of
the Russian Federation deployed in conformity
with international agreement on the territory of
Ukraine, the Autonomous Republic of Crimea — in
accordance with paragraph (g) of part I of article 102
of the Constitution of the Russian Federation — has
requested the deployment of the armed forces of
the Russian Federation on the territory of Ukraine
until the civic and political situation in Ukraine can
be normalized”.
I therefore draw the Council’s attention to the fact
that it says“on the territory of Ukraine” — not “against
Ukraine”, as my Ukrainian colleague said, but “on
the territory of Ukraine until the civic and political
situation in Ukraine can be normalized”. In recent
reports that I have received, including the statement
issued by the press representative of the President of
the Russian Federation, the President of the Russian
Federation has not taken a decision on the use of armed
forces on the territory of Ukraine.
With regard to how to get out of this situation, I
repeat, as Mr. Eliasson said quite correctly, that cooler
heads must prevail and we must return to the political
path in the constitutional framework. We need to go
back to the agreement of 21 February and establish
a national unity Government, and we need to put an
end to attempts to converse with our ethnic or political
opponents in the language of force. The international
factors that are especially interested in the situation in
Ukraine need to call the radicals to order. They must
advise the Ukrainian opposition, or whoever happens
to be in Kiev, to distance itself from the radicals and
not allow them to lord it over Ukraine, as such actions
could lead to very difficult developments, which is
what the Russian Federation is trying to avoid.
Ms. Power (United States of America): The United
States renews our call for the international community
to support the newly formed Government of Ukraine
and to prevent unnecessary violence.
I would like to take a moment to respond to the
comments made here by the representative of the
Russian Federation. Actions speak louder than words.
Early this morning, the Russian Duma acted to
authorize the use of military force in Ukraine. This
is as dangerous as it is destabilizing. We are deeply

14-250305/7

S/PV.7124

Ukraine

disturbed by reports this morning of Russian military
intervention into Crimea. This intervention is without
legal basis; indeed, it violates Russia’s commitment
to protecting the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of Ukraine.
It is time for the Russian intervention in Ukraine
to end. The Russian military must stand down, the
aspirations of the Ukrainian people must be respected,
and political dialogue must be allowed to continue. We
applaud the remarkable restraint and commitment to
that dialogue that the new Ukrainian Government in
Kiev has demonstrated in the face of hostility.
We have said from the outset that we recognize
and respect Russia’s historical ties to Ukraine, but
instead of engaging the Government of Ukraine and
international institutions about its concerns for ethnic
Russians, Russia has ignored both, and has instead
acted unilaterally and militarily. It is ironic that the
Russian Federation regularly goes out of its way in this
Chamber to emphasize the sanctity of national borders
and of sovereignty, but Russian actions in Ukraine are
violating the sovereignty of Ukraine and pose a threat
to peace and security.
Russia alleges various actions against and threats
to minority groups in Ukraine. We see no evidence of
such actions yet, but Russia’s provocative actions could
easily push a tense situation beyond the breaking point.
Russia’s incitement of groups to come out to protest
is not responsible behaviour in the present situation.
There is a clear way forward that would preserve
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and
address Russia’s concerns.
First, Russia should directly engage the Government
of Ukraine. Secondly, international monitors and
observers, including from the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), should be sent to Ukraine. That is the best
way to get the facts, monitor conduct and prevent any
abuses. Russia is a leading member of both institutions
and can participate actively to ensure that its interests
are upheld. The immediate deployment of international
observers from either the OSCE or the United Nations
to Crimea would also provide transparency about the
movements and activities of military and paramilitary
forces in the region, and defuse the tensions between
different groups. We are also working to stand up an
international mediation mission to the Crimea to begin
to de-escalate the situation and facilitate productive

6/7

01/03/2014

and peaceful political dialogue among all Ukrainian
parties.
Our paramount concerns are to end the confrontation
and to find a solution that allows the Ukrainian people
to determine their own destiny, their own Government
and their own future. That must be the goal of the
Council and the international community. The United
States will work with Ukraine, our allies and partners
in Europe and around the world, and here at the United
Nations to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity
and democratic future of Ukraine.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): As the
Permanent Representative of Russia has suggested
that some European Union (EU) member States were
somehow involved in making the crisis in Ukraine
worse, I should like to set out clearly my Government’s
position.
The United Kingdom is deeply concerned by the
escalation of tensions in the Crimea peninsula and by
the fact that the Russian Parliament has authorized
Russian military action on Ukrainian soil against the
wishes of the Ukrainian Government. That action is
a grave threat to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine. We condemn any act of
aggression against Ukraine. We have therefore sought
an immediate and full explanation from the Russian
Federation for the decision to authorize military action
on sovereign Ukrainian soil, and of the basis for it
under international law.
Earlier today, my Prime Minister called on all
parties to think carefully about their actions and to
work to lower, not escalate, tensions. Yesterday, my
Foreign Secretary spoke to Ukrainian acting President
Turchynov, and made clear the United Kingdom’s
support for Ukraine’s new Government. He urged him
to ensure that the Government take measures that unify
the country and that it protect the rights of Ukraine’s
citizens, including those from minority groups, in
a spirit of inclusiveness. And he assured him of the
United Kingdom’s commitment to Ukraine’s territorial
integrity, unity and sovereignty.
The United Kingdom Government support
the Ukrainian Government’s request for urgent
consultations, in accordance with the 1994 Budapest
Memorandum, signed by the United Kingdom,
the United States, Russia and Ukraine. We see no
reason why these consultations should not take place
immediately.

14-25030

01/03/2014

Ukraine

Yesterday, the Council expressed support for
Ukraine’s unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity,
and agreed that all political actors should show
restraint. It is critical that the Russian Federation
respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Ukraine, and take immediate steps to calm
this dangerous situation.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Since the
current crisis began, France has worked towards a
solution promoting the stabilization of a democratic
Ukraine in which the rights of all communities are
respected and which is part of the broader European
family. This was the aim of the mediation efforts carried
out by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Federal
Republic of Germany, Poland and France. It was the
aim of the agreement of 21 February, which the Russian
Federation refused to support at the time.
The situation before us today is not a modernday geopolitical spat. This is not a situation in which
Ukraine is being forced to choose between East and
West, which would go against all of the values on
which the European Union is founded. I recall that the
Union’s very existence is based on the rejection of such
practices of another age, which twice left our continent
in ruins in the course of a single century.

S/PV.7124

The authorization given by the Council of the
Russian Federation to deploy troops in Ukraine could, if
acted upon, be seen as a threat to the territorial integrity
of the country and would be a dangerous development
for peace. In the Ukrainian crisis, France will continue
to strive for a political solution that meets the needs
of the Ukrainian people and preserves the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of that country.
We therefore call on all parties involved to show
their sense of responsibility. We call on the Ukrainian
authorities to take all measures necessary to ensure
civil peace and intercommunal coexistence, to restore
the country and to take the legitimate interests of the
Russian Federation into account. We expect all of
Ukraine’s neighbours to assist it in this difficult task.
France and the European Union stand ready to
contribute to the peaceful settlement of the crisis. The
President of the French Republic has called for swift
and coordinated action from the European Union,
which will be determined at the Foreign Affairs Council
meeting on 3 March.
The President (spoke in French): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

14-250307/7
