S/PV.7877

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7877th meeting

Tuesday, 7 February 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yelchenko. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ukraine)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Biagini
Mr. Akahori
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Wilson
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Fourth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in
support of Member States in countering the threat (S/2017/97)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-03244 (E)
*1703244*

S/PV.7877

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Fourth report of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to
international peace and security and the range
of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat (S/2017/97)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/97, which contains the fourth report
of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL
(Da’esh) to international peace and security and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat.
I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: I thank you for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the fourth report of the
Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat (S/2017/97).
This report was prepared with the input of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253
(2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, and in close collaboration
with the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF), the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre
(UNCCT) and other relevant United Nations actors and
international organizations.
The report stresses that the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) is on the defensive militarily
in several regions, but although its income and the
2/6

07/02/2017

territory under its control are shrinking, ISIL still
appears to have sufficient funds to continue fighting.
The group relies mainly on income from extortion
and hydrocarbon exploitation, even though resources
from the latter are on the decline. Member States are
concerned that ISIL will try to expand other sources of
income, such as kidnapping for ransom, and increase
its reliance on donations.
ISIL is adapting in several ways to military pressure,
resorting to increasingly covert communication and
recruitment methods, including by using the dark web,
encryption and messengers. Moreover, it has expanded
its area of attacks to countries neighbouring Iraq
and Syria, while continuing to encourage followers
farther afield to perpetrate attacks. Meanwhile, foreign
terrorist fighters leaving Iraq and Syria augment the
threat of terrorism in their countries of origin.
The previous reports to the Security Council on
ISIL’s global threat have focused on South-East Asia,
Yemen and East Africa, Libya and Afghanistan. This
fourth report focuses on Europe, North Africa and West
Africa.
First, since declaring in 2014 its intent to attack
Europe, ISIL has conducted a range of attacks in
that region. Some of these attacks were directed and
facilitated by ISIL personnel, while others were
enabled by ISIL providing guidance or assistance or
were inspired through its propaganda.
Secondly, while the military offensive in Libya has
dislodged ISIL from its stronghold in Sirte, the group’s
threat to Libya and neighbouring countries persists. Its
fighters — estimated to range from several hundred to
3,000 — have moved to other parts of the country.
Thirdly, ISIL has increased its presence in West
Africa and the Maghreb, although the group does not
control significant amounts of territory in the region.
The reported loyalty pledge to ISIL by a splinter faction
of Al-Mourabitoun, led by Lehbib Ould Ali, may elevate
the level of the threat.
Fourthly, ISIL-affiliate Boko Haram is attempting
to spread its influence and commit terrorist acts beyond
Nigeria and remains a serious threat, with several
thousand fighters at its disposal. It is, however, plagued
by financial difficulties and an internal power struggle,
and has split into two factions. The fourth report also
notes some of the measures taken by Member States
17-03244

07/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7877

through the Security Council and the General Assembly
since the last report.

through legislation, although the report notes that few
terrorist-financing cases have been prosecuted.

On international cooperation and information­
sharing, the report highlights resolution 2322 (2016),
which calls upon Member States to consider establishing
laws and mechanisms to allow for the broadest possible
international cooperation in the judicial and lawenforcement spheres. The report also notes the General
Assembly consensus resolution 71/19, of 21 November,
aimed at further enhancing and strengthening
collaboration between INTERPOL and the United
Nations. INTERPOL reports that information-sharing
among Member States has since increased.

During the reporting period, a number of United
Nations entities took further steps to support the
efforts of Member States to counter the threat of
ISIL. For instance, the CTITF Office and CTED are
currently reviewing the Security Council-mandated
All-of-UN capacity building implementation plan to
stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, in order to
adjust it to the changing phenomenon. The 37 project
proposals address the entire life-cycle of the foreign
terrorist fighter phenomenon, including radicalization,
travel, financing, and return and rehabilitation and
reintegration should they return. The plan is currently
23 per cent funded.

The report also mentions resolution 2331 (2016),
which recognizes the connection between human
trafficking, sexual violence and terrorism and other
transnational organized criminal activities and
calls upon Member States to prosecute and penalize
perpetrators. Some States, with help from United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), have
instituted special procedures to screen for trafficking
victims among refugees and asylum-seekers.
The report highlights some of the actions Member
States have taken in Europe, the Maghreb and West
Africa to counter ISIL. With regard to Europe, for
example, it stresses the improvements in States’
information-sharing and cooperation on addressing
terrorist attacks and on curtailing the travel and transit
of foreign terrorist fighters. Although more work needs
to be done, including on the use of advance passenger
information systems, the report notes that substantial
progress has been made to counter the financing of
terrorism despite continuing challenges.
The report also notes the efforts by the European
Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe to prevent and counter violent
extremism, including projects to bring together
information on radicalization and intervention and
raise awareness about the phenomenon.
With regard to the Maghreb and West Africa,
the report notes that States are pooling resources
regionally to combat terrorism, while improving the
sharing of information on foreign terrorist fighters. It
also highlights the fact that some States — with United
Nations support — are developing and implementing
counter-terrorism and prevention-of-violent-extremism
strategies. Some West African States are taking action
on countering the financing of terrorism, including

The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre
provides capacity-building assistance to Member States
through a number of projects at the global, regional and
national levels.
At the global level, progress was made on the
border security initiative, the development of the border
security and management programme and the advance
passenger information project.
At the regional level, the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre continued to provide assistance on
the development of strategies to counter terrorism and
prevent violent extremism. The Centre also continued
its efforts to improve the capacity of Member States
in East and West Africa to address kidnapping-forransom, which is a potential source of funds for ISILaffiliated groups.
At the regional and national levels, the Integrated
Assistance for Counter Terrorism (I-ACT) initiative
aims to develop a coherent and coordinated capacitybuilding programme to counter terrorism and prevent
violent extremism. During the reporting period, much
progress was made in the implementation of the I-ACT,
both in Mali, with the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, and regionally, in the preparation of an I-ACT
for the Group of Five States for the Sahel, as mandated
by presidential statement S/PRST/2015/24, on peace
and security in Africa. The United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre also continued its preparations for a
project to enhance aviation security in Nigeria.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
published the Handbook on the Management of Violent

17-032443/6

S/PV.7877

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Extremist Prisoners and the Prevention of Radicalization
to Violence in Prisons. UNODC also continued to
provide assistance to Member States in the Middle East
and North Africa region aimed at strengthening lawenforcement capacity at international airports, as part of
its airport communication project. UNODC and CTED
collaborated to provide technical assistance to Member
States on strengthening judicial cooperation on foreign
terrorist fighters and held technical consultations
with Nigeria on the prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration of persons associated with terrorist
organizations. The United Nations Interregional Crime
and Justice Research Institute implemented projects
in the Maghreb on preventing and managing violent
extremism, including in prison settings.
The need to develop sustained, coordinated
responses to the grave threat posed by ISIL and
associated groups and entities is beyond question.
There are 19 universal counter-terrorism conventions
and protocols, as well as related regional instruments on
international terrorism, and relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions. But we need to do
more, as Member States continue to face significant
challenges to ensure effective international cooperation.
Improving our response is critical to addressing the
growth of transnational terrorism as ISIL expands its
area of attacks and foreign terrorist fighters leave Syria
and Iraq. Although many foreign terrorist fighters stay
behind in the conflict zone, those returning or leaving
the conflict could pose a grave risk to the country
of origin or to the countries they are travelling to or
transiting through, such as Iraq and Syria’s neighbours,
as well as countries in the Maghreb.
The Secretary-General has warned that terrorism
exacerbates conflicts and that it takes little to trigger a
crisis that can engulf a country, or a region, with global
consequences. He has urged Member States to step up
efforts to resolve conflicts, including those that are
responsible for the dramatic increase in global terrorism.
As we consider what more we can do to check and
roll back ISIL, we must also step up efforts to prevent
and resolve the violent conflicts that both drive and are
made worse by terrorism. Those are mutually reinforcing
pursuits. Ultimately, it is the spread and consolidation
of peace, security, development and human rights that
will most effectively deprive terrorism of the oxygen it
needs to survive.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
4/6

07/02/2017

The representative of Uruguay has asked for the
floor to make a statement.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express my gratitude for the briefing by
Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman on the fourth
report (S/2017/97) of the Secretary-General on the
threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh) to international peace and security and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering that threat.
The report provides us some encouraging
information, although it also gives us serious cause for
concern. We are pleased to learn that, following the
military defeats suffered by Da’esh in Iraq and Syria,
which were mentioned in the third report (S/2016/830)
of the Secretary-General, that group remains militarily
on the defensive in various areas, especially in Iraq,
Syria, Libya and Afghanistan. The bad news is that the
group is constantly seeking new ways to adapt to the
new circumstances and updates its modus operandi,
while continuing to poke holes in State and regional
security systems.
We are also informed that Da’esh communications
and recruitment systems are moving towards more
covert methods, such as the so-called dark web,
encryption messages and messengers. Furthermore,
it carries out attacks using local terrorist cells or by
calling on its followers to perpetrate attacks in third
countries. All of this points to an organized ability to
act with the support of transnational networks, which
gives a new dimension to attacks by pseudo lone wolves.
Dismantling such terrorist networks will require
joint, coordinated efforts that go beyond the work of
national authorities, as well as inter-State, regional
and international coordination and cooperation. In that
regard, we welcome the work done by INTERPOL and
regional agencies such as EUROPOL.
As Under-Secretary-General Feltman just said, the
fourth report focuses on Europe, the Maghreb and West
Africa and tells of the various initiatives and projects
being carried out by the United Nations in various
areas, as well as by regional organizations and some
States. We trust that they will produce good results and
we encourage continuing along that path.
We reiterate our belief that cooperation and
coordinated actions in various areas and at various
levels are needed to combat the different facets of the
complex phenomenon of terrorism — its financing,
17-03244

07/02/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7877

contact networks and recruitment methods; the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters; migration control and
the problem of returnees, to cite just a few. However,
we also believe that the main responsibility lies with
States. That is why we support initiatives to provide
technical and financial assistance to countries that
lack the necessary means to prevent and combat such
a complex and changing phenomenon, especially to the
most affected countries. We also call on all States to
show genuine political will to combat terrorism and its
sources of financing without ambiguity or doublespeak.

and collaboration will make us much more effective in
this struggle.

We are particularly concerned about the systematic
use of sexual violence as a terrorist tactic and about its
link to human trafficking. In that regard, we commend
the adoption of resolution 2331 (2016) last year. The
report also mentions the recruitment of children by
terrorist groups and the physical and sexual abuse that
some migrant, asylum-seeking and refugee women are
subjected to. Those practices deserve our strongest
condemnation and are issues about which we would
like to have further information.

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of
Bolivia thanks Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his briefing on the
fourth report (S/2017/97) of the Secretary-General on
the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace
and security and the range of United Nations efforts and
activities in support of Member States in countering
the threat.

We were moderately pleased by the information on
the deterioration of the financial standing of Da’esh,
because, despite the deterioration, the group still has
enough resources to continue fighting and is calling for
new forms of financing in order to increase the number
of extortions and kidnappings, in particular through
non-profit organizations and fundraising websites.
We are also concerned by the use of improvised
explosive devices and the growing use of the Internet
and information technologies to spread propaganda,
identify potential recruits and incite individuals to
commit acts of terrorism. In this second aspect, we
encourage greater interaction among public and private
actors and we note with satisfaction the joint initiative
of some private companies to develop a database of
images intended to promote terrorism.
Before concluding, I must emphasize that we
are pleased to know that efforts are also being
made to prevent and combat violent extremism and
radicalization. Preventing and combating terrorism is
the duty of all members of the international community.
Although my country belongs to a region where the
threat of terrorism is fortunately minor, we are aware
that no State is exempt from it. Uruguay believes that
it is in everyone’s interest that the United Nations be
a linchpin among States and international, regional
and subregional organizations. Inter-State cooperation

Lastly, I must mention that national counterterrorism strategies must bear in mind States’
obligations, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, including international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
The President: The representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia has asked for the floor to
make a statement.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia reiterates its
emphatic, categorical condemnation of terrorist acts in
all their forms and manifestations — regardless of the
motives for committing them, where they take place
and who their perpetrators may be — since they are
a deliberate attack on international peace and security
and they represent flagrant violations of international
law. At the same time, we wish to stress that terrorism
should not be associated with any religion, nationality
or civilization.
We recognize the assessments of the reports of
the Secretary-General that Da’esh is an unprecented
threat to international peace and security and that it is
able to quickly adapt to changing environments and to
persuade or inspire terrorist groups that are similar to
it throughout the world to facilitate and commit acts
of terrorism.
We value the regional focus of the SecretaryGeneral on this occasion, in particular on the regions
of Europe, the Maghreb and West Africa. We view with
concern the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters
returning to their countries of origin in Europe, as well
as the online dissemination of designs for improvised
explosive devices. While Da’esh has been forced out of
cities such as Sirte in Libya, it continues to threaten
neighbouring countries in the Maghreb and West
Africa. We also note the efforts made by countries of
those regions in the context of combating terrorism in

17-032445/6

S/PV.7877

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

order to respond to the unprecendented threat posed
by the so-called Islamic State to regional stability
and security. We encourage them to continue making
progress and coordinating their efforts in that direction.
We are particularly concerned by the situation of
women, girls and boys, asylum-seekers and refugees.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia also wishes to publicly
recognize the efforts, sacrifices and achievements
of the peoples of Iraq, Syria and Libya and all those
who are on the front lines in combating the scourge of
terrorism in conflict areas and on the international level,
especially with regard to the threat that Da’esh poses
to international peace and security. We also recognize
the efforts of Turkey, Iran and Russia in reaching a
ceasefire agreement on Syria, in December 2016, and
the efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. Those
efforts deal a great blow to the progress of the Islamic
State and represent hope in being able to resolve the
conflict through negotiations among the parties and the
necessary fight against the Islamic State.
While we acknowledge Member States for their
contributions set out in the fourth report, Bolivia believes

6/6

07/02/2017

that we must not forget the root causes of the problem
of terrorism and the development of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant —
­ intervention and regime-change
policies. If we do not learn those lessons, we will be
condemned to repeat history. We would not be sitting
here dealing with this issue, denouncing the situation
and the loss of over 1.5 million lives, had it not been for
the invasion of Iraq, the attempts to not recognize and
overthrow the Government of Syria and the planned
destruction of Libya. Furthermore, it is ironic that some
Governments responsible for those policies are the very
ones that refuse to welcome refugees who are victims
of terrorism in the conflict areas.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia once again
acknowledges the work done by the United Nations to
greatly alleviate the situation of victims of terrorism
and to bolster the work of States in fighting this threat
to international peace and security.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

17-03244
