UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1927) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/12093) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1927

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1927th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 15 June 1976, at 9.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Rashleigh

E. JACKSON

4. In our consultations we took careful note of all
the terms of the Secretary-General’s
report [S/22093]+
which has been most helpful. It is true that we were
not able to reflect in the draft resolution all the elements
desired by some of the members of the Council-like,
for instance, those referred to in section III of the
report, as well as some in section VII. Nevertheless,
I know I speak on behalf of the majority of- the
members of this Council when I say that we share a
deep concern for the future of the indigenous people
of Cyprus. I am sure that the majority of the members
of the Council share the hope that the adoption of this
draft resolution will help in facilitating
a peaceful
solution of the Cyprus problem.

(Guyana).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (SJAgendall927)

of the agenda

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/12093)
The meeting

Adoption

5. Finally, I wish to express on my own behalf
and on the Council’s behalf appreciation of the understanding and co-operation
shown by the parties
directly concerned. !

was called to order at 11.35 p.m.

of the agenda
6. I shall now put 1to the vote the draft resolution
appearing in document S/12096.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General
operation in Cyprus (S/12093)

A vote was taken by show of hands.
on the United Nations

The draft resolution
none.’

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council at its 1925th meeting,
I invite the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and
Greece to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote.

was adopted

by 13 votes to

Two members (Benin and China) did not participate
in the voting.
7. The PRESIDENT:
A number of representatives
have expressed the wish to speak following the vote.
Before calling upon them, I shall call on the SecretaryGeneral.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Christophides
(Cyprus), Mr. Tiirkmen (Turkey) and Mr. Papoulias
(Greece) took places at the Council table.

8. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I wish to assure
the Council that I shall do my best to implement the
resolution which it has just adopted. As far as the
United
Nations
Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP)
is concerned, the necessary instructions
will be given so that the Force may continue to function
during the next six months. The full co-operation of
the parties concerned is, of course, vital to the
success of the Force in performing its difficult duties.
In this regard, I hope that the function of the Force
will be facilitated by the conclusion of the discussions
with the representative of the Turkish Cypriot community in respect to the stationing, deployment and
functioning of the Force in the north.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw attention
to the text of a draft resolution that has been prepared
in the course of extensive consultations, which appears
in document S/12096.
3. As members of the Council are aware, we have
had long and arduous consultations on the formulation of a draft resolution which could command the
widest support in the Council and meet the requirements of the situation. Difficult through the job was,
I am sure members will all agree that it was an
eminently satisfying task and that the Council can feel
confident that the decision we are about to take will
make a constructive contribution
to the search for a
settlement in Cyprus.

9. As I have stated in my report, I and my Special
Representative
are continuing our efforts to remove
1

the various obstacles in the way of a resumption of
the negotiating
process. I am fully aware of the
importance of resuming the talks as soon as possible.
I should like, however, to take this opportunity
to
stress once again that these negotiations
must be
meaningful and constructive.
I am sure that, after
five rounds of talks, the Council will understand my
concern in this regard. This means that the parties
should show the necessary flexibility,
taking into
account not only their own interests but also the
legitimate aspirations and requirements of the other
side. It means also that they must act with the utmost
restraint and avoid actions which tend to increase
the, tension between the two communities
and thus
make negotiations more difficult.

complexity of the question, some time will be required
for a settlement of the issues left over from history
and of the immediate issues. It is our earnest hope that
the two Cypriot communities
and the parties concerned, bearing in mind the over-all interests, will
further remove super-Power meddling, intervention
and sabotage and, in particular,
will .avoid giving
openings for exploitation
by the super-Power which
is bent on sowing discord and fishing in troubled
waters, and that they will take a positive attitude to
eliminate gradually, and not widen, their differences
through patient and peaceful negotiations on an equal
footing and in a spirit of mutual understanding and
mutual accommodation
so as to achieve a reasonable
settlement of the Cyprus question at an early date.

16: That being said, I wish to assure the Council
that I shall con&e
to-make every effort to bring about
the resumption of the negotiating process in conditions
which give it a reasonable chance of being productive.
I shall not fail to report to the Council on further
developments.

16. With respect to the draft resolution contained
in document S/12096, the Chinese delegation is in
favour of that portion of the draft which reaffiis
General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX).
But in
view of the fact that the draft resolution mainly
concerns the renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP,
a question on which the Chinese delegation has
always held a different position in ,principle,
the
Chinese delegation did not participate in the vote.

11. There is one aspect of the functioning
of
UNFICYP
which. has not been mentioned
in the
resolution. I refer to the financial situation. As I have
pointed out in my report, the deficit in the budget of
UNFICYP
now exceeds $40 million. This situation
represents an increasingly heavy and disproportionate
burden on the Governments contributing contigents to
UNFICYP.
In the efforts that we shall be making to
improve the situation, .I very much hope that I shall
have the full co-operation both of the members of the
Council and of the Members of the United Nations as
a whole.

17. Mr. ILLUECA
(Panama) (interpketation
from
Spanish):
Mr. President,
Panama,
like Guyana,
occupies one of the two seats reserved for Latin
America on the Security Council, and it is thus par-’
titularly pleased to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of this august body. The skill
with which you have been guiding our work only
enhances your proven reputation as a genuine intemational statesman and the well-earned prestige of the
Gpvemment of your country as one of the most honest
champions of the principles and purposes of the United
Nations Charter. It is those purposes and principles
which form the foundation of the movement of the
non-aligned countries, to which Guyana and Panama
have the honour to belong.

12. In conclusion, Mr. President, I should like to
thank you most warmly for your leadership and for
your untiring efforts during the past few days. I should
also like to express my appreciation to the members
of the Council for their understanding and help on this
very important question.

18. I also wish to express the appreciation of my
delegation for the brilliant work done by the representative of France, Mr. Louis de Guiringaud, during
the month of May, when he discharged the delicate
tasks of the President of the Council deftly and with
masterly composure. We might say of him that each
one of his actions was a link in a chain of diplomatic
successes.

13. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the Secretary-General
very much and express the Council’s confidence iii
his dedication in and his energetic efforts to pursue
the mandate given to him.
14. Mr. LA1 Ya-Ii (China) (translation from Chinese):
During the consideration of the Cyprus question at the
thirtieth session of the General Assembly, the Chinese
delegation stated the Chinese Government’s
position
on the Cyprus question in a comprehensive
way.*
Based on this position, the Chinese delegation voted
in favour of General Assembly resolution 3395 (XXX).

19. Likewise, I am pleased to offer the heart-felt
gratitude of my delegation to my eminent colleagues
who on the occasion of my appointment as representative of my country on the Council, have said kind
things both about me and about my distinguished
predecessor, Mr. Aquilino Boyd, who today heads the
Ministry of External Relations of the Republic of
Panama.

15. The Chinese delegation firmly holds that the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Cyprus must be respected. Cyprus, Turkey and Greece
are all friends of China. We have all suffered from the
imperialist tactics of sowing discord and “divide and
ride”. We fully understand that in view of the

20. I should like to take this opportunity to reiterate
to each and every member of the Council, as well as
2

-First,
that the continued presence of the United
Nations Force is essential, not only to help maintain
quiet in the island, but also to facilitate the uninterrupted search for a peaceful settlement.

to the Secretary-General
and to his efficient assistants,
my firm intention of co-operating with them, both
officially .and personally, in our common endeavours
and for the sake of strengthening
the world Organization.

--Second,
UNCIVPOL,
movements.

21. From the analytical
study submitted
by the
Secretary-General
on 2 February to the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on
the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization,3
it is clear that the role of the United Nations in the
maintenance of international
peace and security is of
paramount importance and constitutes its fundamental
and constant task; furthermore, we must admit that the
Organization has made a positive contribution
to the
maintenance and furtherance of international
peace
and security, as is borne out by the fact that during
the 30 years the United Nations has been in existence
mankind has been spared the nightmare’ of a world
war.

-Third,
that artificial changes are being made in the
demographic structure of the island.
-Fourth,
that the situation of the Greek Cypriots
in the north is a matter of serious concern not only
on purely humanitarian
grounds but also because ,it
increases tension between the two communities
and
tends to have an adverse effect on the efforts towards
‘1
a just and lasting peace on Cyprus.
-Fifth,
that the Secretary-General
must continue
to do everything possible to carry out the good
offices mission entrusted to him by the Security
Council.

22. The same study nevertheless records the equally
correct view; held by a number of States that, lately,
the United
Nations has made little progress in
increasing its .effectiveness as an instrument for the
maintenance of peace and security and that this is due,
among other factors, to a lack of political will on the
part of Member States to comply strictly with the
Charter and to use United Nations organs and the
means contemplated in the Charter.

-Sixth,
that the sixth round of Vienna talks
scheduled for May was postponed because the
exchange of written proposals on the territorial issue
could not be carried out.
-Seventh,
that despite all the difficulties,
the
Secretary-General
believes that a just and lasting
settlement of the Cyprus problem can be achieved
through negotiations between the representatives of
the two communities. However, he warns that for those
negotiations
to serve a useful purpose, all the
parties concerned must be willing to show the necessary flexibility,
taking into account not only their
own interests but also those of the opposing side. As
we see it, what the Secretary-General wishes to convey
in this diplomatic
language is that the negotiations
will succeed only if there is more co-operation between
the parties.

23. Furthermore,
the analytical study presents the
views of States Members which point out that, among
the reasons for the apparent absence of progress or
failure in discharging the duty of maintaining international peace and security, are, besides those mentioned
in the preceding paragraph,
the following:
noncompliance on the part of Member States with decisions of the Security Council and of the General
Assembly; the conduct of certain States which act
counter to the purposes and principles of the Charter;
and an abuse of the right of veto in the Security
Council.

27. Given the seriousness of the picture presented in
the report of the Secretary-Genreal,
my delegation
felt that the renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP
was necessary. May I avail myself of this opportunity
to dwell on the important mission of the Force, whose
devotion and sense of duty have won our admiration
and appreciation.
We pay a tribute of gratitude and
admiration
to the Commander
of the Force,
Lieutenant-General
Prem Chand, as well as to his
officers and men, and to the civilian staff. The
Under-Secretaries-General
Mr. Roberto Guyer and
Mr. Brian Urquhart deserve the same recognition.

24. Therefore, Panama agrees ‘with the emphasis
placed by certain esteemed States Members on the
need to ensure genuine compliance with the decisions
of United Nations bodies, decisions such as that which
the Council has adopted tonight. Accordingly, we are
in favour of giving greater urgency to the need to
search for ways to make the resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Council effective, rather than to
revising the Charter. We believe that more emphasis
should be placed on respecting the Charter than on
changing it.
25. The Secretary-General
and his Special Representative in Cyprus, Mr. Perez de CuelIar, have
performed an exceptional task which deserves praise
and recognition by the Council.
26. From the report of the Secretary-General,
may draw the following conclusions:

that UNFICYP
and its civilian police,
are severely
restricted
in their

28. The good offices performed by the SecretaryGeneral in regard to the question of Cyprus represent,
in the opinion of my delegation, an excellent example
of how we can strengthen the role of the United
Nations in the present-day
world. In the Organization views have been expressed, which we share, to

we
3

the effect that the peaceful settlement of disputes is
the most important expression of the wish of States
to bring about agreement and international
peace,
just as it is an indispensable
requirement
for the
protection of weaker States from possible abuses by
stronger States.

33. In conclusion, the delegation of Panama, in voting
for the draft resolution which has just been adopted,
expresses its fervent hope that, through the United
Nations machinery
the distressing problem of the
island of Cyprus well be solved by the effective
application of the following measures, recommended
by the General Assembly and the Council: first, the
military occupation of the island of Cyprus by the
Turkish army must be brought to an end as must any
attempt to partition the island; second, there must be a
prompt withdrawal of all foreign armed forces and
foreign military
presence and personnel from the
Republic of Cyprus; third, all foreign intervention in
the internal affairs of the Republic of Cyprus must
cease; fourth, the constitutional system of the Republic
of Cyprus must be respected, a matter which lies
within the exclusive competence of the Greek Cypriot
and Turkish Cypriot communities;
fifth, all displaced
persons must be allowed to return to their homes and
an over-all solution to the problem of the refugees must
be found; sixth, any unilateral action by the parties
in contravention of resolution 3212 (XXIX), including
any artificial
scheme to change the demographic
structure of Cyprus, must be rejected; seventh, the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force must remain in
Cyprus for as long as the Council considers it necessary to ensure the consolidation of peace and security
in the Republic of Cyprus.

29. It should therefore be made very clear that the
good offices mission being performed by the SecretaryGeneral has the absolute and enthusiastic support of
all members of the Security Council without exception,
and that furthermore,
it had the unanimous support
of all States Members when on 1 November
1974,
they decided without dissent to adopt General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX), paragraph 4 of which
reads as follows:
“Commends
the contacts and negotiations taking
place on an equal footing, with the good offices of
the Secretary-General,
between the representatives
of the two communities, and calls for their continuation with a view to reaching freely a mutually
acceptable political
settlement,
based on their
fundamental and legitimate rights . * *

30. Since they command such support, no country
in the world can object to the activities carried out by
the Secretary-General
in the performance
of the
mandate conferred on him by the international
community. Furthermore, we are all desirous of the success
of the mission of the Secretary-General
so that there
may be positive proof that the means, methods and
procedures for the peaceful settlement of disputes are
effective within the United Nations system. We
believe that in the mission entrusted to the SecretaryGeneral it is not only his prestige-his
great prestigewhich is involved but also the prestige of and respect
for the Security Council, the General Assembly and
the entire United Nations.

34. In one of his reports, the Secretary-General
said
that the non-aligned countries, which have always fully
supported the United Nations, played a vital role in
carrying out the tasks of the General Assembly and of
other United Nations bodies. The work you, Mr. President, have done over the last few days is a living
demonstration
of that great truth. We have complete
faith in the increasingly significant contribution
of
the non-aligned countries to the process of strengthening the United Nations. “Accordingly,
all the more
do we need”-as
Mr. Ralil Prebisch recently said at
the fourth session of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development:

31. Clearly, if within a reasonable period of time
which should not go beyond the present year, 1976,
there were no signs of progress because of the
obstinacy or the defiance of one of the parties, it would
then be necessary within the United Nations system for
the Security Council and the General Assembly to
propose some formula which would be viable in the
field of multilateral
diplomacy and which would be in
harmony with the system for the maintenance
of
international
peace and security laid down in the
Charter.

The constructive cohesion of the countries of the
third world, regardless of all their different levels
of development, conditions and economic and social
systems: unity within diversity. But all of this counts
less than the vital and continued existence of the
great common denominators.”
35. Mr. RYDBECK
(Sweden): The Swedish delegation has been guided all through our arduous consultations by the conviction of its Government
that the
Security Council must once again prolong the mandate of the United Nations Force in Cyprus for another
period of six months. My Government
strongly
supports the view expressed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report, namely, that the presence of
UNFICYP
is essential not only to maintain quiet in
the island but also to facilitate the continued search
for a peaceful settlement. We have also been guided
by the conviction that the Council should do everything

32. My delegation believes then that it is important
for us to adopt the appropriate
formulas so that
General Assembly resolution
3395 (XXX) can be
implemented
as soon as possible, as well as resolution 3212 (XXIX), which was endorsed by the Security
Council in resolution 365 (1974), and those other
resolutions of the Council calling for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus to be
respected.
\

4

in its power to support the negotiations taking place
under the auspices of the Secretary-General

measures that might prejudice the integrity and independence of Cyprus-for
instance, such measures as
resettlement of population groups within, and immigration to, the island.

36. Though the over-all situation in Cyprus has been
relatively quiet, the picture emerging from the report
of the Secretary-General
contains elements which are
clearly disturbing. The situation of the Greek Cypriots
in the north gives cause for serious concern and adds
to the tension in the island. The efforts of UNFICYP
to assist the civilian population in that area and to
provide humanitarian
aid to the population in need
have been seriously hampered by the fact that the
Force has -been severely restricted in its freedom
of movement and denied free and normal access to
Greek Cypriot habitations in the area. A failure to
co-operate fully with UNFICYP
seriously harms the
efforts of the Force to assist in creating an atmosphere
conducive to a just and lasting settlement. In the view
of the Swedish delegation, such a policy is a shortsighted one and can only work against the interests
of both communities in Cyprus.

41. Sweden, as a troop-contributing
country, unfortunately feels compelled
to bring up, once again,
even at this late hour, the precarious financial situation
of UNFICYP.
The report of the Secretary-General
is
very eloquent in this respect. It certainly does not
overstate the gravity of the situation. The deficit in the
budget of UNFICYP
continues to increase, which
means that troop-contributing
Governments have to
assume an ever more disproportionate
share of the
financial burden of UNFICYP.
I think everyone will
agree with us that it is a totally unacceptable situation
that the maintenance
of UNFICYP
should be the
task mainly of a small number of Governments.
It is
certainly the responsibility
of the international
community as a whole.
42. In conclusion, I want to express the deep gratitude of my Government
to the Secretary-General,
who with persistence and with great diplomatic
skill
carries out the tasks entrusted to him by the Security
Council. To him personally, to his Special Representative, Ambassador
Perez de CuCllar, and to the
immediate staff of the Secretary-General
we express
our deep appreciation
for what they have so far
achieved in their efforts to promote a stable and
peaceful solution. May I also express our warm
appreciation to the ‘Force Commander,
the officers
and the men of UNFICYP
for the exemplary way in
which they have fulfilled their tasks under sometimes
very trying circumstances.

37. It must be repeated once again here today that a
prolongation of UNFICYP’s
mandate is not an end in
itself. The time afforded through its prolongation must
be used for meaningful negotiations between the two
communities.
The good offices of the SecretaryGeneral still offer the only framework for the negotiations. We urgently appeal to the parties to avail
themselves of the opportunity
thus provided. After
they were initiated by the Council in its resolution 367
(1975), the talks under the Secretary-General’s
aegis
did show some encouraging progress, especially those
of February this year in Vienna, which gave hope for
a certain success. For various reasons the parties have
not been able to follow up the results thus achieved.

43. Finally, a very special word of thanks goes to
you, Mr. President. I had not had the opportunity to
congratulate you on your accession to the presidency,
but I am happy to have the opportunity
now to
congratulate you, not only on your accession to the
presidency but on the masterful and extremely constructive way in which you have guided us through a
very difficult period these last few days. We want to
express our very deepest gratitude to you.

38. The negotiating situation has deteriorated,
and
the parties have not been able to keep up the momentum from previous rounds in Vienna. We do not
underestimate the difficulties and the delicacy of the
problems confronting
the negotiators.
The consequences of failure in the efforts to get the intercommunal negotiations going once more, however,
can only lead to deep suffering for all Cypriots and be
to the detriment of all.
39. In spite of the setback after the Vienna talks,
the mission of good offices of the Secretary-General
must continue. We note. that it is still the expressed
wish of the parties to make further efforts in this
context. There is, in fact, no viable and credible
alternative to the talks under the auspices of the
Secretary-General.
The Council must give its full
support to those talks.

44. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): Mr. President, first
of all, may I offer you the sincere congratulations
of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of June. The Council
is fortunate indeed in having in the Chair, when it is
seized of some of the most important and difftcult
issues on its agenda, a diplomat of your tact, your
patience and negotiating skill-qualities
of which we
have had renewed and striking proof in the last few
days.

40. May I in this context declare that Sweden insists
that any settlement of the Cyprus problem must safeguard the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. Cyprus must also
be guaranteed the right to continue its policy of nonalignment. We expect all parties to refrain from any

45. My delegation joins others who have preceded me
in expressing the warmest appreciation also to your
predecessor, the representative
of France, Ambassador de Guiringaud, for the consummate ability, skill
and great devotion with which he conducted the
Council’s business during the month of May.
5

46. -The question of Cyprus has been before the
United Nations for many years now. The events leading
up to the prevailing situation are too well known to
require detailed recapitulation.
At this juncture we
have been concerned with two aspects of the situation: first, whether to renew the mandate of UNFICYP
which would otherwise have expired at midnight-and
I take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the men and
officers of the United Nations Force for the efficient
and gallant manner in which they have discharged
their duties in circumstances
not always free of
difficulty; and, secondly, what the Secretary-General
has told us in his latest report on the prevailing
situation, and, above all, what he has to say about
the prospects for a definitive and lasting settlement.

tions between these two neighbours. A settlement
between these two Powers, which are also Guarantor
Powers in Cyprus, could not fail to have a salutary
effect on the situation in the island. Wisdom and good
sense suggest that the Security Council must complement, and not supplant, these contacts.
51. The Secretary-General,
in,the report he submitted
to the Council a few days ago, states:
“I myself and my Special Representative
have
remained in close touch with the parties and have
continued to explore actively with the Greek Cypriot
and Turkish Cypriot representatives ‘how best to
overcome the present difficulties and to pave the way
for the continuation of the negotiating process. Both
sides, while expressing certain reservations, have
indicated publicly that the intercommunal
talks
under my auspices continue to provide the best
method of making progress towards an agreed
settlement
of the Cyprus problem.”
[S/12093,

47, J Without taking an unduly sanguine view of things
or wishing to minimize the difficulties and obstacles
which lie in the way, my delegation shares the view of
those who see elements of encouragement
in the
Secretary-General’s
report with regard to the future.
My own country’s policy with regard to the Cyprus
issue was outlined by the leader of the Pakistan delegation to the last session of the General Assembly, when
he said:4

para. 53.1

52. We welcome this willingness of the two communities to continue their search for anagreed solution. My delegation is encouraged to believe that
an approach by their leaders based on mutual tolerance
and a long view of their common interests will
light their way to peaceful coexistence and help them
to overcome current difftculties.
This is also the
Secretary-General’s
view, and I should like to quote
again from his report:

“We are deeply conscious... of the need for an
early solution of the conflict in Cyprus. Pakistan
has always supported a settlement that would fully
ensure the exercise of their fundamental rights for
the two communities in the island and enable them
to live peacefully side by side. We hope that the
efforts made by the Secretary-General
and the
willingness to negotiate shown by the parties will
pave the way for a final settlement and restore peace
and tranquillity
in that area.”

“Despite all the difficulties I continue to believe
that the best hope of achieving a just and lasting
settlement of the Cyprus problem is through negotiations between the representatives of the two communities. But for those negotiations
to serve a
useful purpose, all the parties concerned must be
willing to show the necessary flexibility,
taking into
account not only their own interests but also the
legitimate
aspirations
and requirements
of the
opposing side. It is also important that agreements
reached at previous rounds should be respected
and carried out.” [Ibid., para. 70.1

48. Pakistan has followed the progress of the intercommunal talks with deep interest. We endorse the
efforts of the Secretary-General
in this regard. With
his customary tact and perseverance he has kept these
contacts and exchanges alive and has maintained a
dialogue which, despite the strains and stresses
inherent in the situation, is, in our view, alone capable
of promoting a settlement based on mutual accommodation.

53. In this context, I find it necessary to say that if
the Turkish Cypriot community is wary of promises it
is because it feels that earlier promises made to it
were violated. That unhappy past must now be
forgotten and overtaken by a new experience of
generous accommodation
and trust.

49. May I take this occasion to express the deep
appreciation of my delegation to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
our former colleague Ambassador Perez de Cdliar, for the manner
in which he has been discharging his onerous responsibilities in Cyprus.

54. The resolution which the Council has just adopted
embodies the ideas and approach which I have outlined. It enjoys the support of the overwhelming
majority of the Council’s membership. It is designed
to serve the interests of the parties themselves, even
if they might, for diametrically
opposite reasons, have
preferred a draft which reflected more closely their
own particular view of the situation. This is evidence,
in my delegation’s view, of the objectivity and realism

50. While the final outcome undoubtedly
depends
on the ability of the leaders of the Turkish and Greek
communities
in Cyprus to agree on an arrangement
satisfactory to both sides, we are also aware of the
other cross-currents that influence events in that area.
My delegation therefore views with satisfaction the
fact that Turkey and Greece have agreed to meet and
to discuss the problems that have troubled the rela6

making the international
community
connive in the
occupation of a Member State by the troops of another
Member State-and,
what is more, a member of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO)-and
that, while the United Nations has found itself obliged
to oppose that occupation, it has not thereby been able
to obtain the withdrawal of the Turkish troops of
annexation from the island. For my delegation, to be
content at the present time with renewing the mandate
of UNFICYP
is to administer a tranquillizer
to the
Government
and people of Cyprus; it means, of
necessity helping the forces of occupation to consolidate their position and to impose a fait accompli
on the international
community.
a’
~
58. It is obvious that the best way to avoid such
pitfalls is to view the question as a whole and to make
the renewal of the mandate of the Force called
upon to maintain order and peace in Cyprus-if
its
presence is necessary-a
result of the solution to be
found. In saying this, my delegation wants to make
it clear that Benin is not opposed to the recommendation contained in paragraph 71 of the SecretaryGeneral’s report. But my delegation thinks that before
we give an opinion on the need to renew the mandate
of the Force it is important, first of all, to review the
question of Cyprus in its entirety. Otherwise, the
United Nations may find itself in the position of a
doctor who contents himself with giving palliatives
to his patient without trying to find out the true reasons
for his illness and thus to be able to administer a suitable remedy.

which went into the preparations of the draft which
has been submitted to us and which has been adopted
by the Council. My delegation voted in favour of the
draft and expresses the hope that it will enable the
parties, with the continued help of the SecretaryGeneral, to find a way out of their present predicament.
55. Mr. President, I take this occasion to pay a tribute
to you again for the skill and good will with which you
have approached your task and to thank you for the
efforts and labour you have deployed towards bringing
the present debate to a successful conclusion.
56. Mr. PAQUI (Benin) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, to see the work of the Security Council presided over by such a worthy and distinguished
son of Guyana as you can only be a source of true
satisfaction for my delegation, because, just as the
revolutionary
military Government
of the People’s
Republic of Benin, imbued with the desire to cure
forever the endemic ills from which my country has
suffered since its accession to independence, has opted
for a radical change in the old philosophical
and
political thinking inherited from a colonial post, just
as the revolutionary
Government of the co-operative
Republic of Guyana has chosen to orient its actions
according to a revolutionary concept in order to make
your country a free and truly independent country,
in other words, a State in which the achievement of
fundamental
political
objectives necessarily means
destroying the visible or invisible forces of intemational imperialism
and neo-colonialism.
The identical
orientation
of our Governments,
chosen with paramount concern for security and well-being of our
peoples, explains the similarity’in
the positions of our
two delegations concerning the protection
of the
fundamental
objectives and principles which should
guide the present and future activities of the United
Nations. This is why my delegation remains convinced
that, despite the thorny and sensitive nature of the
item on the agenda, the views of our Governments
on the most appropriate means of solving this problem
will be very similar.

59. In my delegation’s view, the problem before the
Council is primarily that of the survival of a Member
State as a single and indivisible entity. It is also a
question of the independence, inviolability
and territorial integrity of Cyprus. To forget or ignore that
aspect of the question would be to content ourselves
with a palliative instead of going to the root of the
problem.
60. My Government’s
position was stated clearly in
the General Assembly following the inadmissible act
of the reactionary Greek generals, ,followed by the
Turkish occupation, the aim of which is to impose
partition as a solution. This position was confirmed
again at last year’s session of the General Assembly,s
and the delegation of Benin, was instructed not to
participate
in the vote on resolution 3395 (XXX),
whose insinuating and delaying character is only too
obvious. Let it suffice for me to reaffirm here that
for my country there is only one Cypriot State, whose
Foreign Minister addressed the Council last Friday,
[1925th meeting]. The conciliatory tone of his statement should arouse the sympathy of Member States,
for the Cypriot Government
must be exceptionally
courageous and sincerely desirous of reaching a final
solution to agree to talk with the representatives of
a Government
whose military force, are flagrantly
occupying the part of the island that is the most
important
and vital to the Cypriot economy. My

57. It is clear that the question before the Council
cannot and should not be solved merely by renewing
the mandate of UNFICYP
because we have only to
refer to the report of the Secretary-General
particularly paragraph IO-to mention only that one-to
realize that, although it is true that the Force continues to discharge its functions to the best of its
ability, it is nevertheless true that its humanitarian
work has been carried out only on a limited basis. In
such circumstances
is it not tempting to wonder
what purpose the presence of the Force is really
serving? What does the renewal of its mandate mean in
these conditions if not that we are asking the world
community
to continue to contribute to the maintenance of an impotent Force which cannot do anything to induce the two communities
to seek a satisfactory solution in the interests of the whole population
of Cyprus? What does it mean, if not that we are
7

delegation cannot fail to underscore that part of the
Foreign Minister’s statement in which he stressed that
the situation in Cyprus was a challenge to the
effectiveness of the United Nations, a challenge which
many delegations, including my own, have frequently
brought to the attention of both the Security Council
and the General Assembly. It would not be fair to say
that the Assembly has the same attitude to this warning
as the Council. However, things are happening as if
in illustration of the adage that the dog continues to
bark, but that will not stop the caravan from going by.
61. So, despite the cries of alarm from the overwhelming majority of the Member States concerning
the necessity of taking effective action to prevent
future challenges of this kind, the super-Powers,
animated by their rivalry, their desire for hegemony
and their unshakeable determination
to keep an eye on
some of their acquisitions, apparently do not wish to
make the least effort to maintain the credibility and
respectability of our Organization. That exceptionally
obtuse attitude has been explained by a famous
statesman, our brother Abdelaziz Bouteflika,
the
Foreign Minister of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Algeria, President of the twenty-ninth session of the
General Assembly, when he said
“A crisis such as that of Cyprus has its origin in
the imperfections of the international system which
resulted from the Second World War and which
during the period of the cold war was based upon
the division of the world into antagonistic blocs and
zones of influence supported by military bases.”
62. Today, the cold war appears to be over, at least
in theory, and everyone is resolutely engaged in
promoting detente, and yet the most vital questions,
that of Cyprus among others, remain unsolved. Faced
with these ‘very significant facts, we may wonder
whether, instead of talking of detente, it would not be
better, as here and elsewhere Ambassador Baroody
has suggested, to talk of entenfe, because if detente
means stagnation and the consolidation
of acquired
positions to the detriment of the peoples who continue to endure atrocious and inhuman sufferings,
we, the small States, the disadvantaged States, have
many reasons for concern.
63. It is thus high time for the Security Council to
think seriously about the question of Cyprus with a
view to helping the Cypriot Government and people
to solve their own problems. It is very distressing to
note that since its birth under the sponsorship of our
Organizationin other words, at a time when its
geographical position and its colonial history left it no
alternative but to accept a provisional solution which
consisted in agreeing to its independence
being
guaranteed by other States, namely, Greece, Turkey,
and, of course, the United Kingdom-a
solution which
was no solution-the
Cypriot State has known only
hardship and has had to cope with both internal and
external difficulties,
the latest of which is the inadmissible Turkish occupation.

64. If it is conceivable that the world community
was wrong at that time, it is inconceivable now that,
faced with the failure of the adopted formula, it should
opt for inaction and try to prevent the United Nations
from reviewing the Cyprus situation in the light of the
experience acquired. It is clear that in trying to find
a solution that will guarantee the constitutionality
and
territorial integrity of Cyprus, our Organization has
helped to make a breach in the freedom of decision
of its Government and introduced elements that may
lead to its future desintegration.
There is time to
correct this mistake, if those who have the real key
to the problem will contribute to its final solution.
65. My delegation takes this opportunity
to pay a
well-deserved tribute to the Secretary-General
for his
efforts and those of his Special Representative
to
discharge to the best of their ability the mission of
mediation
entrusted to them. However, we may
wonder whether in the long term these efforts to
maintain contacts between the communities
may not
be paralysed by uprising or by an unfortunate lack of
true co-operation engineered with a view to gaining
time to consolidate positions that have already been
established and that some wish to impose upon Cyprus
at all costs.
66. That is a question that arises from a reading of
the detailed and very well-balanced
report of the
Secretary-General,
for, if the representatives of the
legitimate Government of Cyprus have taken the pains
to make their detailed and constructive proposals on
the various aspects of the Cypriot problem, as we
can see they have from annex I of the report, the
Turkish party, on the contrary, has taken refuge in
evasive and time-wasting proposals. For example, if
we consider the question of constitutional
principles,
we see that when the Cypriot authorities in a more
realistic and conciliatory manner spoke of a constitution that should lead the way to a federal republic
of Cyprus, which would be a federation and not a
confederation,
the Turkish party proposed a federal
republic composed of two confederated States, one
in the north comprising the Turkish community,
and
one in the south comprising the Greek community.
Thus it is clear that one side is doing everything to
preserve the unity and territorial integrity of Cyprus,
while the other wishes to do everything possible to
legalize the partition of the island and the destruction
of the Cypriot State.
67. For the revolutionary military Government of the
People’s Republic of Benin, there can be no question
of participating
in a plot -designed to split up a State
Member of the United Nations, a State which is, moreover, a founding member of the non-aligned movement.
The provisions in paragraph 7 of part A of annex II
of the report, that the Federated States will not have
the right to proclaim their independence unilaterally,
can only make us smile, especially when we know that
Turkish Cypriot leaders have unilaterally proclaimed
their independence and that, despite pressure and

dilatory manoeuvres, the international
refused to endorse that independence.

tiohmunity

has

72. My delegation. has formulated
those modest
proposals by my Government in all good faith, but
without any illusions. We are aware of the enormous
influence of the forces of evil, whose interests are
served by the perpetuation
of such an intolerable
situation. We have nevertheless submitted the proposals because we are convinced that the proposals
of any Member State must be taken into consideration
and that there can be no question of giving primacy
to certain States, as though they alone held the true
solution. To sum up my delegation’s views, the renewal
of the mandate of UNFICYP
cannot be justified, in
the final analysis, except in the light of the genuine
and final solution that the international
community
wishes to find to the question of substance, the origin
of all the difficulties confronting the Cypriot State.

68. In other words, the report itself contains points
which can justify my delegation’s concern about the
chances for success of the Secretary-General’s
mission. Since that concern might prove to be well
founded sooner or later, it would perhaps be advisable
to begin reconsidering
immediately
the proposal
made some time ago by the delegation of the Soviet
Union [S/11465 of22 August 19741 for the convening
of an international
conference on this question, a
conference in which all the members of the Security
Council, the parties concerned and the representatives
of the non-aligned movement would participate,
on
condition-and
it is sad to have to say this-that
the
latter would be guided not by unavowed and unavowable considerations but by the firm will to seek the
solution that would guarantee the unity, integrity and
territorial inviolability
of a founding member of the
non-aligned movement.

.

73. Before concluding, I wish to say a few words
about my Government’s
position on the resolution
that the Council has just adopted.
74. The fact that the Council has been able to adopt
that resolution is the result, Mr. President, of your
talents and your skill in the art of conducting negotiations. My delegation would have liked to see you get
this question out of the rut into which some have
wished to push it. We would have wished all the
relevant aspects of the question to be taken up and
dealt with in this resolution. Unfortunately,
our hopes
have not been fulfilled. Nevertheless, we congratulate
you very sincerely o!‘n the Herculean effort you have
made in working auf this text, while taking account
of the basic concerns of the members of the Council.
My delegation, however, was not able to participate
in the voting because the resolution, since it tries to
satisfy all the partils-and,
above all, the party of
aggression and annexation-seems
to overlook the
basic preoccupations of the principal party, the delegation of the Government of Cyprus, the only Govem.~,- ..ment recognized by the United Nations.

69. My Government’s
position is dictated by a
number of considerations.
First, the unequivocal
choice of non-alignment by the Government of Cyprus
is a just choice and cannot but displease those for
whom Cyprus can and must serve only as an important
strategic base. Second, the time has come for our
community to find a remedy for the confusion that has
been created in the island. Finally, the Organization
must ‘in, no way encourage the establishment
of a
biregional community
in Cyprus, as the Turkish side
desires.
70. As far as my Government
is concerned, there
can be only one Cypriot State, in which the two
communities
condemned
to live together
would
necessarily find the formula that would be most
favourable to their coexistence in harmony and agreement. To achieve this, it is important above all that
all the foreign troops-Turkish
and other-be
withdrawn without delay from Cyprus so that the Cypriots
may have a free hand to settle their problem among
themselves. And then all the States in the region,
which will no longer have any justification for keeping
an eye on the island, must undertake not to continue
interfering in the internal affairs of that State and to
respect its independence, its sovereignty, its unity and
its territorial integrity.

75. It is regrettable that the Council was not able
to take into consideration the problem of the change in
the demographic
structure of the part of the island
occupied by Turkey. It is regrettable that it was not
deemed necessary to reconfirm in this resolution the
sacrosanct principle of the United Nations regarding
the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by
force. Finally, it is regrettable that it was not deemed
necessary to affii
a fact recognized by all the members of the Council-that
is, that General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX) and Security Council resolution 365 (1974) have not been implemented.
There is
nothing surprising in the fact that the Turkish side has
not felt it necessary to give effect to those resolutions,
because once resolution
3212 (XXIX)
had been
adopted-and
adopted, it must be remembered,
unanimously-the
Turkish
delegation
hastened to
empty the resolution of all its substance by expressing
the most significant reservations.

71. In my delegation’s
opinion, it is in this way
that the people of Cyprus will be able to regain and
develop their nationalism
and that the affiliation of
either community
with any neighbouring
country
will finally disappear. This opinion is based on the fact
that the case of Cyprus is not unique in the annals
of international
relations. If communities
have been
able to coexist without difficulties in other places, there
is no reason why that kind of coexistence should not
be possible in Cyprus if the communities
there really
wish to rid themselves of foreign influences.

76. My delegation dares to hope that the next discussion of this problem, envisaged for the month of
9

October, will give the Council the opportunity to go to
the very heart of the problem and to take the measures
that the situation demands.

role being played by. the selfless officers and men of
the peace-keeping force. But, as we have stated in the
past, UNFICYP
should only be a means for finding
peace and justice in Cyprus. It should not be left to
be a recurrent exercise. Thus, in voting for the renewal
of the Force’s mandate, the Tanzanian delegation
hopes that maximum efforts will be undertaken by all
concerned to make use of the next six months more
significantly
for a resolution
of the outstanding
problems. In particular, we call for .the immediate
implementation
of the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions.

77. Mr. SALIM
(United
Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, speaking for the first time under your
presidency, I should like to take this opportunity
to extend my very warm congratulations to you on your
assumption of the high office of President of the
Security Council for the month of June. I do not do
so as a mere courtesy. Your outstanding qualities of
leadership and your proven skill as a diplomat give my
delegation great confidence that you will effectively,
efficiently and objectively
guide us throughout this
month. The co-operative Republic of Guyana and the
United Republic of Tanzania have cordial and brotherly
relations. Although our two countries are separated
by vast distances, our peoples share the same aspirations to true independence
and self-determination.
Through the non-aligned movement our Governments
and parties have determined the rightful path which will
make our peoples genuinely free, both politically and
economically.

83. In making this observation, my delegation wishes
to express its serious concern at the lack of progress
in the implementation
of the resolutions of the Council and the Assembly. We are also disturbed by some
of the additional difliculties that confront the Cypriot
people, as succinctly elaborated by the SecretaryGeneral in his report. Here we are referring to paragraph 65, where it is pointed out that UNFICYP
is
not being granted free and normal access to Greek
Cypriot habitations in the northern ‘part of Cyprus.
This makes it difficult, if not impossible, to render
humanitarian
aid to the needy and displaced people
in this area, in contravention of the spirit of the third
round of the Vienna talks.

78. Let me also add my particular satisfaction at
seeing you, Ambassador Jackson, a real brother,
colleague and close friend, assuming this office for the
second time since Guyana became a member of the
Council.

84. I wish to join my colleagues who have preceded
me in thanking the Secretary-General
for the tremendous efforts he has selflessly and persistently made in
conformity with the mandate entrusted to him by the
Council. In this connexion, we should like to underscore his pertinent observations, embodied in paragraph 70 of his report, to the effect that:
“ . . . the best hope of achieving a just and lasting
settlement of the Cyprus problem is through negotiations between the representatives of the two communities.
But for those negotiations
to serve a
useful purpose, all the parties concerned must be
willing to show the necessary flexibility, taking into
account not only their own interests but also the
legitimate
aspirations
and requirements
of the
opposing side.”

79. Those of us who have had the pleasure of
appreciating
at close quarters your outstanding
personal qualities of diplomatic
acumen, negotiating
skill and personal warmth, have indeed not been
surprised by the very able, competent and effective
manner in which you have brought our present debate
to a fruitful conclusion. That we have been able to
adopt a resolution at the eleventh hour is, in no small
measure, due to your untiring, patient, energetic,
skilful and impartial efforts. The exceptional leadership
that you have displayed does great honour to your
country, the co-operative Republic of Guyana, as it
does credit to the Council.
80. May I also, through you, pay a tribute to
Ambassador de Guiringaud of France for the very
able and impartial manner in which he presided over
the Council for the month of May.

85. In supporting
the Secretary-General’s
apt
remarks, my delegation would like once again to
reiterate its position calling for the withdrawal of all
foreign troops and military personnel from Cyprus.
We believe that, left to themselves, the Cypriots have
the magnanimity and wisdom to find a just and lasting
solution to their problems. We also wish to emphasize
the call for scrupulous respect for the sovereignty,
territorial
integrity
and non-alignment
of Cyprus.
Furthermore, any moves to disintegrate or dismember
Cyprus must not be entertained.

81. The situation in Cyprus remains very serious
and is a matter of great international concern. Foreign
troops remain there. Thousands of Cypriots continue
to be helpless refugees in the country of their birth.
Resolutions
3212 (XXIX)
and 3395 (XXX) remain
unimplemented.
And so we’are left with no alternative
but to renew the mandate of UNFICYP
for the twentyninth time in 12 years. The impression this may give
the suffering people of Cyprus is that UNFICYP
will
be a permanent feature,of their life.

86. Here we would like to emphasize paragraph 3
of the resolution which has just been adopted, which
urges the parties concerned to exercise restraint and
to refrain from unilateral or other actions which would
adversely affect the prospects of negotiations.

82. In saying this, I am not trying to underestimate
the role of UNFICYP.
I am aware of the very useful
10

87. Given time, the Greek Cypriots and the Turkish
Cypriots can heal their wounds and start anew. But no
solution can be imposed on them by force. Unity is
something that must grow naturally if it is to last.
Mutual confidence can be obtained in the transitional
period. With relevant international
guarantees, the
rights of both communities can and should be assured.

93. Mr. ~KANAZ-AWA
(Japan): Mr. President,
I should like to begin by extending my congratulations
and good wishes to you upon your assumption of the
presidency for the month of June. There has already
been ample proof that your excellent diplomatic skill
and your masterful appreciation of the political evolutions of our time have enabled you to guide our
deliberations
to fruitful and constructive
results.
I am confident that in the remaining half of this month
you will continue to preside over our Council for the
further successful fulfilment of our tasks.

88. One of the main problems in Cyprus continues to
be the mutual suspicion and hostility, nurtured over
many years, owing to injustices committed by each of
the two communities against the other. The July 1974
events worsened the situation. Lives and property
were lost. People were displaced and are now refugees.
Attempts have since been made to change the demographic situation in some areas of Cyprus. Refugees
have been denied the right to return to their villages.
Foreign occupation is a de facto situation. And yet,
despite all this, both the Greek Cypriots and the
Turkish Cypriots, in their proposals for a solution,
agree that Cyprus should not be federated or united
to any other State. My delegation believes that this is
a good omen for meaningful negotiations.
Whether
Cyprus will have a strong central Government or one
that has greater autonomy is for the people of Cyprus
themselves to decide. But the necessary conditions
must be created to facilitate such a genuine and free
choice on the part of the Cypriot people, both Greeks
and Turks.

94. I wish also to pay a tribute, as previous speakers
have done, to Ambassador de Guiringaud of France
for having presided over the Council with such skill
during the busy month of work in May.
95. My delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution in document S/12096, by which the Council
extended. the stationing in Cyprus of the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force for a further period of
six months. We cannot fail to express our profound
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for your extraordinary
efforts in producing a text under the most difficult
circumstances. We wish to emphasize once again our
belief that the extension of the mandate of UNFICYP,
and the extra time we have gained by this action,
should not be used by any other parties to drag out
the negotiations in any way.

89. Many sticky issues remain to be resolved concerning Cyprus; the constitutional
issues, the territorial aspects and humanitarian
matters are some of
them. It is to be hoped that these will be sorted out
at the sixth round of the Vienna talks.

96. My delegation wishes to pay a sincere tribute to
the Secretary-General for his efforts in making possible
the fifth round of the Vienna talks last February,
after lengthy and difficult consultations.
We are,
however, painfully aware of the failure of the sixth
round of the talks to get started in May as scheduled.
However, we are encouraged by the Secretary-General
when he states in paragraph 53 of his report:

90. We commend the Secretary-General
and his
Special Representative for the very delicate key role
they are playing in furthering
the intercommunal
talks. In order to facilitate the role of the mediators,
the opposing sides should not be presenting fuits
accomplis. The main aim for all should be the preservation of the independence,
sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-alignment
of Cyprus. And above
all, as I have already stated citing the SecretaryGeneral’s observations, the two communities
should
strive for mutual understanding and show sensitivity
to the legitimate interests of either side.

“Both sides, while expressing certain reservations, have indicated publicly that the intercommunal
talks under my auspices continue to provide the best
method of making progress towards an agreed
settlement of the Cyprus problem.”
97. We wish to express our appreciation
to the
Secretary-General
and his Special Representative for
their continued efforts to remove the various obstacles
in the way of a resumption of the negotiations.
My
delegation wishes to draw the attention of the parties
directly concerned to the paragraph of the preamble
of the resolution just adopted to the effect that the
usefulness of those negotiations
depends upon the
willingness of all the parties concerned to show the
necessary flexibility, taking into account not only their
own interests but also the legitimate aspirations and
requirements of the opposing side.

91. In voting for the resolution that has just been
adopted my delegation had these considerations
in
mind. We are perfectly well aware that the resolution
does not contain all the elements that we would have
preferred it to contain, but given the present circumstances, I believe it is a step in the right direction.
92. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Tanzania for the kind and generous, and indeed
flattering, remarks that he made about me personally.
I also thank him most sincerely for the sentiments he
expressed concerning the fraternal relations between
our two parties, our Governments and our peoples.
Those sentiments are very happily reciprocated.

98. It is also important that the agreements reached
in all previous rounds of talks be adhered to. My
delegation wishes to urge the parties with all the greater
emphasis to take conciliatory
positions and to give
11

their full
efforts.

co-operation

to the

Secretary-General’s

105. In the last two years the United States has
doubled its annual contribution
to UNFICYP
from
$4.8 million to $9.6 million a year. We have done this
in order to maintain quiet on the island and ensure
conditions supportive of the intercommunal
negotiations. It is accordingly with deep concern that we have
read in paragraph 72 of the Secretary-General’s
report
that the future of the Force is imperilled
because
“voluntary contributions have continued to be made in
insufficient amounts and by a disappointingly
small
number of Governments”.
Surely the time has come
for Governments interested in a just Cyprus settlement
to donate their fair share to UNFICYP.
The permanent
members of the Council have a special responsibility
to contribute
to international
peace and security.
That high responsibility
cannot be diminished
by
peace-keeping doctrinal considerations stemming from
different circumstances and an earlier era.

99. In concluding, I wish to pay a tribute to the
Secretary-General
and his staff for the effective
administration
of the Force. We wish also to pay a
tribute to the officers and men of the Force and to its
civilian staff, as well as to the Governments
which
have contributed contingents to the Force.
100. Mr. SHERER (United States of America): My
delegation would like once again to express its most
sincere congratulations
on the patient and skilful
manner in which you, Mr. President, have handled
this very delicate subject. We have been much
impressed by our even-handed approach to all the
problems which have arisen during the past five days.
1Oi. Tonight’s renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus marks the
twenty-ninth
time that the Council has taken this
action. As he has so often done before, the SecretaryGeneral has stressed the need for flexibility and good
will in the negotiating process. Once again, in the paragraph 70 of his report, that is before us he urges the
parties to take into account “not only their own
interests but also the legitimate
aspirations
and
requirements of the opposing side”.

106. My Government remains convinced that a just
and durable peace in Cyprus is not only possible but
is deeply desired by Greek Cypriots and Turkish
Cypriots alike. At the last General Assembly session,
Secretary of State Kissinger outlined five principles”
which the United States considers. essential to a
permanent settlement. Let me repeat these principles,
which are consonant with General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions on Cyprus. First,

102. Members of the Council must surely echo the
Secretary-General’s
appeal for greater energy, flexibility and dedication to the success of the intercommunal negotiations. Over the years too many opportunities have been lost because the concessions
necessary for agreement entailed high political risks.
As the body charged with the maintenance of intemational peace-and through its long involvement in the
Cyprus question-the
Council has the right to expect
that serious risks be taken in the search for a lasting
settlement.

“a settlement
must preserve the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus.”
Secondly,
“it must ensure that both the Greek Cypriot and
the Turkish Cypriot communities can live in freedom
and have a large voice in their own affairs.”
Thirdly,
“the present dividing lines cannot be permanent.
There must be... agreed territorial
arrangements
which reflect the economic requirements
of the
Greek Cypriot community
and take account of its
self-respect.”

103. The Secretary-General
has again earned our
admiration for the tireless and imaginative way in which
he has carried out his mission of good oflices. The last
six months have presented very special difficulties.
My Government fully understands, and shares, the
view expressed by the Secretary-General
in paragraph 69 of his report that “before reconvening the
talks, it is obviously necessary to have reasonable
assurances that they will be meaningful and productive”. The Secretary-General
will, we are certain,
lend the prestige of his office and his personal
ingenuity to obtaining the assurances necessary to
ensure the success of the Cyprus talks.

Fourthly,
“there must be provision for the withdrawal of
foreign military forces other than those present
under the authority of international
agreements.”
And, ftithly,
“there must be security for all Cypriots; the needs
and wishes of the refugees, who have been the
principal victims and whose tragic plight touches us
all, must be dealt with speedily and with compassion.”

104. In straightforward
terms,
the SecretaryGeneral has, in paragraph 65 of his report, expressed
concern over the situation of Greek Cypriots in the
north. My delegation shares the hope expressed by
other members of the Council that this situation will
improve in accordance with past agreements covering
Greek Cypriots in the north.

107. In conclusion, I should like to pay a tribute to
those who make the United Nations operation in
12

Cyprus the remarkable
combination
of peacekeeping and peace-making that it is. The SecretaryGeneral’s
Special Representative,
Mr. Perez de
Cue&r,
Under-Secretaries-General
Urquhart
and
Guyer and their fine staffs, Lieutenant-General
Prem
Chand and the officers and men of UNFICYP-these
people represent, in my Government’s
estimation,
the very highest standards of international
service.
Their conduct reflects the ideals of this Organization,
and we salute them.

It is through the instrumentality
offices of the Secretary-General
to achieve its objectives.

of the mission of good
that the Council seeks

112. As is well known, the Secretary-General
has
spared no effort to reach a successful conclusion of his
mission. My delegation wishes to pay him special
tribute for the selfless expenditure of his energies, for
his unremitting
dedication and for his unswerving
commitment
to a pacific and urgent settlement in
Cyprus, as indeed to the cause of peace everywhere.
And we would like to associate in that tribute, his
Special Representative
in Cyprus, Mr. Perez -de
Cuellar, and the other officers of the Secretariat who
lend the Secretary-General
such unstinting support.

108. The PRESIDENT:
I will now make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of GUYANA.
109. In considering the item on the agenda before
us, my delegation could not but recall that UNFICYP
was created in 1964 in certain specific circumstances
and that it was .ascribed a function consistent with
those circumstances. Today, 12 years later, the Council is still concerned with the renewal of the mandate
of UNFICYP.
In the intervening period, however,
the fortunes of the people of Cyprus as they sought
to maintain and strengthen their unity, as they sought
to make secure their sovereignty, territorial integrity
and non-alignment,
have been subjected to much
travail. The sequence of events of two years ago and
actions since then are the most immediate reasons
for present concern.

113. It is against that background that my delegation
will review the halting progress made in the intercommunal talks and the report of the Secretary-General
contained in document S/12093. Despite the high hopes
for rapid movement which had been fostered when
resolution 3212 (XXIX)
was unanimously
adopted,
and when resolutions 365 (1974) and 370 (1975) were
adopted by the Council, my delegation, finds, regrettably, that many obstacles still frustrate the efforts of
the Secretary-General
and the will of the international
community. Foremost among these is the manifestation
of attitudes which betray mistrust and indeed hostility
assuming legitimacy from past experiences and perceptions of present intentions. And these attitudes inform
postures at the negotiations. That is why my delegation whole-heartedly
endorses the observation of the
Secretary-General
in paragraph 70 of his report that
for the negotiations

110. It was nearly two years ago that the General
Assembly
unanimously
adopted
resolution
3212
(XXIX). That resolution represented the prescriptions
of the international
community for a just and lasting
peace in Cyprus. My delegation believes now, as it
did then, that resolution 3212 (XXIX) provides the
only valid framework for an equitable and peaceful
settlement of the Cyprus problem. It thus behoves
this Council in the discharge of its responsibilities
for
international
peace and security to ensure that there
is no deviation from the terms of that resolution.
The essential elements of resolution 3212 (XXIX) are
well known; they do not therefore need to be recapitulated. However, my delegation is constrained to
remark on the slow progress of its implementation.
We therefore, once again, call for its prompt and
effective implementation.

In this regard, my delegation also shares the view
expressed by the Secretary-General
in paragraph 69
that, before talks can be reconvened, “it is obviously
necessary to have reasonable assurances that they will
be meaningful and productive”.

111. Pursuant to resolution 3212 (XXIX), the General
Assembly itself, through its resolution 3395 (XXX),
sought to make more dynamic and more urgent the
search for a solution. And the Security Council, by
several resolutions-365
(1974), which endorsed
resolution 3212 (XXIX); 370 (1975), and 383 (1975)has been engaged in prescribing specific modalities
through which an early settlement
of the Cyprus
problem
could be achieved.
While
reaffirming
essential and unalterable principles, the Council has
placed much emphasis on the negotiating
process
between representatives of the two communities as a
most important element in the search for an agreement satisfactory to the people of Cyprus, to the
Council and to the international community as a whole.

114. But these are not the only obstacles to peace
in Cyprus. While, as stated in paragraph 66 of the
report, discussions concerning the stationing, deployment and functioning
of UNFICYP
are making
progress, my delegation takes particular note of the
fact that the freedom of movement of UNFICYP
and its civil police in the north of the island is still
restricted, thus rendering it difficult for them to contribute in any effective way to the welfare, well-being
and security of the Greek Cypriots in the north. The
situation of the Greek Cypriots in the north is, as
the Secretary-General
points out in paragraph 65 of
his report, “a matter of serious concern”. For unless
that situation is immediately
altered, tension between
the two communities
is likely to increase, with the

“to serve a useful purpose, all the parties concerned
must be willing to show the necessary flexibility,
taking.into account not only their own interests but
also the legitimate aspirations and requirements of
the opposing side”.

13

efforts towards a just and lasting
being adversely affected.

“Calls upon all States to respect the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment
of the Republic of Cyprus and to refrain from all
acts and interventions directed against it.”

peace in Cyprus

115. My delegation is also seriously concerned at the
persistence of reports of attempts at changing the
demographic character of the population in the north,
as well as reports of colonization.
We have listened
with great care to the statements made in this Chamber
on these matters and have studied the relevant sections of the Secretary-General’s
report. Let me state
quite clearly that Guyana is implacably opposed to
attempts at changing the demographic
structure in
Cyprus, no less there than in any other part of the
world, including
occupied Arab territories
in the
Middle East.

In paragraph
Assembly

2 of the same resolution,
..

the General

“Urges the speedy withdrawal of all foreign armed
forces and foreign military presence and personnel
from the Republic of Cyprus, and ,the cessation of
all foreign interference in its affairs.”
121. In paragraph 2 of the resolution adopted today,
the Security Council calls for the ,urgent and effective
implementation
of the aforementioned
resolution of
the General Assembly as well as of. the Council’s
own earlier resolutions on the question of Cyprus.
In not opposing the adoption of this resolution today,
the delegation of the USSR also took,into account the
fact that it contains another important provision. I am
referring to paragraph 3, in which the Council

116.. Despite the obstacles at present being confronted, my delegation does not despair of the prospects for the future of Cyprus. It is true that the
picture today does not dispel every pessimistic notion.
Yet my delegation wishes to maintain the belief that
previous rounds of intercommunal
talks held under
the auspices of the Secretary-General
do reveal a ray
of hope. The way forward lies in respect for and the
speedy implementation
of the agreements already
reached during those talks and in the demonstration
of a genuine will on the part of all concerned, but more
especially on the part of those who believe that the
cards are now stacked in their favour, to honour
their international
obligations and to put the interests
of the people of Cyprus above all other considerations.

“Urges the parties concerned to act with the
utmost restraint to refrain from any unilateral or
other action likely to affect adversely the prospects
of negotiations
and to continue :and accelerate
determined
co-operative
efforts to achieve the
objectives of the Security Council.“’
I stress that the Council urges the parties to refrain
from “any unilateral or other action, likely to affect
adversely the prospects of negotiations”.
The expression “other action’* is a very broad ~term; it covers
the Council’s requirement
that the parties should
refrain from any unilateral action designed to bring
about changes in the demographic structure of Cyprus.
This has been mentioned by a number of other speakers
before me. Such an approach is fully in conformity
with an important provision of the General Assembly’s
second resolution on Cyprus-I
am referring to General
Assembly resolution 3395 (XXX jin
paragraph 6 of
which the Assembly

117. We call upon all parties to extend unreservedly
their fullest co-operation to the Secretary-General.
Let
us hope that when this Council meets in a few months’
time to consider the question of Cyprus once again,
substantial progress, if not total success, will have been
recorded.
118. Before concluding,
my delegation wishes to
express its gratitude to the officers and men of
UNFICYP
and its civilian staff for their sterling
service and their efficiency and devotion to the
important, but difficult, task entrusted to them by the
Council, and to those countries which have made
contributions
of men and material resources towards
the peace-keeping operation and its upkeep.

“Urges all parties to refrain from unilateral actions
in contravention
of resolution
3212 (XXIX),
including changes in the demographic structure of
Cyprus.”

119. Finally, I wish to voice the hope that with support for the renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP,
the continued search for a peaceful and durable settlement of the Cyprus problem is, indeed, being
facilitated.

The importance of this General Assembly resolution
lies, among other things, in the fact that 13 members
of the Security Council out of 15 voted for it, and
only two members of the Council abstained. This is a
circumstance of no small importance.

120. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): In speaking in
explanation of our vote, I should like to state the
following. The delegation of the Soviet Union did not
oppose the adoption of this resolution, although we
think it is not strong enough. However, we noted that
paragraph 2 of the resolution refers to General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX), paragraph 1 of which
reads as follows:

122. We also took into account paragraph 4 of the
resolution adopted today in which the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force
in Cyprus for an additional six-month period is made
subject to the attainment during that period of sufficient progress towards a final solution of the problem
of Cyprus. We think it is another’positive
fact that, in
14

accordance with the wishes of the party most directly
concerned-the
Government of Cyprus-the
present
consideration of the question of Cyprus has been conducted on a very broad basis. The problem of Cyprus
has been considered from every point of view during
the repeated and continuous consultations among the
members of the Council as well as in its official
meetings, and the discussion was not confined to an
examination of the narrow question of the renewal of
the mandate. This broad consideration of the problem
of Cyprus by the Council at this time is a positive
prelude to a further broad discussion of it in September of this year. That is why the Secretary-General
is
requested, in paragraph 6 of the resolution, to continue his mission of good offtces and to submit a report
on the implementation
of this resolution by 30 October 1976. Thus;, during the thirty-first session of the
General Assembly, the Council will again consider all
aspects of the question of Cyprus and will then see
who is in favour of a peaceful settlement of the problem
in accordance with the decisions of the United Nations,
and who is against it.

128. Mr. CHRISTOPHIDES
(Cyprus): In its wisdom,
the Council has adopted the draft resolution before it
after long and arduous deliberations. This resolution,
like so many others adopted by this body, is the result
of a compromise. We, for our part, would have thought
that the situation in Cyprus, as it emerges from the
Secretary-General’s
report and the debate in the
Council itself, warranted a stronger text in order to
meet the tragically serious conditions in my country.
129. Some Council members have expressed the view
that if Turkey continues to flout the United Nations
resolutions on Cyprus and the commitments
which’are
set out in the Vienna agreement of 2 August .-I975
[S/11789, annex] and the Vienna communique
of
21 February 1976, [S/21993, annex] then the Council
could adopt a stronger resolution when it discusses
the Cyprus problem in perhaps about four months”
time, as provided in paragraph 6 of the resolution
that has just been adopted. Since they do not know
the situation in Cyprus at first hand, those delegations
cannot, perhaps, imagine the tragedy of the people
of Cyprus and particularly the tragedy of those who are
expelled daily and those who live in refugee camps
under subhuman conditions. It may also be that some
members of the Council have not realized either that
the more numerous the expulsions of Greek Cypriots
‘from the occupied area, and the greater the colonization
of that area, the more remote will become the chances
of a peaceful settlement of the Cyprus problem.
Perhaps those are the reasons for which the Council
has adopted a resolution that is not as strong as is
warranted by the serious conditions that persist in
Cyprus.

123. Taking into account all these circumstances, the
delegation of the Soviet Union did not oppose the
adoption of this resolution, despite certain deficiencies
to which a number of other speakers have referred.
124. In concluding,
another matter.

I should like to draw attention

to

125. One of the previous speakers at this meeting,
the representative of a certain “mono-superPower”,
as usual introdutied some repetitious and trite expressions about the “two superPowers” into his statement.
This demagogic language distracts us from the substance of the tragedy in Cyprus and serves to cover
up those who are truly responsible for this tragedy,
glossing over, in particular, NATO’s role in it. It is not
difficult to see that that representative assumed the
role of devil’s advocate. That demagogic language is
used in the United Nations by the representatives of
that mono-superpower
in order to cover up its policy
of stirring up hotbeds of military tension and deliberately refusing to participate in the elimination
of
those hotbeds or to co-operate with the Security
Council in settling urgent international conflicts.

130. Of course, we realize the difficulties involved,
and we believe that in the circumstances the resolution adopted was the best the Council could do. We
should therefore like to look at this resolution and its
positive elements. We feel that the resolution as a
whole meets a number of our basic demands. I will
not go into detail, since the hour is late and I would
not want unnecessarily to prolong the proceedings.
But I would draw attention to a few of the paragraphs.
131. I would point out the emphatic reaffirmation
of Security Council resolution 365 (1974), in which it
endorsed resolution 3212 (XXIX), and the call for their
urgent and effective implementation,
as well as that of
Security Council resolution 367 (1975), goes a long
way towards fulfilling the Council’s responsibilities.
Also, the request for a report by the Secretary-General
on the implementation
of the present resolution and
those resolutions referred to therein by 30 October
1976 at the latest keeps the Cyprus question in all its
dimensions before the Council for such further action
as may be required in the light of developments.
More particularly,
the veiled yet unmistakably
clear
references to the expulsions of Greek Cypriots from the
occupied areas and the colonization
of those areas
through the importation
of mainland
Turks in a
systematic effort to change the demographic structure

126. The policy of that monosuperPower
is to stir
up and provoke conflicts and to lead the world into
another world war. But let us hope that that policy
will not have the desired effect. In order to cover up
that unpopular
and indefensible
policy which is
detested by all peoples, the representatives of that
mono-superpower
have to resort to demagogic language about the two superPowers and to a pathological
anti-Sovietism.
Such demagoguery is so clumsy and
naive with respect to the Cyprus question also that
it cannot deceive anyone-except
perhaps little
children and big fools.
127. The PRESIDENT:
of Cyprus.

I call upon the representative
15

of the Republic of Cyprus, coupled with a call by the
Council upon the parties concerned-in
this case,
evidently,
Turkey-to
refrain from any unilateral
actions, and the appeal to all parties to extend their
fullest co-operation to so as to enable UNFICYP
to
perform its duties effectively are a source of satisfaction as, in effect, they constitute a call upon Turkey
to cease the expulsions and the colonization
and to
allow UNFICYP
to operate unrestrictedly in providing
the safeguards for the Greek Cypriots in the north,
with the protection agreed. upon under the Vienna
agreement of 2 August 1975.

138. Our views regarding Council resolutions 365
(1974) and 367 (1975) and General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX)
are already on record with the
Council.
139. I should lie also to express to you, Mr. President, my appreciation
for the extreme competence
and objectivity with which you have conducted the
meetings of the Security Council that have culminated
in the adoption tonight of the resolution extending the
mandate of UNFICYP.
140. The PRESIDENT:
tive of Turkey.

132. This is further reinforced by the paragraph
emphasizing the need for the parties concerned to
‘adhere to the agreements reached at all the previous
rounds of the talks. Of course, that covers not only
the substantive agreement of 2 August 1975, but also
the procedural
agreement
of 21 February
1976
regarding the requirement
for the submission
of
concrete proposals by the Turkish side on the territorial aspect. The Greek Cypriot side has already
submitted such proposals. This is to serve as a prelude
to the finding of a common basis for the negotiations.

I now call on the representa-

141. Mr. TURKMEN
(Turkey): I think that at this
late hour I would be well advised to refrain from
replying to the Greek Cypriot representative.
Needless to say, I do not accept his unilateral interpretations of the resolution adopted tonight by the Council.
142. I should like to explain very briefly my Govemment’s views on the resolution which has been adopted
by the Council.
143. During the discussions at the Council’s previous
meetings I have made clear our basic and unchanged
position regarding the representation of Cyprus. We
have to dissociate ourselves from any documents
containing a reference to the so-called Government of
Cyprus. We maintain and emphatically
reiterate our
view that there is at present no government which can
represent Cyprus; there are merely two communities
which are entitled to speak with equal. voices in all
forums where the question of Cyprus is debated. The
reference to a Government
of Cyprus is therefore
irrelevant. For that reason, irrespective of our views
on the substance of the resolution, we cannot accept
it in its entirety. We can, however, examine its provisions on their own merits and indicate to what
extent they are acceptable to us.

133. I shall say nothing more at this late hour.
I would merely take the opportunity
to express our
appreciation to the members of the Council for their
concern and, more particularly,
to those who spoke
out strongly in favour of the just cause of Cyprus.
Our particular gratitude goes to you, Mr. President,
for all your efforts and long labours, in the best tradition of the United Nations, and also for your statement
at the beginning of the present meeting in introducing
the draft resolution, in which you pointed to the deep
concern for the indigenous people of Cyprus, in
relation to the situation set out in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
134. The PRESIDENT:
I have been informed that
Mr. Atalay , to whom the Security Council has extended
an invitation under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure, wishes to make a further statement. As I
hear no objection, I invite Mr. Atalay to take a place
at the Council table and to make that further statement.

144. We support the general thrust of the resolution, putting emphasis on the continuation of the intercommunal talks. The fourth paragraph of the preamble
notes the view expressed by the Secretary-General
that the best hope of achieving a just and lasting
settlement of the Cyprus problem lies in negotiations
between the representatives of the two communities.
We whole-heartedly
concur with that view. We hope
very much that the Secretary-General
will be able to
undertake as rapidly as possible a renewed effort
to promote the intercommunal
talks, within the framework worked out by the parties before and during the
fifth round of talks in Vienna. I can assure him that he
can count on our active and sustained support in his
endeavours.

135. Mr. ATALAY:
I should like to express the
views of the Turkish Cypriot side on the resolution
adopted at this meeting by the Security Council.
136. The resolution uses the term “Government
of
Cyprus”, which we do not recognize, for reasons
which we have set forth several times before this
Council. Therefore, the resolution is unacceptable to
us as a whole.
137. However, I should like to put it on record that
the Turkish Cypriot side is giving its consent to the
extension of the mandate of the Force and is ready
to resume the intercommunal
negotiations under the
auspices of the Secretary-General.

145. Paragraph 2 refers to and reaffirms Security
Council resolution 365 (1974), which endorsed General
Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX).
The reservations
formulated
by the Turkish delegation
on resolu16

opportunity for sowing discord and fanning the flames
of trouble by desperate means. Anxious, like an ant
on a hot pan, you were active in different quarters,
issuing one statement after another to support A
against B one day and B against A the next day, in
a frenzied attempt to exploit the contradictions
and,
aggravate the situation by adding fuel to the fire.
Subsequently,
you did your utmost to sabotage the
negotiations between the parties concerned. Everyone
can see that such mischievous deeds on your part
are in no way intended to “support Cyprus” as you
professed, but are aimed at meddling in the Cyprus
question and squeezing into the Eastern Mediterranean
in rivalry with the other super-Power for the establishment of world hegemony in co-ordination
with your
expansionist activities in other parts of the world.
You are a downright hypocrite who says all the nice
things but stops at nothing in doing evil. The facts
are all there. How can they be covered up?

tion 3212 (XXIX) are well known to the members of
the Council. Furthermore,
we take the view that the
terms of resolution 3212 (XXIX) do not apply to the
present situation, particularly in view of the results of
the intercommunal
talks held since its adoption.
Indeed, the agreements reached at those talks have
already been translated into practical steps in the
island, and these have profoundly affected the elements of the problem. We consider, therefore, that the
paragraph of the resolution
adopted today which
reaffirms resolution 3212 (XXIX) can have no operative
value in present circumstances.
146. We concur in the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force for a further
period of six months. In doing so, we take note of the
fact that the Turkish community
has been consulted
and has given its consent. My Government is pleased
to be informed that the discussions on the stationing,
functioning
and deployment
of the Force in the
Turkish area which have been under way in accordance
with the pro&s-verbal
signed between the Force
Commander
and President Denktag last December
[S/12093, paru. 81 have progressed satisfactorily and
that an agreement on those issues is expected to be
concluded in the very near future. We sincerely hope
that with that agreement the difficulties referred to in
the Secretary-General’s
report will be overcome.

152. As to Soviet social-imperialism
stretching its
tentacles for expansion in various parts of the world
behind the smokescreen of “detente”,
it is clear for
everyone to see. As to the hot-beds of war and the
main threat of a new world war, they emanate mainly
from the new Czars in the Kremlin and not from
other places.
153. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of the Soviet Union who has asked to exercise his right
of reply.

147. I should like also to seize this opportunity
to
pay a tribute to the personnel of UNFICYP
and to
all the countries contributing to the Force.

154. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (interpretation
from Russian):
My previous
remarks regarding the demagogic statement of the
representative of the country which claims to be a
mono-super-Power
contain a complete and comprehensive evaluation of the substance of that statement
and of the notorious demagogic formula “the two
super-Powers”.
I have nothing to add to what I have
already said. It has all been said. The country which
is striving to become a mono-super-Power
is stirring
up hotbeds of tension in any part of the world in
order to bring other countries into conflict with a view
to pursuing the main object of its policy-to
promote
a world war. It was stated officially from the rostrum
of the General Assembly that China is dreaming of
another world war. The new leader of that monosuper-Power recently stated this officially at the reception in honour of the Prime Minister of Madagascar.
The mono-super-Power
is cherishing a dream of a new
world war. That is the meaning of its representative’s
demagoguery about the two super-Powers. That is
obvious and we are well aware of it.

148. Mr. President, before concluding my remarks,
I have a last but pleasant duty to perform. I should
like to tell you, Mr. President, how much I have
appreciated your untiring efforts to reach a consensus
and admired your outstanding diplomatic
skill, your
negotiating style, your efficient and able presidency,
and your intellectual resourcefulness.
149. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of China who has asked to exercise his right of reply.
150. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (translation from Chinese): I will make a brief statement in reply to the
statement just made by the Soviet representative.
In my earlier brief speech I, as the Chinese representative, merely mentioned the need to maintain vigilance
against the super-Power tactics of sowing discord. Yet
the Soviet representative,
driven by his guilty conscience because of the evil deeds he has done, has
made an unsolicited confession to justify Soviet socialimperialism
and has made a slanderous attack on
China’s foreign policy. But the facts are the most
eloquent.
Are not the deeds of Soviet socialimperialism
sufficient to prove that the Soviet Union
is a downright imperialist
that is engaged in sowing
discord and the tactics of “divide and rule”?
151. Since the eruption
Soviet social-imperialism

155. The PRESIDENT:
I now call on the representative of China who has asked to be allowed to speak
again to exercise his right of reply.
156. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (translation from Chinese): Since Malik can in no way deny the facts which
we have enumerated,
it is simply not worth while
refuting the second statement which he has just made.

of the Cyprus crisis in 1974,
has taken it as a golden
17

157. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republies) (interpretation
from Russian): Neither do I have
any reason to reply to the representative of the monosuper-Power since I already presented a complete and
comprehensive evaluation of his demagogic statement
in my previous remarks.
The meeting

rose on Wednesday,

Notes
* See resolution
391 (1976).
z Official
Records
of the General
Plenary
Meetings,
2406th meeting.
3 A/&!f@/L.2.
4 Official
Records
of the General
Plenary
Meetings,
2373rd meeting.
5 Ibid., 2404th meeting.
6 Ibid., 2355th meeting.

16 June, at 2 a.m.

Assembly,

‘Thirtieth

Session,

Assembly,

Thirtieth

Session,

18
Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00400

83-60801-September

1984-2.200
