S/PV.7257

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7257th meeting

Friday, 29 August 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant/ Mr. Wilson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. De Antueno
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Omaish
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mr. Maes
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Klein

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2014/558)

14-52203 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1452203*

S/PV.7257

Kosovo

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2014/558)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Zarif,
who is joining today’s meeting via video teleconference
from Pristina.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2014/558, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: It is with great regret that I feel obliged
to begin my remarks today by addressing briefly
the incidents that took place in and around Kosovo
during the past 36 hours, near the villages of Orlovac
and Kushtovë, resulting in at least three fatalities,
including a Serbian police officer, and gunfire injuries
to three others. While law enforcement agencies and
international presences are still determining the
details, preliminary information suggests that armed
persons involved in illegal wood-cutting were likely
responsible for the incidents.

2/27

29/08/2014

Such tragic outcomes unfortunately occur when
serious criminal activities are being pursued. However,
in sensitive areas such as the location of those
incidents, great care should be taken not to give reign
to speculation of political motives, so that professional
agencies may do their work and those who commit such
crimes and violence are brought to face justice. I wish,
in this same light, to express my deepest sympathies to
the family of the Serbian police officer who fell in the
line of duty.
Turning to the latest report (S/2014/558) before the
Council today, I wish first of all to congratulate the
Kosovo voters, institutions and political leaders on the
successful conduct of the general elections on 8 June,
which were held for the first time throughout Kosovo
under a unified legal framework and in a peaceful and
well-organized manner. I also wish to acknowledge the
constructive role played by the leadership in Belgrade in
encouraging Kosovo Serb voters to fully participate in
the elections. I commend the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the European Union
(EU) for the important role they played in facilitating
the organization of the elections and in enhancing their
overall transparency and accountability. In order to
capitalize fully on the success of that process, I have
joined many others in urging political leaders in Kosovo
to treat the formation of Kosovo’s next Government as
the most pressing imperative.
The Constitutional Court, in its decision published
on Tuesday, has ruled as unconstitutional the election
of the Assembly President on 17 July, and asked the
Assembly to complete its constitutive session and to
elect, as soon as possible, an Assembly President and
Deputy Presidents in compliance with the Constitution
and the Assembly’s rules of procedure. Moving forward
expeditiously in the wake of that decision will best
serve the interests of the people of Kosovo and will
be a further manifestation of their maturing political
processes.
As the Council is aware, Belgrade and Pristina have
made great strides since last year towards normalization
of relations, including through their constructive
participation in the EU-facilitated dialogue. In May,
the adoption of municipal statutes by the Serb-majority
municipalities in northern Kosovo marked a significant
step forward. Both sides are aware that commitment
to full implementation on the ground of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013 can be validated only

14-52203

29/08/2014

Kosovo

through their concrete and visible actions. In that
context, making progress on the formation of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
will serve as an essential factor for sustaining the
positive momentum and promoting the prospects for
further normalization. I hope that members of the
Council will unanimously encourage both parties to
resume their high-level meetings as soon as the next
government is in place in Pristina.
Unfortunate acts of violence and lawlessness,
committed during the demonstrations on 22 June in
South Mitrovica, highlighted the volatility which still
characterizes the north-south divide in the Mitrovica
region. Misguided behaviour in this case did not
inflame wider tension, thanks in great measure to the
professional and effective intervention by the Kosovo
police, as well as the Kosovo Force, with the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) on
stand-by as a reserve capacity. Yet close vigilance
remains necessary to safeguard the achievements and
continuing progress of the dialogue.
I take this opportunity once again to urge all
parties to address issues related to the main bridge
of Mitrovica — and any other disputed construction
work — through respectful dialogue. The 8 July and
11 August meetings on the subject between Kosovo’s
Minister for Environment and Special Planning and
the mayor of North Mitrovica, as well as the 22 July
meeting of the EU-facilitated working group on the
matter, marked such constructive steps. Alongside
these, all local channels of communication and contacts
should be fully utilized in order to address the issues on
the ground that directly affect the everyday lives and
perceptions of local communities.
In northern Kosovo, arrest warrants recently
requested by a EULEX prosecutor and issued by a
EULEX pre-trial judge in the Basic Court of Mitrovica
against the current and former mayors of Zubin
Potok have significantly added to the unease in local
sentiments against EULEX. Although critical of those
recent developments in their joint statement of today,
the mayors and members of the four northern municipal
assemblies have expressed their readiness to continue
cooperating with EULEX.
As I continuously stress the crucial importance of
respecting judicial independence, I cannot but note that
public confidence in the system will be enhanced greatly
when justice is perceived to be conducted professionally

S/PV.7257

and expeditiously. In that respect, I am pleased to see
that the trial of five Kosovo Serbs charged with war
crimes and murder began its proceedings on Tuesday at
the Basic Court in Mitrovica after an extended period
marred by unhelpful speculations.
Of greater and long-term importance for the process
of justice and reconciliation in Kosovo was the 29 July
statement of findings (S/2014/558, annex II) made by the
Chief Prosecutor of the Special Investigative Task Force.
Although the filing of further indictments will await
the establishment of a specialist court, the statement
itself represents another milestone in strengthening
the rule of law and an historic opportunity for further
healing of the scars of war. Immediate responses
from all quarters to the Chief Prosecutor’s statement
have been encouraging. The Kosovo authorities have
recently reiterated their commitment to continuing
full cooperation with the Special Investigative Task
Force. Once fully functional, the Assembly of Kosovo
is expected to move expeditiously to pass the necessary
legislation to ensure the court becomes fully operational
early next year.
With regard to further progress in determining
the fate of missing persons, exhumation works at the
Rudnica stone quarry in Serbia’s Raska municipality
were concluded on 22 August in the presence of Kosovo
Government forensic observers, supported by EULEX,
the International Committee of the Red Cross, the
International Commission on Missing Persons and
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). I wish to acknowledge with great
appreciation the efforts of both Belgrade and Pristina
to ensure a non-politicized professional operation. As
we prepare to commemorate the International Day of
the Missing Persons tomorrow, I reiterate my call on all
parties to continue the work in this same manner and
to respect the suffering endured by the families of the
victims.
The
reporting
period
showed
that
the
interconnectedness of ongoing crises throughout the
world is also affecting Kosovo. I wish to applaud the
initiative by President Jahjaga and the effective action
taken by the Kosovo police and security bodies to tackle
trends of violent extremism and prevent participation of
some Kosovars in the conflicts in Syria and Iraq. During
this summer, large-scale police operations resulted in a
significant number of arrests of persons suspected of
supporting extremist organizations or participating in
these foreign wars. I also wish to commend the close

14-522033/27

S/PV.7257

Kosovo

engagement of the Islamic community of Kosovo and
its leaders, as well as the public stand taken by other
religious and secular leaders, to distance themselves
entirely from such extremism.
During the reporting period, UNMIK has continued
to focus its resources on strengthening reconciliation
efforts among the communities throughout Kosovo.
The Mission successfully completed its 2013-2014
confidence-building measures programme and is
now taking further initiatives on the foundations
of the implemented projects. We are engaging our
international partners to facilitate and support similar
initiatives throughout Kosovo, in particular in the
north.
However, I must sound a note of concern regarding
the protection of cultural and religious heritage in
Kosovo. Despite numerous announcements made by
the municipal authorities, the council for the protection
of the historic village of Hoca i Madhe/Velika Hoča
has not been established yet. In addition, the illegal
construction in the special protective zones — including
that surrounding the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization World Heritage
site of the Visoki Dečani monastery — continues to
undermine our reconciliation efforts on the ground.
Resolute and effective enforcement measures against
such activities have yet to be taken by the concerned
Kosovo authorities.
Since the last report, little progress has been
observed with regard to the returns and reintegration
process of internally displaced persons (IDPs), with
35 percent fewer IDPs returning to Kosovo between
January and July 2014 compared to the corresponding
period last year. The hostile local protest of yesterday
against an approved visit of IDP pilgrims to Mushtisht
in order to mark the 28 August Orthodox feast was
deeply disappointing. I was grateful, however, to note
the strong and prompt public response was issued
by the Minister for Communities and Returns in the
immediate aftermath of this incident. I also welcome
the recent decision to postpone the eviction of around
50 Kosovo Serb IDPs from a collective centre in
Shtërpce municipality, and I continue to encourage the
authorities in Pristina and in the municipality to find
durable solutions for this problem. Overall, greater and
proactive efforts are needed to address the rights of
IDPs before and after their return.
UNMIK fully supports the commendable work of
the EU and High Representative Ashton in facilitating
4/27

29/08/2014

the high- level political dialogue and the implementation
of its historic agreements, which has significantly
enhanced the EU strategic perspective of both Belgrade
and Pristina. In this light, I wish to note the initialling
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
between the EU and Kosovo in Brussels on 25 July. The
commitment to the EU path being shown throughout
the region continues to be a driving force for positive
political, institutional and socioeconomic changes.
This is essential as well to fulfil the Council’s objective
of finding a peaceful settlement of the Kosovo issue.
UNMIK remains wholly committed to performing its
mandate in the furtherance of this objective.
I conclude my remarks by expressing my gratitude
to you, Mr. President, and to all members of the Council
for your continuous support of UNMIK’s work. The
period ahead will bring further challenges that will
require your continuing active engagement with both
parties to encourage full implementation of the 19 April
2013 Agreement and to support the work of the Special
Investigative Task Force and the establishment of the
specialist court. UNMIK will continue working closely
with local and international partners to support all vital
processes in accordance with its mandate, exerting
its efforts in support of the political progress being
achieved and helping to reduce and redress the shortterm challenges as and when they appear.
The President: I thank Mr. Zarif for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): Allow me
to greet you, Mr. President, and the members of the
Security Council, as well as to thank you for your
ongoing attention to the question of Kosovo and
Metohija. I am very pleased to be presented another
opportunity to address this body in connection with
the efforts that have been made under United Nations
auspices to find a lasting and sustainable solution to the
question of Kosovo and Metohija for 15 years now.
I am convinced that we all agree with the assessment
that the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) has a key role to play in the creation
of conditions for peaceful coexistence for the residents
of Kosovo and Metohija, a safe and secure life for all its
communities and respect for their human rights. Serbia
cooperates in good faith with the United Nations in
Kosovo and Metohija and wishes to further strengthen,
enrich and promote that cooperation. We appreciate the

14-52203

29/08/2014

Kosovo

efforts invested by Mr. Farid Zarif in the implementation
of the UNMIK mandate and the coordination of
international civil and security presences. We also
appreciate the contributions of UNMIK and other
international organizations — the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) and specialized agencies like the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees — which, through their missions and under
the United Nations auspices and resolution 1244 (1999),
are constituent parts of those presences in Serbia’s
southern province.
The dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, within
which the First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations was reached in Brussels on
19 April last year, was initiated with the aim of finding
practical solutions to questions that hamper the normal
life of the residents of Kosovo and Metohija. Serbia
expects the European Union to continue to facilitate
that dialogue.
We believe that the results achieved by Serbia so
far in the adoption of European values and standards
and its further progress along its European path are
the right context for the creation of a proper living
environment for the people in Kosovo and Metohija. In
that regard, we concur with the assessment presented in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/558) that the
commitment of Belgrade, as well Pristina, to European
integration, coupled with continued active engagement
by the European Union, are critical driving forces for
the normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina.
Serbia is firmly committed to the continuation of
constructive dialogue with Pristina at all levels, as well
as to the implementation of all agreements reached so
far. It has fulfilled in good faith the obligations derived
from the agreements reached in the dialogue.
Regrettably, no such assessment could be made in
connection with the Pristina side. It has not yet taken
the necessary steps to fully implement the agreements
reached in Brussels, including the adoption of an
amnesty law, the budget and local self-government.
Confidence-building is not improved by the problems
encountered by Serbian officials on their trips to
Kosovo and Metohija either. In this reporting period,
for instance, Serbian liaison officer Dejan Pavićević
was banned from entering the province on 25 June.

S/PV.7257

In addition to the consideration of the quarterly
reports at Security Council meetings, true insight into
the situation in Kosovo and Metohija can be gained
only by taking into account the broader picture of the
level of integration of Serbian and other non-Albanian
populations in the economic and social flows of the
province. That picture reveals the existence of a
substantial gap between international standards and the
legal framework and the situation in the field, which
is characterized by inter-ethnic incidents, unresolved
property issues and limited access to the services
of public institutions by members of non-Albanian
communities, as well as their mistrust in the work of
those institutions.
The situation in Kosovo and Metohija continues
to be difficult. Serbs live in constant fear, while
unemployment in Serbian communities is at levels
higher than ever in the past. Those are all obstacles
to the normalization of relations and to inter-ethnic
confidence-building and are a potential threat to
stability and security in a broader regional context.
Four houses of Serbian returnees were broken into
and looted in the village of Ljevosa, in the municipality
of Peć, during the night of 18 to 19 June. About 20 Serbs
returned to the village in 2005 and 2006. That was not
the first time that returning Serbs were intimidated
with the aim of discouraging them from returning to
their homes. Nor is the amelioration of the atmosphere
of mistrust helped by arbitrary arrests of local Serbs,
such as Jovica Dejanović from Prilužje and Dorde
Bojkovic from Babin Most, near Obiliq.
I would like to make special mention of the case of
Oliver Ivanović, the leader of the civic initiative Serbia,
Democracy, Justice, who was remanded into custody in
January on suspicion of participating in alleged crimes
committed during 1999 and 2000. Oliver Ivanović
continues to be detained, while he was indicted only
in mid-August. The Government of Serbia has given
guarantees that he will attend the trial, so the refusal
to release him from detention is disrespectful of the
Government of Serbia, which has contributed so much
to the normalization of relations. We demand that
Oliver lvanović be released from detention.
The data on the number of ethnically motivated
crimes against members of non-Albanian communities
remains incomplete, without explanation, as no
investigation of the attacks on Serbs and their property
has been successfully brought to an end. The percentage
of perpetrators of attacks on members of Serbian and

14-522035/27

S/PV.7257

Kosovo

29/08/2014

other non-Albanian communities discovered and tried
in the past 15 years is well nigh zero. The persons who
took part in the ethnically motivated violence in March
2004 — the only pogrom committed on European soil
in the twenty-first century — were tried for offences
against public peace and order under the civil procedure.

large-scale ethnic cleansing of the Serbian and Roma
populations from parts of Kosovo and Metohija south
of the Ibar River. We concur with the assessment that
the widespread and systematic nature of those crimes
constitutes a basis for the prosecution of crimes against
humanity and war crimes.

At the same time, no public records are available
on ethnically motivated attacks on members of Serbian
and other non-Albanian communities. The scope and
type of those attacks are concealed by being catalogued
as general crimes. The message thus sent to Serbs and
other non-Albanians, in particular the returning ones,
is that they are not welcome. The ethnically motivated
crime is thus de-personalized, while offences against
members of non-Albanian communities are tolerated.

Surely, the statement of the Chief Prosecutor
(S/2014/558, annex II) on the results of the investigation
so far is an immense contribution to the establishment
of the responsibility of the KLA leaders for the crimes
committed against the population, particularly the
non-Albanian population of Kosovo and Metohija.
However, justice will be served only if those who
committed and ordered the heineous crimes — the
KLA commanders who still walk free today — are tried
in courts. Serbia therefore expects that a special court
be established soon — not later than the beginning of
2015 — in which it will be possible to indict the leaders
of the KLA suspected of, among other things, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. We are convinced
that all countries that respect international law will
insist on it.

The perpetrators of killings, abductions and attacks
on Serbs committed since June of 1999 have not yet
been discovered and tried. Serbia has therefore followed
attentively the investigation of the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force and its Chief Prosecutor Clint
Williamson of the allegations of the 2010 report of
Swiss Senator Dick Marty, adopted in the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe, entitled “Inhuman
treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo”.
First of all, let me recognize the efforts of Chief
Prosecutor Williamson and all other members of the
Special Investigative Task Force invested in the detailed
investigation of the allegations from the report of
Senator Marty regarding the crimes committed against
the Serbs, Roma and Albanians of Kosovo and Metohija
by the members of the so-called Kosovo Liberation
Army (KLA). We are not surprised by the fact that they
faced numerous obstacles during their work, mostly
the intimidation of witnesses and the destruction of
evidence.
It is with appreciation that we accept the conclusion
of Chief Prosecutor Williamson that enough evidence
has been gathered to indict the KLA leaders responsible
for the persecution of Serbs, Roma and members of other
non-Albanian communities, as well as the Albanians
of Kosovo and Metohija. As we understand from the
statement of the Chief Prosecutor (S/2014/558, annex
II), the campaign of persecution included killings,
abductions, enforced disappearances, illegal detentions
in camps both in Kosovo and Metohija and in Albania,
sexual violence and other forms of inhuman treatment
such as forced displacement, and the destruction of
churches and other religious sites. That resulted in a
6/27

The widespread nature and magnitude of the crimes
mentioned in the statement (S/2014/558, annex II) of
the Chief Prosecutor call for a judicial epilogue, for
only that can bring justice and peace to a great number
of victims and their families. In that connection, we
address a strong appeal to key actors in the international
community to do, for their part, all that is necessary so
that a special court is established by the beginning of
the next year. It must not be allowed, as has been the
case in court proceedings so far, that because of the
intimidation of witnesses, responsible individuals are
acquitted due to the lack of evidence. All those involved
in the intimidation must also be tried.
At the same time, we must join forces to establish
the fate of the missing persons. As stated in the
statement (S/2014/558, annex II) of Chief Prosecutor
Williamson, not enough has been done in that regard,
and additional efforts must be made.
As it has done in the past, Serbia will do its utmost
so that additional evidence can be provided with
regard to organ trafficking. It is necessary that other
countries too make efforts in order to make it possible
for evidence of organ trafficking to find its way to the
special court.
Since beginning the work of the special court
depends in part on the decisions that ought to be taken

14-52203

29/08/2014

Kosovo

in Pristina, we call on all political actors in Kosovo and
Metohija to bear in mind that their conscientious work
will be a linchpin to the service of justice for the crimes
that have been committed.
It is with concern that we have followed the trial
of the so-called “Drenica Group” initiated last May
before the Basic Court in Kosovska, Mitrovica, for
reasons stated in the report before us. Three out of
seven indicted members of the former KLA managed to
run away from the institution in which they were being
given medical treatment. EULEX assessed the results
of the internal investigation in this case as bad and
without information of key importance.
I would like to point to another question raised in
the report relating to the adoption of the law amending
the laws on the mandate of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo. The new law changes
the composition of the chambers of courts that hear
the criminal and civil cases that fall within EULEX
competency, to the effect that the number of judges
of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government is
always greater than that of EULEX judges. I especially
mention that situation because the cases tried in the
Special Chamber of the Supreme Court of Kosovo in
connection with the Kosovo Privatization Agency and
the cases before appellate panels relating to decisions
of the Kosovo Property Claims Commission have
continued to be cases in which mostly Serbs and
non-Albanians are the aggrieved parties.
Bearing in mind the importance of the
implementation of the EULEX mandate, in particular
the part related to the proper investigation, trial
and enforcement of sentences for war crimes,
terrorism, organized crime, corruption, inter-ethnic
crime, financial-economic fraud and other grievous
offences, the question of the readiness of the judicial
organs to carry out impartially, conscientiously and
professionally the tasks entrusted to them is very
pertinent indeed. I emphasize this because the Kosovo
2013 Progress Report of the European Commission
highlights the need for improved enforcement of
decisions regarding human rights violations and the
many unresolved property cases related precisely to
damage compensation and inter-ethnic disputes, which
have been unjustifiably delayed.
In that connection we stress the importance of the
continued oversight over and assessment of the work of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, and the
judicial and other organs, and adequate appraisal of their

S/PV.7257

readiness to assume the executive competencies that
EULEX currently holds, as provided for by the EULEX
reconfiguration decision of this past June. I would
like to remind the members of the Security Council,
the body that adopted resolution 1244 (1999), which
established UNMIK with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General at its head, that the competencies
held by the Special Representative may be transferred
to the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government only
with his authorization. The fact that those competencies
were entrusted to EULEX does not diminish the powers
and responsibility of the Special Representative.
The incidents around the bridge in Kosovska
Mitrovica during this past June have served as a
reminder of the distance that the communities in
Kosovo and Metohija still need to traverse to achieve
reconciliation. The removal of the barricades on the
northern side of the bridge over the lbar River was an act
of goodwill on the part of the local Serbian population.
Unlike that act, the reaction of their Albanian fellow
residents did not show good faith and only added to the
deepening of intolerance.
One of the reasons that Serbia insists on the
unreduced presence and engagement of the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo and Metohija is precisely
because of the volatility of the situation in the province.
The trust that Serbian and other non-Albanian
communities have in the Mission as guarantor of their
survival is of paramount importance. In that context,
we must not allow the role entrusted to the United
Nations Mission, which is the guarantor and the basis
for the activities of all other international missions in
Kosovo and Metohija, to be weakened.
It is with concern that we look at attempts to
marginalize UNMIK — that is, reduce its size, both in
the number of substantive international personnel and
its activities in the field. We hope that, even though the
budget has been reduced compared to that of the past
year, the UNMIK budget adopted this past June will
not negatively affect the realization of the Mission’s
concrete tasks, including verification of the number of
returnees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
the protection of minority communities.
The Government of the Republic of Serbia is
fully committed to the normalization of relations with
Priština, which was confirmed by its call addressed
to the Serbs with residences registered in Kosovo and
Metohija to participate in the early general elections
on 8 June. Regrettably, in their attempt to exercise

14-522037/27

S/PV.7257

Kosovo

their voting rights, persons of Serbian nationality, in
particular the IDPs, encountered numerous obstacles
all over again, from a questionable legal interpretation
of electoral provisions to challenges to the recognition
of their right to be entered into voters’ lists.
Overall, 30,000 IDPs, 26,000 of them from the
central parts of Serbia, sent their voting applications
to the Central Election Commission. Out of 26,000
applications, less than half were accepted, while the
rejected ones were directed to an appellate procedure.
The Central Election Commission adopted 200 out of
9,000 appeals. The number of Serbs with the right to
vote has diminished in comparison with their number
at the local elections in November 2013. The fact that
as many as 20,000 deceased persons were inscribed on
the voters’ lists and that, even after the removal of their
names, the number of registered voters has continued to
be greater than the population of Kosovo and Metohija
is indicative all by itself.
The new general elections law was being discussed
in Parliament at the time that the early elections were
called; the law was not adopted. Absent a new elections
law, the Central Election Commission decided to
invoke the provisions of the constitutional amendments
of 2012, with negative consequences for a number of
the mandates of the Serbian community. Specifically,
the Civic Initiative Serbia list was thus left short of six
additional Parliament seats.
Some provisions of the draft general elections law
downgrade outright the voting rights of members of
the minority communities in Kosovo and Metohija. I
believe that we all can agree that setting conditions for
dialogue and the participation of Serbian community
members in the work of provincial institutions in which
the scope of their rights has been reduced cannot be
politically justified.
In the municipalities in the northern part of the
province with a Serbian majority, conditions have
been fulfilled for the establishment of the association/
community of Serbian municipalities, as provided
for in the Brussels Agreement. We expect Pristina to
complete the post-electoral processes in the foreseeable
future in order to make it possible to establish the
community, that is to say, to adopt the legal framework
necessary for the implementation of its competencies.
That would be a true indicator of the commitment of the
Pristina side to the implementation of the agreements
that have been reached, contribute to the strengthening
of confidence in provincial institutions, and represent
8/27

29/08/2014

an important step in the direction of achieving progress
in mutual dialogue.
Let me particularly draw the Council’s attention to
the situation of the IDPs and the fact that the solution to
their situation largely depends on the actions of political
actors in Priština. In June 2014, Special Rapporteur
on the human rights of internally displaced persons
Chaloka Beyani presented a report to the Human Rights
Council on his visit to Serbia in October 2013. The
Special Rapporteur called on the authorities in Priština
to invest efforts in ensuring effective implementation
of legal solutions and to increase the political will to
find a lasting solution for the IDPs. He also pointed to
an urgent need to solve property issues.
The creation of real conditions for IDPs to return
to their homes is one of the key factors in the process
of reconciliation. The return of the IDPs to Kosovo
and Metohija has been obstructed by administrative
impediments, to the point that the Administration in
Pristina cannot honestly claim to continue to espouse
democracy and multi-ethnicity. In practice, instead of
facilitating the IDPs’ return, the required documents
and procedures constitute insurmountable obstacles
for any returns, let alone sustainable ones. In that way,
implicit pressure is being brought to bear on the IDPs
to integrate into local communities outside Kosovo and
Metohija, the end result of which is a forced change in
the demographic picture of the province.
The Republic of Serbia is the country with
the largest number of IDPs in Europe — 230,000,
with 18,000 of them in Kosovo and Metohija. In our
estimation, between 2,000 and 4,000 IDPs have realized
a sustainable return to Kosovo and Metohija. The low
level of returns is caused preponderantly by the failure
to ensure the basic conditions for return and normal
life, which has also been confirmed by the SecretaryGeneral’s reports to the Security Council. According to
the report before us, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees registered as few
as 49 voluntary individual returns by members of
non-Albanian communities in the period from April to
June.
This has been taking place despite the presence
of the international civil administration, one of the
main responsibilities of which under resolution 1244
(1999) is to assure the safe and unimpeded return of all
refugees and internally displaced persons. The creation
of conditions for Serbian and other non-Albanian
populations to enjoy fundamental human rights and the
14-52203

29/08/2014

Kosovo

rights that belong to them as non-majority populations
would surely contribute to the improvement of the
general atmosphere for the return of IDPs.
The programmes aimed at strengthening
confidence that have been devised by UNMIK and
other missions active in Kosovo and Metohija are,
no doubt, useful in the process of reconciliation
among communities, yet they do not suffice. In order
to create a sustainable atmosphere of tolerance,
political will and a comprehensive approach on the
part of the provisional institutions in Pristina are
needed. Our assumption is that, with the support of
competent international organizations, the authorities
in Pristina will seriously take into consideration the
recommendations contained in the assessment of the
implementation, at the municipal level, of the law on
the use of languages, published by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) this past
June. The conclusion of the OSCE is that the law has
been implemented only partially because of a lack of
political will and the absence of full understanding of
the obligation.
In the Kosovo 2013 Progress Report of the European
Commission, special mention is made, inter alia, of the
problem of continued attacks on religious heritage,
particularly that of the Serbian Orthodox Church and its
graveyards. The report also points to the unsatisfactory
implementation of the anti-discrimination law, the
numerous unresolved property cases before the courts
related to damage compensation, and inter-ethnic
disputes. It also highlights the problem of sustainable
return and reintegration, which has continued to worsen,
owing to persistent incidents targeting returnees, their
property, their religious and cultural heritage and the
lack of suitable economic opportunities.
It is not only the property rights of returnees that
are impossible to exercise and protect in Kosovo and
Metohija. Nothing is being done about cases of forged
purchase and sale agreements of real estate legally
owned by Serbs. Only one report has been published
on this issue, the 2009 OSCE Mission in Kosovo report
on fraudulent transactions in the Peć region, the only
systematic and detailed review of violations of Serbs’
property rights, and that in only one region. The
statistical reviews of court decisions and cases conceal
the real picture of a large number of decisions that strike
down property-damage claims filed by Serbs. That
is an enormous problem and appears to be ethnically

S/PV.7257

motivated in view of the fact that the damaged property
belongs exclusively to Serbs.
I would be remiss if I failed to note that the report
mentions only the number of cases closed. It discusses
only the decisions adjudicated by the Kosovo Property
Agency and not the number of decisions that have been
enforced, which would, practically speaking, reflect
the number of owners who have gained possession
of their properties. That is only one of the issues that
have affected and continue to affect the process of IDP
returns to Kosovo and Metohija in more ways than one.
An ongoing big problem is the privatization being
carried out by the Kosovo Privatization Agency,
formerly known as the Kosovo Trust Agency, which
contravenes international and European human-rights
conventions by continuing to privatize public and
socially owned companies in Serbian communities.
The sale of such companies to persons of Albanian
nationality leads to a loss of economic resources in
Serbian communities and also influences the exodus
of the Serbian population. The latest in a series of
such events took place on 9 June, when officials of the
Kosovo Privatization Agency entered the FDK Lola
plant in Štrpce, seized its documentation, keys and
seals, put in their own security and banned Serbian
workers and management from entering the premises.
Similarly, the Kosovo Privatization Agency has decided
to liquidate the Hotel Junior in Štrpce, which houses a
group accommodation centre for 85 lDPs, who would
be further displaced if the hotel were privatized.
I would like to point out once again that one of the
Republic of Serbia’s top priorities is to find a lasting
solution for the question of Kosovo and Metohija
through negotiations and dialogue with the provisional
institutions of self-government in Priština, with the
recognition of the legitimate interests of the Albanian,
Serbian and other populations of Kosovo and Metohija
and full respect for the mandate of the United Nations
set out in resolution 1244 (1999).
Serbia is open to dialogue for the purpose of finding
a comprehensive solution to the question of Kosovo and
Metohija, first and foremost in the interests of its own
citizens. Let us not forget that behind all our speeches,
reports and statements are people whose only desire
is to have normal living conditions for their families,
who want to work, educate their children, provide them
a happy childhood and a safe and secure future and
enjoy all the rights belonging to them according to the
European standards to which our entire region aspires.

14-522039/27

S/PV.7257

Kosovo

This is nothing less or more than what we all want
for ourselves. Our reports on the situation in Kosovo
and Metohija must therefore not be turned into mere
numbers. As we consider each and every situation report
on the province, we should ask ourselves how much we
have helped the local population live better lives. I am
not sure that the conditions are there for lessening the
Security Council’s interest in this topic. Regrettably,
this has also been confirmed by an incident that took
place yesterday in the Ground Safety Zone, in which
Stevan Sinđelić, a member of the Serbian Gendarmerie,
was killed.
Great progress has been made, but we are far from
being close to our goal. The Republic of Serbia is
ready to do everything in its power to contribute, as a
responsible United Nations Member State and not just
as an interested party, to improving the situation in the
province. Serbia is also ready to put its maximum effort
into further stabilizing and normalizing the situation,
for peace is its primary goal.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj.
Mr. Hoxhaj: It is a great honour for me to address
the Security Council today and to present the latest
developments and progress in the Republic of Kosovo.
During the past three months there have been many
important developments contributing to peace and
stability as well as to strengthening a multi-ethnic and
democratic Kosovo.
I am pleased to be able to report to you today on
the subjects of Kosovo’s strengthening of statehood
internally, its further integration into the international
community, its successful negotiation of a draft
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union and the continuation of our inter-State
dialogue with Serbia. I will also take this opportunity to
raise a number of concerns on behalf of the Government
of Kosovo.
Before addressing those issues, I would first like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon and the current
States members of the Security Council for their support
for peace and progress in Kosovo. For the citizens of
Kosovo, the United Nations remains a symbol of hope,
peace and international justice.
Two decades ago, the Council had repeated
discussions and acted on those discussions, as the main
United Nations body addressing the human-rights

10/27

29/08/2014

violations and crimes against humanity committed by
the Milošević regime. It witnessed the apartheid period
in Kosovo and drew attention to the State-sponsored
crimes and ethnic cleansing perpetrated by the
Milošević regime. Today, 15 years since the end of the
war and despite many challenges, Kosovo represents
a successful story of State- and peacebuilding, which
would not have been possible without the international
community’s active support.
Over the past three months, Kosovo has continued to
maintain political and economic stability and to further
strengthen its democratic governance. One of the main
developments of recent months has been the successful
holding of parliamentary elections. The international
democratic community, including a European election
observation mission, applauded the elections of 8 June
for their credibility, organization and transparency, and
for being in line with the highest European standards.
Those elections also marked an important milestone,
because for the first time Kosovo Serbs living in the
four northern municipalities participated in electing
representatives to the Kosovo Assembly.
We are currently at the stage of consolidating the
new Assembly. The Constitutional Court has been
crucial to that process by ensuring the establishment
of a democratic and constitutional basis for
Kosovo’s new legislative and executive institutions.
Kosovo’s new Government will therefore soon be in
place — a Government whose composition will be
inclusive, multi-ethnic, and committed to continuing
comprehensive reforms. In that regard, it is important
to emphasize that, while our institutions are in the
process of being formed, Kosovo has continued to
maintain high levels of security and stability.
On 25 July, Kosovo initialled a Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union (EU).
It is the first contractual Agreement between Kosovo
and the European Union, and it will provide a clear
framework for reforms and political engagement with
the EU in the integration process. The next step will
be the Agreement’s adoption by the Council of the
European Union and its formal signing. This crucial step
on our path to European integration signals Kosovo’s
comprehensive progress in democratic governance, the
protection of human rights, economic reform, ethnic
relations, and strengthened statehood. The deal seals
our country’s strategic orientation and launches us on
the path to our desire, which is to become a full-fledged
and equal member of the European Union.

14-52203

29/08/2014

Kosovo

Beyond the political benefits, the Agreement
will open the EU market to our small and medium
enterprises, which will generate new jobs and economic
growth in Kosovo. On its path to joining the EU,
Kosovo will continue to exhibit high levels of political
and institutional responsibility. We will undertake all
necessary reforms in the areas of the rule of law and
the alignment of our legislation with that of the EU. On
the EU integration path, Kosovo has shown progress in
fulfilling the remaining criteria for visa-free travel in
the EU Schengen zone. The visible progress on the EU
integration path shows that Kosovo’s European future
is secure.
Parallel to the consolidation of domestic institutions,
Kosovo has shown progress in strengthening its
international position. In the past two months, the
Togolese Republic and Solomon Islands have recognized
the independence and sovereignty of Kosovo. We are
committed to strengthening our bilateral relations
with all 108 countries that have recognized Kosovo’s
independence and statehood. The unprecedented and
overwhelming international support for Kosovo’s
statehood shows that the declaration of independence
was a legitimate and legal act, with wide international
acceptance, which has contributed to regional peace
and stability. Kosovo is therefore gradually claiming
its rightful place in the family of free, democratic and
peace-loving nations.
Moreover, Kosovo has shown progress in
increasing its membership in international and regional
organizations. Kosovo has become a full member of
the Venice Commission, which is part of the Council
of Europe, and has joined two important regional
organizations, the South-East European Cooperation
Process and the Migration, Asylum, Refugees Regional
Initiative. Kosovo’s membership in those regional
bodies has strengthened Kosovo’s regional role in the
service of constructive regional cooperation.
In the near future, we intend to apply for full
membership in the Council of Europe, an important
regional body for strengthening human rights and
democracy. Kosovo deserves a place in the Council of
Europe because of our geographic position, democratic
performance and commitment to human rights
protection and the rule of law. Kosovo will continue
to press forward on achieving its goal of gaining full
membership in the international community. That
would be in the best interest of our citizens and would
provide an opportunity to contribute to regional

S/PV.7257

and international peace and stability and to take on
international responsibility.
Kosovo has been and remains highly committed
to the EU-facilitated dialogue with Serbia. We are
dedicated to improving the relations between our two
independent and sovereign States. Thus far, substantial
success has been achieved in the implementation
of the First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations, reached between Kosovo
and Serbia in April 2013. However, more needs to be
done. In recent months, there have been some incidents
in the Serb-populated northern part of Kosovo that
have impeded the implementation of technical and
political agreements and have not contributed to the
normalization and improvement of the everyday lives
of people. Here I am referring to the placement of
barricades on the bridge over the river in Mitrovica and
the recent aggressive rhetoric of local Serb leaders in
the north against the work of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo, which seeks to strengthen
the rule of law in Kosovo.
I take this opportunity to call upon on the authorities
in Belgrade to respect the agreements that we have
reached together and not to promote the destabilization
of the situation in those municipalities. The Government
of Kosovo highly condemns all possible pressure on
EULEX personnel when it comes to arresting alleged
criminals operating in the northern municipalities.
Beyond that, we share our serious concern that the
Serbian authorities have not upheld the implementation
of other agreements reached as part of the dialogue.
This year, the Constitutional Court of Serbia nullified
the agreements on cadastral surveys and records and
the mutual recognition of university diplomas. While
Kosovo has undertaken all necessary legal changes to
accommodate the technical and political agreements,
the same is not the case with Serbia. We urge our
Serbian counterparts to respect the agreements reached
and undertake the necessary constitutional and legal
changes in order to ensure their normal implementation.
Despite those developments, we have expressed
our will to make progress on discussing new topics as
part of the dialogue with Serbia until we achieve full
normalization of inter-State and inter-society relations.
However, the dialogue cannot continue endlessly and
must come to a successful conclusion with the signing of
a peace treaty, which should represent an agreement for
mutual recognition and the establishment of permanent
friendship and neighbourly relations between Kosovo

14-5220311/27

S/PV.7257

Kosovo

and Serbia. That would be in the interest of advancing
a common peace, regional stability and our joint
European future.
In speaking about relations with Serbia, I would
like to point out that, two days ago, an isolated incident
took place on the north-eastern border with Serbia,
where a private citizen of Kosovo had a confrontation
with Serb security forces across the border. We wish
to reassure Serbian authorities that it was an isolated
incident, and we regret that it happened. Nether side
should exaggerate it, and we should continue working
together to build confidence and resolve all outstanding
issues through dialogue.
The Special Investigative Task Force for alleged
war crimes in Kosovo, initiated by former Special
Rapporteur of the Council of Europe Dick Marty, issued
a statement (S/2014/558, annex II) at the end of July.
The Government of Kosovo has closely cooperated with
the Task Force throughout the entire process, and we
will continue to cooperate until the entire investigation
is over. Our commitment is also demonstrated by the
actions taken in the Kosovo Assembly to create a special
chamber as part of Kosovo’s legal system to address
those allegations. That is the best proof that Kosovo is
a State governed by the law, and it demonstrates our
willingness to undertake all necessary steps to fully
cooperate with our international partners in that process.
The Government of Kosovo appreciates the work of
Ambassador Williamson, which is an important step
for resolving all the allegations and other accusations.
As I address the Council here, a mass grave has
been discovered in the town of Raška in Serbia that
holds the bodies of approximately 350 Kosovo Albanian
civilians killed during the war in Kosovo. Those
innocent civilians were killed in Kosovo, transported
by the Serbian security apparatus to Serbia to hide
the traces and buried in a mass grave, above which
buildings have been constructed. It is not the only mass
grave of civilians killed during the Kosovo war that
has been discovered in Serbia. While we acknowledge
Serbia’s efforts towards cooperation on this matter, we
appeal to Serbia to undertake more proactive measures
to move ahead with the excavation and identification of
the bodies in the mass grave in Raška.
Serbia should also show more willingness to
cooperate with Kosovar and international authorities
in identifying the bodies of over 1,700 other missing
persons. Any delay in resolving the fate of missing
persons prolongs the pain of their families. It is
12/27

29/08/2014

an inhumane practice and does not contribute to
inter-ethnic reconciliation between Kosovo and
Serbia. I would to bring to the Council’s attention that
approximately 15,000 Albanian civilians were killed
for ethnic reasons alone, and that all of those crimes
against humanity have been proved and documented in
the proceedings of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia.
Recently, we joined the international campaign led
by the United Kingdom on ending sexual violence in
conflict. During the Kosovo war, there was a significant
number of women who experienced sexual violence at
the hands of the Serbian State and security apparatus,
and those acts have to date remained unaddressed
by international or domestic transitional justice
mechanisms. Besides taking certain legal measures,
very soon a petition will be addressed to the SecretaryGeneral to urge the United Nations to undertake all
necessary measures to bring justice to those women
who have silently endured pain and suffering since the
time of the war. Addressing past sexual violence done
to women during the Kosovo war is a matter of justice
and reconciliation, and we are committed to dealing
with it.
Let me conclude by expressing the gratitude of
the people and Government of Kosovo to the United
Nations for supporting Kosovo over the years in
consolidating peace and building State institutions.
Since the declaration of independence in 2008, the role
of the United Nations in Kosovo has gradually been
reduced and its presence downsized. This has been in
accordance with the evolving circumstances and local
needs. Today, Kosovo has democratic, functioning,
multi-ethnic institutions and has successfully
implemented the Ahtisaari plan under international
supervision.
As the European Union has taken a greater
role in the region, it is of critical importance that
the Council should consider ending the presence in
Kosovo of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), as this would be timely,
cost-effective and in line with the United Nations
commitment to empowering local ownership and
drafting successful exit strategies. We recommend
that the Council reconfigure the UNMIK presence
from its current mission to a United Nations political
office in Kosovo, which could take on a new role in
supporting Kosovo institutions in strengthening

14-52203

29/08/2014

Kosovo

domestic capacities for more responsible engagement
in the international community.
In the meantime, the United Nations should
reduce the budget and number of staff of UNMIK,
since the Mission has no role in the implementation of
the agreements reached as part of the EU-facilitated
dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia. The guarantor
of the implementation of those agreements remains the
European Union. The financial costs of UNMIK could
be distributed to other agencies in Kosovo and around
the world and used for different projects that would
improve the lives of the citizens in Kosovo and in other
parts of the world.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing. I
welcome to the Council His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia and His Excellency Mr. Enver Hoxhaj,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, and thank them
for their statements.
Luxembourg congratulates the Kosovo authorities
on the successful conduct of parliamentary elections
in Kosovo on 8 June. The elections were conducted
peacefully throughout Kosovo, including in the four
northern municipalities with a Serb majority, in a
unified legal framework. The election turnout was
generally satisfactory and many Kosovo Serbs chose to
go to the polls. We welcome Serbia’s constructive role
in encouraging that democratic choice.
This month, the Constitutional Court of Kosovo
was able to clarify a number of issues raised following
the elections. We now encourage the political leaders
of Kosovo to show a spirit of compromise in order to
swiftly form a new Government supported by a stable
majority in Parliament.
It is encouraging to see that the situation in Kosovo
remained calm and stable during the period covered by
the recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/558).
That said, we strongly condemn the fatal shooting that
claimed the life of a Serbian police officer yesterday
morning near the Serbian town of Merdare, near the
Kosovo border. The circumstances of the attack must
be investigated and those responsible must be brought
to justice. During the months of June and July, tensions

S/PV.7257

arose around a so-called peace park that was set up on
the bridge of Mitrovica, blocking movement between
the two parts of the city. We encourage the initiatives
under way to address the issue by consensus.
We welcome the efforts made by Kosovo to
strengthen the rule of law, with the support of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX). We welcome the progress made by the
EULEX Special Investigative Task Force concerning
allegations contained in the report on inhumane
treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo, published in January 2011 by the
Council of Europe. We thank the Chief Prosecutor,
Mr. Clint Williamson, and his team for their hard work,
which was summarized in a presentation on 29 July.
We encourage Kosovo institutions to cooperate with
the European Union in the establishment next year of
a special tribunal to prosecute the perpetrators of the
crimes committed, while allowing those who have been
falsely accused to prove their innocence. Justice system
can thereby become an integral part of the reconciliation
process between Serbs and Kosovars.
In recent months, Serbia and Kosovo have taken
further steps on the path to European integration.
Negotiations with Serbia on joining the European Union
are ongoing and, as has been noted, Kosovo has just
initialled a Stabilization and Association Agreement
with the European Union. As Serbia and Kosovo
advance in that direction, there will be less need for
United Nations involvement. We therefore call on the
United Nations to adjust its presence to foster lasting
stability in Kosovo, in line with the recent efforts of the
European Union in restructuring EULEX. We welcome
the Serbian Government’s statement of unwavering
commitment to the normalization of relations with
Pristina under the auspices of the EU-facilitated
dialogue. We are confident that the new Government of
Kosovo, once established, will do the same to foster a
new political impetus in the normalization of relations.
In conclusion, Luxembourg takes this opportunity
to encourage the authorities of Serbia and Kosovo to
continue to exercise the wisdom, commitment and
courage needed to achieve successful reconciliation
between their countries and fulfil their common
European aspirations.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his highly informative briefing.
I also welcome the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister

14-5220313/27

S/PV.7257

Kosovo

for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kosovo,
and thank them for their statements.
Kosovo continues to make significant progress in
re-establishing a unified, democratic, multi-ethnic State
participating actively in the international community.
We therefore urge all States to support Kosovo in taking
advantage of the progress achieved. We duly note that
the elections convened in Kosovo and in Serbia have
slowed the dialogue facilitated by the European Union
in the framework of the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations of 19 April
2013.
Despite our support for ongoing technical
discussions, we consider it extremely important to
resume the high-level dialogue as quickly as possible.
Furthermore, we believe that it is the duty of both parties
to pursue the dialogue and the thorough implementation
of the First Agreement. The European Union will have
an essential role to play in accelerating dialogue.
We hope that the aspirations of both sides to
integrate with the European Union and that their
relationships with regional organizations will contribute
to strengthening security and stability in the region,
and to promoting relations among the countries of the
region in various spheres with a view to fulfilling the
aspirations of their peoples and achieving prosperity. On
this point, we reiterate the importance of the activities
of EULEX aimed at helping Kosovo in strengthening
the institutions of justice and the rule of law.

29/08/2014

to follow-up the decisions of the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force.
It is essential to continue monitoring the problems
caused by this conflict, which have had a major impact
on the collective spirit of the various communities in
Kosovo and the region. One such problem is that of
displaced, repatriated and missing persons. We hope
that UNMIK and international organizations will
continue to find solutions to all these problems in order
to strengthen trust. Furthermore, religious tolerance has
a key role to play in achieving political reconciliation.
Coexistence among the different religions is the
only path to building a real democracy in Kosovo.
We therefore call on everyone to take advantage of
the outcome of the annual conference on inter-faith
dialogue that took place during the week of tolerance
and reconciliation in Kosovo.
To conclude, we would like to express our gratitude
to the head of UNMIK and his team for their efforts to
ensure that the Mission fulfils its responsibilities in all
areas.
Mr. De Antueno (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his introduction
of the Secretary-General’s report on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(S/2014/558). We also welcome the participation of the
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.

We condemn the incident in which a EULEX
convoy was shot at, and we encourage an investigation.
Furthermore, Jordan welcomes the transparent and
successful elections that were organized on 8 June with a
high participation of voters. Furthermore, we commend
the decision to establish new municipal councils. These
successes clearly show that the Kosovar authorities are
committed to establishing fully inclusive institutions
and that they have a long-term political vision and are
capable of managing a democratic process.

Argentina, as is its tradition, would like to
emphasize the important role that the United Nations
plays in Kosovo through the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) by
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights, as well as its cooperation with the Kosovo Force
and with the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX). It maintains its neutral position
regarding the territory’s status and under the auspices
of the United Nations.

We urge the parties to continue engaging politically
in a constitutional framework in order to establish
a new Government that can address the challenges
facing the region. We have already reaffirmed the
importance of post-conflict transitional justice that
seeks to strengthen reconciliation among communities.
Jordan therefore commends Kosovo’s determination
to establish the rule of law and a new special tribunal

Argentina continues to believe that resolution
1244 (1999), for which it had voted in favour when
it was a member of the Council, is the international
legal basis applicable in Kosovo in order to achieve a
comprehensive settlement through a political process
and through negotiations. We reiterate once again
the importance of the firm leadership of UNMIK in
support of Belgrade and Pristina.

14/27

14-52203

29/08/2014

Kosovo

As for the security situation, we welcome the fact
that the elections held during the period under review did
not result in any significant incident. Nevertheless, we
join Pristina, Belgrade and the rest of the international
community in condemning the attack on two EULEX
vehicles on 25 April. We call on the relevant authorities
to take measures to ensure that such acts do not recure
in the future.
Given the commitment shown by the parties to
the high-level dialogue under the auspices of the
European Union, we would urge them to resume highlevel negotiations so that progress can continue to be
made towards the implementation of the historic First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013, and to consolidate the
progress made towards reaching an agreement on the
establishment of an association/community of Serbmajority municipalities. We encourage international
actors with a presence on the ground to continue
working together, in accordance with their respective
mandates, to consolidate their achievements and to
ensure the effective implementation of any outstanding
issues.
While we are encouraged that the overall security
situation in Kosovo has remained mostly calm, we must
call attention to the security situation in South Mitrovica.
We are concerned by the incidents that occurred in the
area of the main bridge in South Mitrovica between
18 and 22 June. As the Secretary-General has stated,
we consider that unilateral measures and incendiary
statements must be avoided so as to ensure a climate
conducive to dialogue. It should be reiterated that
UNMIK’s important work remains essential in
providing maximal support to the political processes.
Special attention should be paid to the implementation
of the provisions of the 19 April Agreement. It is also
vital to continue prioritizing the task of overcoming
the impacts and legacy of the conflict, including the
pending cases of missing persons. In that regard, we
note the resumption of exhumations of a mass gave site
in Rudnica, Raska municipality, and urge the speedy
issuance of a judicial warrant to investigate and exhume
two other sites in Rudnica.
UNMIK should continue to support and encourage
efforts to determine the fate and whereabouts of missing
persons, and redouble its efforts and cooperation
to ensure that these grave human rights violations,
including in relation to cases mentioned in the 2010
report of the Special Rapporteur of the Council of

S/PV.7257

Europe, do not enjoy iompunity. We also deem it
important to take into account the findings of the Chief
Prosecutor of the Special Investigative Task Force at
the European Union.
We highlight UNMIK’s work in support for the
rule of law, in particular its collaboration with all
relevant interested parties with regard to resolving the
main problems on the ground. We also stress the need
for those international actors with a presence on the
ground in Kosovo to continue strengthening mutual
cooperation in order to establish conditions conducive
to an improved implementation of the 19 April 2013
Agreement. Finally, we highlight the work carried
out by the Special Representative to promote security,
stability and respect for human rights in Kosovo, in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Klein (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Zarif for his briefing. I would
also like to thank Foreign Minister Dačić and Foreign
Minister Hoxhaj for their remarks today.
The United States welcomes Kosovo’s continuing
steps towards full integration within the international
community. We commend the Governments of the
Solomon Islands and Togo for their recognition of
Kosovo as a sovereign, independent state. We are
also very pleased about Kosovo’s acceptance into the
Venice Commission of the Council of Europe as its
sixtieth member State. Those steps further cement
Kosovo’s place within the international community,
strengthening Kosovo, the region and international
cooperation.
The United States praises both Serbia and Kosovo
for their continued dedication to the European
Union-facilitated Kosovo-Serbia dialogue and the
implementation of the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations of
19 April 2013. While the next high-level meetings
await Government formation in Kosovo, we are
encouraged that working-level discussions continue,
including a planned meeting on 4 September to carry
forward the work on integrated border management.
Both Governments have made difficult but necessary
decisions to advance the dialogue, which remains
integral to a stable, peaceful and prosperous region. We
are further heartened by the recent public statements by
Serbian officials reaffirming that stability is Belgrade’s
key interest in Kosovo.

14-5220315/27

S/PV.7257

Kosovo

The process of Government formation in Kosovo
is under way following successful parliamentary
elections in June. We are encouraged by the positive
reports from local and international observers on the
smooth and orderly conduct of the election and broad
participation throughout Kosovo. As Kosovo’s political
and party leaders work to form the next government, it is
important that the process proceed in line with Kosovo’s
laws and Constitution; the 1 July and 26 August rulings
by Kosovo’s Constitutional Court should serve as
guidelines in that regard. We urge the leaders, parties
and Kosovo Assembly members to move lawfully and
quickly towards formation of the new government,
so that the important work of strengthening Kosovo’s
multiethnic democracy can continue. We also welcome
the formation of municipal assemblies and the Kosovo
Ministry of Local Government Administration’s
certification in May of municipal statutes for the four
municipalities in the Serb-majority north.
The United States supports freedom of expression
and universal human rights, and we denounce those
who would turn to violence to sow discord and unrest
within their communities. We condemn the violence
that occurred during the South Mitrovica demonstration
on 22 June regarding barriers on the Austerlitz Bridge.
The security services, including the Kosovo police,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR), merit
praise for their swift and appropriate response, which
prevented further escalation. The violence and tensions
over the Mitrovica bridge underscore the enduring
sensitivity of these issues and the need for continued,
constructive dialogue to resolve differences.
In a broader context, stability and security — both
regionally and globally — benefit from rule of law and
strong democratic institutions in Kosovo. Mr. Zarif
mentioned interconnectedness. We commend Kosovo
authorities for their efforts to address the problems of
violent extremism and the initiative of the Kosovo police
and judiciary in apprehending suspected foreign fighters
and their supporters in June and August. President
Jahjaga has publicly reinforced that Kosovo will not
become a terrorist haven and that Kosovo institutions
will not permit terrorists to endanger peace, stability
and constitutional order. We welcome the initiative
of several countries in the region, including Kosovo
and Serbia, to put in place legislation penalizing the
recruitment and participation of its citizens in foreign
armed conflicts. We call on all States in the region

16/27

29/08/2014

to cooperate more closely on countering the common
threat of violent extremism.
Finally, we are pleased with the agreement between
the European Union and Kosovo to extend the mandate
of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
until June 2016. EULEX and KFOR continue to make
essential contributions to the international community’s
work in Kosovo.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in this meeting
of the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica
Dačić. We agree with the comments he made and
we took note of the statement by Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
We thank Mr. Zarif for his presentation of the report
(S/2014/558) of the Secretary-General on the activities
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) and his assessment of the situation
in the region.
The United Nations Mission remains the main
international presence in Kosovo. European Union
mediation in the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina and the transfer of the functions from UNMIK
to the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
does not diminish the role of the United Nations in
Kosovo. We share the concerns expressed in the report
of the Secretary-General about the lack of progress in
the area of ​​national reconciliation, the failure of the
Kosovar authorities to implement a language policy and
the continued desecration of religious shrines.
Unfortunately, the report does not mention the
illegal and corrupt practice of usurping Serb property
in the region, carried out by Kosovar authorities under
the guise of privatization. Against the backdrop of
problems related to the return of Serbian refugees and
internally displaced persons and the restoration of their
property rights, Pristina’s actions deprive the remaining
Serbs of their sources of livelihood. In essence, we are
talking about a continuation of ethnic cleansing by
economic means. In such circumstances, there can be
no meaningful talk of progress in the process of the
return of refugees or internally displaced persons.
All such systemic problems related to the violation
of minorities’ rights have significant potential for
conflict and could lead to the escalation of violence
at any moment. Unfortunately, that proved to be true
in June in the ethnically mixed neighbourhoods of the
Kosovar town of Mitrovica, where a wave of incidents

14-52203

29/08/2014

Kosovo

unfolded culminating in the clashes on the bridge
across the Ibar river.
Given the wide range of problems, we call on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo to fully and proactively fulfil its mandate. To
do so, it must have all the necessary resources. We
should consider significantly enhancing the Mission
by providing it with experts in the fields of human
rights, the rule of law and reconciliation between
communities. We condemn attempts to undermine
UNMIK’s role and call on the Kosovo Albanian side
to encourage meaningful cooperation with the United
Nations presence.
We are not inclined to share the optimism expressed
about the elections held in the region. Only 41 per
cent of registered voters took part in the elections and
the participation of Kosovar Serbs was even lower,
demonstrating their continued deep distrust of the
region’s institutions. In fact, these institutions are not
really being established. We are seeing the ongoing
protraction of the political crisis. The delayed formation
of a Government also hinders the resumption of
negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina. We believe
that the interest of the Serbs and other non-Albanian
communities of the region should be fully taken into
consideration in the formation of new Government
institutions. To protect the interests of the Kosovo
Serbs, it is essential to create a community of Kosovo
Serbian municipalities, in accordance with the Brussels
Agreement, as quickly as possible.

S/PV.7257

Mr. Clint Williamson’s mention of the active resistance
to the investigation of the crimes of the KLA, which
clearly illustrates Pristina’s attitude and readiness to
cooperate with the inquiry.
The report does not say a great deal about the topic
of the participation of Kosovars in conflicts in the
Middle East. Nevertheless, since early August several
dozen individuals have been arrested and accused of
fighting in the ranks of terrorist and extremist groups
in the conflicts in Syria and Iraq. Such activity needs to
be stopped. We are happy to hear Mr. Zarif raise these
issues in his briefing today.
In conclusion, we confirm that Russia’s position on
the problems of Kosovo remains unchanged. We believe
that resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in force and
binding on all parties as the international legal basis for
the resolution of the conflict in Kosovo.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) for his briefing on the situation in
Kosovo.
I should also like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Kosovo. Chad fully supports their
efforts to build peace in the region.

We draw attention to the published interim results
of the investigations related to the report of Dick Marty,
which clearly state that there is sufficient evidence to
bring charges against certain senior officials of the
former Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA). The report
speaks of many cases of murder, abduction, rape, illegal
detention, inhumane treatment and the desecration of
churches, which resulted in ethnic cleansing and the
expulsion of Serbs from southern and central Kosovo.
Those activities were organized, widespread and
systematic. The interim report also confirms cases of
organ trafficking in the region.

Chad welcomes the progressive improvement in
the political, institutional, security and human rights
situation in Kosovo. With regard to the political
situation, Chad commends the holding on 16 March
of transparent legislative elections in Kosovo, which
demonstrated the political maturity of that country
and signaled the growing engagement of Kosovo’s
political class and population in a genuine process of
national reconciliation. Those significant achievements
should be built upon and strengthened through the
establishment of a legitimate and credible constitutional
order.

The public results of the investigation clearly dispel
the myth of the just struggle for liberation of the KLA,
which was used in particular to justify the unilateral
declaration of independence of the Serbian region of
Kosovo by the former leaders of that organization.
Those guilty of crimes must be punished, independent
of the position they occupy now. We were worried by

Concerning Belgrade and Pristina’s commitment
to the normalization of their relations, we note with
satisfaction the efforts deployed by Kosovo and the
European Commission to finalize a Stabilization
and Association Agreement. In addition, the onset of
post-electoral talks has allowed Pristina to take a new
direction, the main challenge which will be reform of

14-5220317/27

S/PV.7257

Kosovo

the electoral system. We welcome the progress of the
dialogue with Pristina, facilitated by the European
Union, and the full implementation of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013, in accordance with the
implementation plan of 22 May 2013.
At the local level, we commend the adoption of new
municipal statutes in the north and in Pristina with a
view to normalizing the administrative and budgetary
situation. In the judicial sector, Chad notes that the
Special Investigative Task Force, with the support
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), has collected sufficient proof of ethnic
cleansing of the Serb and Roma populations during
the armed conflict. Similar results have also been
achieved with regard to cases involving violence and
intimidation against the Kosovar Albanian oppposition.
Nevertheless, the prosecution of these allegations can
be addressed only once the special criminal tribunal
has been established to that end. Chad urges the
Kosovar authorities to establish the special tribunal by
early 2015 so as to ensure that justice is served and to
close this painful chapter in the history of the country.
We commend and encourage the efforts of the
Kosovar judicial authorities in their fight against
impunity. With regard to security, Chad strongly
condemns the violent acts in the Mitrovica area, where
violence has claimed victims among law enforcement
officers and civilians, and damaged property belonging
to the Kosovo police, EULEX and UNMIK. Chad
commends the effective intervention and actions of the
Kosovo police, EULEX and the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
in resolving problems involving public disorder, such as
the demonstration of 8 July in Pristina at the Embassy
of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
With regard to human rights, Chad notes with
satisfaction the significant progress of the Working
Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances,
notably the resumption of the exhumation and
identification of bodies. Chad also commends efforts
to promote the voluntary return of 48 displaced persons
to Kosovo. We urge the Kosovar authorities to ensure
the implementation of the law so as to find a lasting
solution to the problem of displaced persons and
refugees and the restitution of their property. We take
this opportunity to encourage the work of UNMIK to
create a reconciliation programme in 18 municipalities,
notably in northern Kosovo, and to commend the
adoption of amendments to the law on the status and

18/27

29/08/2014

the rights of martyrs, invalids, veterans and members
of the Kosovo Liberation Army, civilian victims of war
and their families, and survivors of sexual violence in
order to guarantee their access to compensation.
In conclusion, Chad notes with satisfaction the
two-year extension of the EULEX mandate. Chad
commends the sound management and dedication of
the entire UNMIK team for its work on the ground
and its fruitful collaboration with EULEX, KFOR, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
all United Nations agencies on the ground, and the
institutions of Kosovo. Chad urges the international
community, particularly the Security Council, to
redouble their efforts to support Kosovo at this very
delicate time in its transition towards stability, security,
peace and development.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Special Representative Farid Zarif for his briefing.
We also warmly welcome First Deputy Prime Minister
Ivica Dačić and Foreign Minister Enver Hoxhaj to the
Council and thank them for their statements today.
First, the Republic of Korea congratulates Kosovo
on holding successful elections for the Assembly of
Kosovo. In particular, the large participation of various
ethnic groups and minorities, including the Kosovo
Serbs, is a welcome development. We believe that these
elections represent a big step forward for Kosovo’s
genuine democracy. Looking ahead, we hope that a
new Government can be formed in a timely manner so
that a new leadership can proceed to address the key
challenges facing the country.
Secondly, we are pleased to note that Belgrade
and Pristina are steadily moving forward in their
implementation of the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations of 19 April
2013. Although high-level dialogue between both sides
has not taken place due to the electoral processes,
progress on the ground has been sustained in many
important areas, notably the adoption of new municipal
statutes by the Serb majority municipalities in the
north. Building upon such achievements, we encourage
Serbia and Kosovo to resume the high-level dialogue
facilitated by the European Union (EU) and to continue
to scale up their efforts towards the normalization of
their relations.
Despite these positive developments, we remain
concerned over violent incidents in northern Kosovo,
in particular the actual violence committed during

14-52203

29/08/2014

Kosovo

the demonstration in South Mitrovica. We commend
the timely and appropriate responses of the Kosovo
police, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force, and support
the establishment of a special working group under EU
auspices to prevent a further escalation of the tensions.
Such incidents are a clear reminder of the importance
of a genuine reconciliation process between the
communities. Unless the root causes of ethnic tensions
are duly addressed, the ongoing political process may
face more difficulties. At the same time, it is also vital
to strengthen the rule of law and ensure accountability.
In that regard, we welcome the statement of the Chief
Prosecutor of the European Union Special Investigative
Task Force in connection with the allegations of war
crimes (S/2014/558, annex II). It is also encouraging
that the Kosovo Assembly has authorized the extension
of EULEX’s mandate, including the establishment of a
specialist court. We note with appreciation that Kosovo
has taken concrete action to investigate crimes and
promote reconciliation.
Finally, we once again commend the entire staff
of UNMIK and EULEX, as well as other international
partners, for their tireless efforts to ensure the peace
and stability of Kosovo and the region.
Mr. Bliss (Australia): I would like to thank Special
Representative Zarif for his briefing to the Security
Council today. I also welcome First Deputy Prime
Minister Dačić of Serbia and Foreign Minister Hoxhaj
of Kosovo and thank them for their statements and their
presence.
I also acknowledge the report on the activities of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), and welcome the extension of EULEX’s
mandate through June 2016. The extension, supported
by Kosovo, will ensure that EULEX can continue to
investigate and prosecute serious organized crime,
corruption and war crimes, while helping to build the
capacity of Kosovo’s multi-ethnic justice and police
institutions, and working to progressively transfer tasks
to local institutions.
Australia welcomes the successful holding of
Kosovo Assembly elections on 8 June, which the
European Union (EU) election observation mission
assessed as being transparent and well organized. In a
major achievement, the elections were held peacefully
across the country, including in Kosovo’s four northern
Serb-majority municipalities, under a unified legal

S/PV.7257

framework. We recognize the role of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe in facilitating the
electoral process in northern Kosovo. We acknowledge
the series of political developments in both Serbia and
Kosovo that have slowed high-level dialogue on the
implementation of the 19 April 2013 First Agreement of
Principles on the Normalization of Relations between
the two countries. The delays are understandable but
should not stand in the way of practical steps at the
working level to implement existing agreements. We
recognize that both sides remain committed to the
process, and we call for renewed political dialogue
as soon as a new Government is formed in Kosovo.
Australia commends the European Union’s efforts to
facilitate technical discussions in order to maintain
momentum for dialogue.
We were concerned by the violent clashes that
took place in Mitrovica on 22 June. We commend the
response of the Kosovo police, EULEX and the Kosovo
Force. We strongly encourage all sides, at all levels, to
renounce violence, eschew inflammatory rhetoric and
commit fully to reconciliation and dialogue.
Australia commends the efforts of the European
Union Special Investigative Task Force to investigate
allegations of widespread and systematic crimes
committed after the end of the war in 1999. The work
is challenging and complex, not least because of utterly
unacceptable witness intimidation. It is critical that
the perpetrators of serious international crimes found
to have been committed in Kosovo be held to account
and that no one impedes that process. It is essential
that the specialist court to be established to adjudicate
allegations arising from the work of the Task Force be
set up as soon as possible.
We note the report of the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced
persons, presented in Geneva on 12 June (A/HRC/26/33/
Add.2). While progress has been made in assisting the
230,000 people who were displaced during the Kosovo
conflict in returning to their homes, much remains to
be done. Their return is an essential component of longterm reconciliation in Kosovo.
The shooting of a Serbian police officer on
27 August near the Serbian town of Merdare and close to
the border with Kosovo is a worrying development that
must be investigated. But, as Special Representative
Zarif has said, it will be important not to speculate
on possible political motives. Australia is encouraged
that the overall security situation in Kosovo generally

14-5220319/27

S/PV.7257

Kosovo

remains peaceful. It is essential that the new leadership
in Kosovo, once in place, recommits to dialogue. It was
on the basis of a mutual commitment to such dialogue
that negotiations on a Stabilization and Association
Agreement for Kosovo were concluded and accession
talks with the EU by Serbia opened.
In conclusion, Australia encourages the newly
elected leadership in Pristina and in Belgrade to work
together to consolidate the peaceful future for their
peoples that is within close reach.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Mr. Farid Zarif for presenting the report on
the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2014/558), and we welcome Foreign Ministers Ivica
Dačić and Enver Hoxhaj.
I would like to begin by highlighting the formation
of the new Serbian Government, led by Prime
Minister Aleksandar Vučić, and by commending the
Government’s prompt confirmation of its willingness to
continue its high-level dialogue with Pristina, facilitated
by the European Union, and the full implementation of
the 19 April 2013 First Agreement of Principles on the
Normalization of Relations.
We commend the peaceful and orderly conduct of
the parliamentary elections held in Kosovo on 8 June.
We also appreciate the negotiation and adoption of new
statutes for the Serbian majority municipalities and the
establishment of an association of those municipalities,
as outlined in the Agreement. We urge that the highlevel meetings between Belgrade and Pristina that were
suspended during the elections be re-started as soon
as possible. It is essential that the parties participate
actively in the dialogue facilitated by the European
Union in order to reach their shared goal of better
cooperation in building peace and the rule of law. In that
context, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX) deserve special mention for their
contribution to the process of establishing the rule
of law and maintaining security in Kosovo. We also
welcome the decision to extend EULEX’s activities in
Kosovo for another year.
We are concerned about the acts of violence
committed during the demonstration in South Mitrovica
on 22 June, when the Kosovo police, EULEX and the
Kosovo Force helped to reduce tensions. Such acts pose
a threat to the Agreement between the parties and are

20/27

29/08/2014

a reminder that the road to reconciliation between the
communities is long and hard.
We emphasize the important work of the SerbianKosovo Working Group on Missing Persons, advised by
UNMIK, on the Rudnica exhumation site and consider
it vital that the tasks of exhumation, identification and
return will continue for missing-persons cases. Chile’s
own experience has shown how important such tasks
are to achieving national reconciliation, since they
encourage the search for truth. Equally important to
the reconciliation process is the safe return of refugees
and internally displaced persons, in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999), including their reintegration
into social and economic activities. We also call for
the continued implementation at all levels of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, in order
to enable women to participate fully and effectively
in decision-making and to ensure that due account is
taken of their needs.
In conclusion, we reaffirm the importance of
resolution 1244 (1999) as a fundamental tool to be
used in the region of Kosovo in order to promote its
communities’ reconciliation, stability and prosperity.
We also take this opportunity to express our gratitude
for the work of the Chief Prosecutor of the European
Union Special Investigative Task Force, Mr. Clint
Williamson, who is leaving the post he has held for
three years.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Zarif, for his briefing, and
I welcome the two Ministers who have done us the
honour of being here today, Mr. Dačić and Mr. Hoxhaj.
France is pleased that the elections on 8 June in
Kosovo took place peacefully and transparently. The
robust participation by the Serb community in the
national elections is also a very positive sign. The
election proves that the path of dialogue will enable
balanced solutions to be found for all communities in
Kosovo. We hope now that a compromise will finally
be found on the speedy formation of a Government,
in full respect for democratic institutions. Kosovo
needs a stable Government. That is in the interests of
all the people of Kosovo, given its pressing economic
challenges, as well as in the interests of the region. It is
also the Council’s expectation.
of

More than a year after the historic First Agreement
Principles Governing the Normalization of

14-52203

29/08/2014

Kosovo

Relations, of 19 April 2013, it is in everyone’s interests
that the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade
resume quickly. Both parties will have to demonstrate
a constructive spirit and search for compromise to
allow for the normalization of their relations and for
the implementation of the agreement reached last
year. That will also have an impact on their European
rapprochement, a subject to which I will return. To
accomplish that, the formation of a Government in
Kosovo is a prerequisite. A return to the parties’
courageous willingness to look to the future together
that prevailed in spring 2013 is another.
Kosovo will not be able to turn confidently to
the future without light being shed on its past. We
thank Chief Prosecutor Clint Williamson, the Special
Investigative Task Force and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) as a whole for their
tireless work over the past three years on the allegations
of crimes contained in the Marty report. Now it is up
to Kosovo to shoulder its responsibilities and facilitate
the establishment of a tribunal charged with following
up on the work of EULEX. Given the gravity of the
alleged crimes, the European Union has also expressed
its expectations vis-à-vis the Kosovo authorities as to
the appropriate response.
We do not doubt the willingness of Kosovo to
engage in a legal process that will respond in a fair and
impartial manner to those allegations and to deal with all
aspects of the difficult times that Kosovo experienced
in the late 1990s. A satisfactory outcome to the case
now depends in particular on the political parties in
Pristina, which must demonstrate their maturity and
determination, as they have done in the past.
I would like to condemn the violent incidents that
rocked Kosovo on 22 July, while at the same time
acknowledging the responsible stance adopted by the
security forces in Kosovo in their measured response.
Despite occasional incidents such as the death of a
Serbian policeman and a Kosovo citizen yesterday in the
border area, which we strongly condemn, the security
situation in Kosovo, fortunately, remains stable overall.
I conclude by commending Kosovo and Serbia’s
joint progress towards European Union integration,
following the normalization of their relations. Important
steps have been taken recently by the European
Commission and Pristina for the conclusion of the
European Union-Kosovo Stabilization and Association
Agreement, which is aimed at supporting Kosovo’s
development and reforms and thereby contributing

S/PV.7257

to the stabilization of the region. We hope that the
Agreement will be finalized very soon.
Serbia, meanwhile, has made significant efforts
in terms of internal reforms and relations with its
neighbours. The negotiations for its accession to the
European Union, launched on 21 January, continue and
will have to focus in particular on issues related to the
rule of law. That aspect is advantageous for the entire
region, and we welcome the efforts already made by
​​
Serbia.
It is now up to Serbia and Kosovo to meet their
mutual commitments in order to together continue their
process of European rapprochement.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): I thank Mr. Farid
Zarif, Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for the update. I also thank Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kosovo, for their
statements.
Over the past few years, we have witnessed many
positive developments in the region. The historic
Agreement between Belgrade and Pristina was one
of the most salient examples of that progress. Its
successful implementation will have a positive effect
on the normalization of relations between Kosovo
and Serbia and on overall stability in the region. We
strongly encourage Belgrade and Pristina to continue
to work hard in translating the agreements into results
on the ground and building trust between communities.
Lithuania welcomes the smooth conduct of the
parliamentary elections that were held throughout
Kosovo in June, including in the north. The elections
were transparent and well-organized and consolidated
the progress made in the 2013 municipal elections. The
voter turnout all over Kosovo, including among the
Serbian community in the northern part, was high. We
would like to express our hope that the Government will
be formed as swiftly as possible and that it will respond
to the expectations formulated by the population during
the elections, in particular with respect to strengthening
the rule of law and economic development.
We welcome the accession of Kosovo to the Venice
Commission. Kosovo will benefit from that membership
in terms of a further strengthening of democracy.
Kosovo has the right to ensure security within
its own territory. The International Security Force in

14-5220321/27

S/PV.7257

Kosovo

Kosovo continues to contribute to the maintenance of
peace and stability on the ground, while the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) plays
a key role in the consolidation of the rule of law. We
welcome the extension of the EULEX mandate for
another two years.
The lack of security affects the functioning of
institutions and international actors and people’s day-today lives. We look forward to a thorough investigation
of the incident of 19 September 2013, when a EULEX
Lithuanian officer was killed. We call on the respective
authorities to find the perpetrators and bring them to
justice.
We welcome the decision to create the specialist
court on war crimes to look into cases stemming from
the work of the Special Investigative Task Force and the
statement of findings (S/2014/558, annex II) presented
by its Chief Prosecutor, Mr. Clint Williamson. We
commend Mr. Williamson’s efforts in carrying out
difficult and important work and the cooperation by
the partners, including the Government of Kosovo. The
investigative work should continue. We expect that the
specialist court will be fully functional in 2015 and will
bring those responsible for crimes against humanity
and war crimes to account and ensure belated justice
for victims and survivors.
The support of the international community in
guiding the transformation process in the Western
Balkans proved to be vital. Kosovo seems to be a good
example of how important results can be achieved when
there is concerted action among different international
donors and actors.
Finally, given the progress thus far, my delegation
believes that there is a need to review the current
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) reporting cycle in the Council, with
a view to reducing its frequency and considering the
drawdown in UNMIK in view of the developments on
the ground.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate. I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zarif for
his briefing on the recent developments in Kosovo. I
acknowledge the presence of His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj, and I thank them for their statements.

22/27

29/08/2014

The successful conduct of elections for the Kosovo
Assembly on 8 June is a significant development. We
take positive note of the negotiations on electoral reform,
political dialogue with Belgrade and participation by
Kosovo Serbs in their internal politics. We see merit
in the early conclusion of those negotiations in order to
enable the authorities of Pristina to focus on procedural
challenges, including political dialogue with Belgrade.
We note that, while no high-level meetings were
held during the reporting period, talks facilitated by
the European Union (EU) were held at the technical
level, with a focus on the implementation of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations, of 19 April 2013. We welcome the
commitment of the new Government in Serbia to
the EU-facilitated dialogue with Kosovo and the
full implementation of the Agreement of 19 April
2013. That will no doubt reassure the international
community of Serbia’s desire to continue its quest for
peaceful coexistence with Kosovo. We look forward to
the resumption of high-level talks between both sides,
once a new Government is formed in Priština.
It is essential, in the interest of peace, that unilateral
action and inflammatory rhetoric be avoided in order
to ease the security challenges faced by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo police. We condemn
the violent incidents in Mitrovica that resulted in both
police and civilian casualties and damage to vehicles
belonging to the Kosovo police, UNMIK and EULEX.
We applaud the intervention for peace by the EU
High Representative Catherine Ashton on 11 July and
welcome the establishment of a working group that will
see to the peaceful resolution of the ethnic tensions in
Mitrovica.
In our statement in the previous debate on UNMIK
(see S/PV.7183), we encouraged the unimpeded
resettlement of minority returnees and internally
displaced persons in Kosovo. In that regard, we take
positive note of the voluntary return of 49 IDPs during
the reporting period. We welcome the completion of
UNMIK’s confidence-building measures programme
aimed at promoting reconciliation among the various
communities. We call for the institution of similar
projects to promote reintegration, education and access
to services and economic opportunities for all.

14-52203

29/08/2014

Kosovo

Finally, we commend Special Representative Zarif
and his team for their unrelenting efforts to promote
peace and stability in Kosovo.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Zarif, for his briefing. I
welcome the presence and statement of His Excellency
Mr. Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia in today’s meeting. I have
also listened attentively to the statement of Mr. Hoxhaj.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and appreciates Serbia’s reasonable
concerns about the question of Kosovo. Council
resolution 1244 (1999) is the important legal basis for
settling the question of Kosovo. China’s view is that,
in addressing the issue of Kosovo, it is imperative to
uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, work within the framework of the
relevant Council resolutions and find an appropriate
solution that is acceptable to both parties through
dialogue and negotiation.
The security situation in Kosovo has remained
mostly peaceful of late. However, violent incidents
continue to take place in the north. China believes that
all relevant parties should undertake concrete measures
to protect the legitimate rights of all communities in
Kosovo and promote intercommunal reconciliation.
At the same time, all parties should adopt a prudent
attitude, stay the course in resolving disputes and
differences through dialogue and avoid any actions that
may lead to complication or escalation of the situation.
China appreciates Serbia’s active efforts in seeking
a political settlement regarding the question of Kosovo.
China welcomes and supports the continued efforts
of both Belgrade and Priština towards maintaining
and furthering the high-level political dialogue and
in implementing the bilateral agreements already
achieved. China believes that the continued efforts
of both sides to promote a pragmatic, positive and
constructive dialogue process and seek a lasting
solution to the question of Kosovo will contribute to the
maintenance of peace and security in the Balkans and
all of Europe. The search for an appropriate settlement
of the question of Kosovo through efforts to strengthen
the harmonious coexistence of all communities and
simultaneous economic and social development in
Kosovo is in line with the common objective of the
international community and the aim of our concerted
efforts.

S/PV.7257

China appreciates the work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
under the leadership of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zarif. We support the continued
implementation of the Security Council’s mandate
by the Mission. We hope that various international
presences, including UNMIK, the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force,
will work in accordance with their respective mandates
to strengthen coordination and cooperation and play
a positive and constructive role in promoting an
appropriate settlement of the question of Kosovo.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Let me at the outset
thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, for his comprehensive
briefing and for his continued leadership at the head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).
I also thank His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić,
Deputy Prime Minster and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj of Kosovo for their
statements.
Rwanda welcomes the commitment of the new
Government of Serbia to the dialogue with Pristina,
facilitated by the European Union (EU), and to
the full implementation of the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
of 19 April 2013. We equally welcome the holding on
8 June of peaceful, transparent and well organized
elections for the Assembly of Kosovo, following the
dissolution of the previous Assembly. We commend
the Kosovo authorities, working with the support of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
for the smooth organization of the elections. We
extend our appreciation to the Kosovo police, which,
in coordination with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force,
provided security for the elections.
We note, however, that owing to electoral and
political procedures on both sides, the EU-facilitated
process slowed down, as no high-level meeting was
held during the reporting period. But we are confident
that the parties will soon resume dialogue to iron
out the underlying differences in that respect, and
we call for the leadership of the European Union in
facilitating the dialogue. We believe it is one of the
examples highlighting the crucial role that regional and
subregional organizations can play in the maintenance
of international peace and security.

14-5220323/27

S/PV.7257

Kosovo

We note that the security situation in Kosovo has
remained generally calm and stable despite various
incidents, such as the incident near the villages of
Orlovac and Kushtovë/Košutovo, of which the Council
was informed by the Special Representative. In northern
Kosovo, we deplore the incidents that occurred in
June in the area of the main Mitrovica bridge, which
led to rising tensions and protests, during which 13
police officers and 12 civilians were injured. However,
we are encouraged by the establishment by Belgrade
and Priština of a working group, following a meeting
held in July between both sides, under the auspices of
the EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy in Brussels, to discuss the matter. We
hope that both sides will continue working together to
avoid further security incidents.
Rwanda takes note with concern of the findings
of the EULEX Special Investigative Task Force, as
presented by its Chief Prosecutor on 29 July. We were
also alarmed by reports of ethnic cleaning targeting
minorities, organized by former senior officials of
the Kosovo Liberation Army, as well as a climate of
intimidation against current and potential witnesses. In
that regard, we welcome the ratification by the Kosovo
Assembly of the agreement between Kosovo and the
EU establishing a specialized court to try cases arising
from the findings of the task force. But it is important
that the Government and the Assembly of Kosovo, as
well as the European Union, take additional measures
to expedite the establishment of the court in order to
ensure that the perpetrators are held accountable.
It is unfortunate that the voluntary return of
displaced persons to Kosovo remained low during
the period under review. Nonetheless, we commend
the Kosovo authorities for the implementation of the
2013/2014 confidence-building measures programme
throughout the country, aimed at promoting genuine
reconciliation among the communities. We believe
that community-based initiatives and other projects,
particularly those aimed at integrating minorities
into the education system and into the public service,
including the police, will eventually contribute to a
higher number of returnees, thus fostering sustainable
reconciliation.
In conclusion, Rwanda recognizes the commitment
of Belgrade and Priština to the EU-facilitated dialogue,
and we encourage both sides to remain constructively
engaged, as we are convinced that the process will

24/27

29/08/2014

ultimately lead to long-term stability, reconciliation
and development on both sides.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing
today, not least because it is now very late at night
for him, and for introducing the Secretary-General’s
quarterly report (S/2014/558). I am delighted to welcome
Foreign Ministers Hoxhaj and Dačić to the Council.
The United Kingdom welcomes Kosovo’s continued
progress both internally and on the international stage.
Kosovo is now recognized by well over half of the
States Members of the United Nations. We encourage
those countries that have not yet recognized it to do
so. The United Kingdom commends Kosovo on the
peaceful conduct of its elections on 8 June and the fact
that both Kosovo and Serbia encouraged the people to
vote. We hope that new leadership in Pristina will be
decided soon, and in accordance with the law.
We welcome the new Government of Serbia’s
commitment to continuing the high-level dialogue
with Pristina facilitated by the European Union. The
normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia
is integral to both countries’ European Union accession
paths. The full implementation of the dialogue
Agreement is necessary to unlock progress. We
encourage both sides to resume higher-level meetings
on further agreements once the new Government of
Kosovo is in place, and urge that continued progress be
made at the working level in this interim period. Both
sides must work to implement existing agreements. This
is a priority, especially for those elements that require
further unilateral work, such as telecommunications
and the adjustment of relevant legal frameworks.
We condemn the violence that arose during
the demonstrations in South Mitrovica on 22 June.
We join the Secretary-General in commending the
professionalism shown by the Kosovo police, the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and the Kosovo Force in responding to the
violence. It is important for the continued progress
of the dialogue that communities are consulted about
decisions that affect them, in order to lay the ground for
their peaceful and cooperative engagement with such
changes. The United Kingdom welcomes the extension
of EULEX’s mandate for a further two years, especially

14-52203

29/08/2014

Kosovo

its work continuing the strengthening of Kosovo’s
rule-of-law and justice institutions.
We welcome the recent Kosovo police operation
on 11 August to arrest 40 individuals alleged to have
been fighting in Syria and Iraq on charges of terrorism,
and the seven arrests that have been made since. We
applaud the Kosovo authorities’ determination to tackle
extremism and foreign fighters, and encourage more
close cooperation between police and security services
in the region, and more widely, to deal with such risks.
Like others, we have taken careful note of the 29 July
report issued by the Chief Prosecutor of the European
Union Special Investigative Task Force, Mr. Clint
Williamson, following his team’s two-and-a-half-year
investigation of the allegations in the 2010 report by
Council of Europe Rapporteur Marty. We welcome
Kosovo’s renewed agreement on cooperating with
establishing judicial proceedings for the investigation
and the European Union’s agreement to support a court
through EULEX.
Finally, given Kosovo’s continued progress and the
improved relationship between Pristina and Belgrade,
the United Kingdom agrees with Lithuania that we
could meet less often in this format. We should not lose
our focus, but we should recognize progress when we
see it.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hoxhaj, who has asked
to make a further statement.
Mr. Hoxhaj: I am aware that this has been a fairly
long meeting, so I will be fairly brief. I would like to
make a couple of points in response to the statement
made today by the representative of the Russian
delegation.
Kosovo is seriously concerned about the escalation
of the conflicts in Iraq and Syria and about Russia’s
increasing aggression against Ukraine. Like the rest
of the international community, Kosovo is shocked
by the brutal acts of violence being committed in
those countries and has condemned them. Regarding
Syria, a small number of citizens from our region have
participated in the ongoing conflict there. Kosovo has
condemned them for taking part in a foreign conflict
and has taken preventive and legal measures against
them. Some of them have been arrested.

S/PV.7257

We are also against the participation of citizens
of Serbia in support of the pro-Russian separatist
groups in eastern Ukraine. I do not think that the
Russian Federation is in any position today to preach
about the situation in Kosovo or to express concerns
about our region. Russia is crossing every red line of
international order, law and practice. We condemned
Russia’s occupation of Crimea as we now condemn the
current aggression in eastern Ukraine. Because of this,
Russia has lost most of the international credibility
and legitimacy that would allow it to preach about
international peace, justice and stability. Russia is
currently becoming the main threat to international
peace and stability.
Here I would also like to reiterate the concern of
the Republic of Kosovo about the Russian-Serbian airforce drills that have been announced for 2015, and
other military activities organized between those two
countries, as a dangerous development for security and
stability in south-eastern Europe.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia, who has asked to make a
further statement.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation
provided by the delegation): I am surprised at Mr. Hoxhaj’s
words. Kosovo is not in a position to lecture anyone
about international law, considering that it unilaterally
declared independence from our country without any
kind of agreement. Do we want to re-examine the past
or talk about the future? I do not know why Mr. Hoxhaj
is involving Serbia in his discussion with Russia. If
he has something to say against Russia, what kind of
joint Russian-Serbian activity is he talking about? He
is misusing this meeting of the Security Council for the
purposes of purveying classic propaganda.
When we were in Berlin two years ago, we talked
about peace and security and about consolidating and
normalizing the situation. Does Mr. Hoxhaj think this
is his contribution to that? In the more than 10 times I
have been here with Prime Minister Thaçi I have never
discussed such things with him. I would therefore
like to ask every other member of the Government of
Kosovo to try not to be more Catholic than the Pope.
I want our relations to be normalized. Serbia does
not participate in any acts of aggression anywhere in
the world. If our citizens go to Syria and Iraq or our
Islamist citizens participate in jihadist activities, we
would condemn that most strongly, and the same goes

14-5220325/27

S/PV.7257

Kosovo

for those who volunteer to be on the side of pro-Russian
forces in Ukraine.
But I believe that what Mr. Hoxhaj is doing in
using this Security Council meeting to lecture others,
including Serbia, is a classic example of abuse of that
privilege. Today we are discussing Kosovo and the
situation of human rights there. We are discussing the
commitments that Kosovo has made under the Brussels
Agreement that I myself signed, together with Hashim
Thaçi. What about the Agreement’s stipulations on an
amnesty law and on the creation of a community of
Serbian municipalities? What is going on with that? I
am trying to arrive at agreements and an understanding
so that we can move forward and make progress.
I think the representative of France put it best when
he spoke to Mr. Hoxhaj in Pristina, but I agree that
what he said also applies to Belgrade. He said that we
cannot face our future if we do not shine a light on our
past — but do we want to continue to live in the past?
We want to reach a political solution with Kosovo. Does
the representative of Kosovo believe that the solution
has already been found? Kosovo unilaterally declared
independence, which some other countries now
support. The President of the Security Council invited
all members to recognize the independence of Kosovo,
and I did not react, although I believe that it is very
much in contravention of international law. Yesterday,
Council members discussed the issue of declarations of
independence in other parts of the world without the
agreement of the country that is being divided. Today,
however, we talked about the fact that Serbia has really
paid a lot for its mistakes. Are we going to continue to
live in the past, or does the representative of Kosovo
want to move forward? Otherwise I do not see the
reason for this discussion.
I believe that the representative of Kosovo and I
will not resolve the world’s problems. We will not
resolve the crises in Syria, Ukraine or in Iraq. However,
let us resolve our own crisis. I advise the representative
of Kosovo to devote himself to that endeavour.
I have never exercised the right of reply in the past.
It was not until now, when the representative of Kosovo
did so, that I, too, am now replying. I think we should
be careful about what words we utter in this Chamber.
I did not want to insult any member of the Security
Council. I wanted to be nice and polite to my colleagues
with whom I participated in the Brussels negotiation
process. I had several meetings with Prime Minister
Thaçi. Together we signed the Brussels Agreement.
26/27

29/08/2014

Yesterday we were in Berlin, where we discussed the
future with Angela Merkel and the representatives of
all of the countries of the Western Balkans. However, if
our future is to be determined only by what happened
in the past, it is useless to talk about the future.
We respect everything that Mr. Hoxhaj said.
I think that he is just trying to provoke a discussion
about something that does not really have to do with
our mutual relations. I do not want to give myself too
much historical importance by saying that my decision
is crucial for the resolution of international crises.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I believe that Mr. Hoxhaj’s comments are an
attempt to lead the discussion away from the topics that
we have been discussing today.
With regard to the events in Crimea, I would like
to recall that over 80 per cent of voters in Crimea took
part in the referendum there, unlike in the elections
in Kosovo, which some members of the Council have
said involved a high level of participation and in which
only 41 per cent of voters took part. As a result of
the referendum in Crimea, over 90 per cent of voters
voted in favour of independence. Only then was a
decision made to include Crimea as part of the Russian
Federation.
With regard to the comments that Mr. Hoxhaj
did not like concerning the fact that the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/558) does not
mention the participation of Kosovars in the conflict
in Syria and Iraq and the fact that Kosovo has adopted
legislation that prohibits such activity, the point
was to draw attention to the fact that in his previous
report (S/2014/305) the Secretary-General specifically
mentioned those issues, and today, in spite of the fact
that the report was in fact published two weeks late,
those facts were not duly reflected.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of
August, I want to express my delegation’s very sincere
appreciation first of all to the Secretariat. When one
sits in the President’s chair, one realizes quite how
much the Secretariat does quietly behind the scenes,
and I for one hugely appreciate it. I also want to express

14-52203

29/08/2014

Kosovo

S/PV.7257

my appreciation, and that of my delegation, for the
interpreters who have worked extremely hard, but who
have had a particularly tough time this month, as we
have enforced the five-minute rule. That has meant,
however, that some delegations, instead of shortening
their statements, have read them faster.

including some thematic issues, that have required
real compromise. Therefore, I really want to thank
all Council members and their teams for the spirit
of compromise and dynamism that they have shown,
which has allowed us to get through the enormous
amount of business.

I would also like to thank very much the members
of the Council. This has been an exceptionally busy
month. We have had six resolutions before the Council
in the month of August and five unscheduled meetings.
We have covered some very controversial issues,

I also want to wish the United States delegation
very good luck for the month of September. I hope they
will not take this the wrong way, but I hope I do not see
Council members over the weekend.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

14-5220327/27
