RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED AND DECISIONS TAKEN
BY THE SECURITY COUNCIL IN 1948
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTEES ET DECISIONS PRISES
PAR LE CONSEIL DE SECURITE Er 1 1948

Part I. Questions considered by the
Security Council under its responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security

Premiere partie. Questions examinees par
le Conseil de securite en tant qu' organe
responsable du maintien de la paix et
de la securite internationale

THE INDIA-PAKISTAN QUESTION

LA QUESTIONINDE-PAK.ISTAN

Decision

Decision

At its 226th meeting, on 6 January 1948, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of India
and Pakistan to participate, without vote, iu the
discussion of the question.

A sa 226• seance, le 6 janvier 1948, le Conseil a
decide d'inviter les representants de I'lnde et du
Pakistan a participer, sans droit de vote, a la discussion de la question.

38 (1948). Resolution of 17 January 1948

38 (1948). Resolution du 17 janvier 1948

[S/651]
The Security Council,
Having heard statements on the situation in Kashmir
from representatives of the Governments of India and
Pakistan,
Recognizing the urgency of the situation,
Taking note of the telegram addressed on 6 January
1948 by its President to each of the parties 1 and of
their replies thereto, 2 in which they affirmed their
intention to conform to the Charter of the United
Nations.

[S/651]
Le Conseil de securite,
Ayant entendu les declarations faites par Jes representants des Gouvernements de l'Inde et du Pakistan
sur la situation dans le Cachemire,
Reconnaissant le caractere d'urgence de la situation,
Prenant acte du telegramme adresse le 6 janvier 1948
par le President du Conseil a chacune des parties1,
ainsi que de la reponse qu'elles y ont faites 2 ou elles
aflirment leur intention de se conformer a la Charte
des Nations Unies,
I. Fait appel au Gouvernement de l'Inde et au
Gouvernement du Pakistan pour que chacun d'eux
prenne immediatement toutes les mesures en son
pouvoir (y compris des appels publics a ses populations) a l'eflet d'ameliorer la situation, et s'abstienne
de faire aucune declaration et d'accomplir, de provo-

1. Calls upon both the Government of India and
the Government of Pakistan to take immediately all
measures within their power (including public appeals
to their people) calculated to improve the situation,
and to refrain from making any statements and from

1 Voir Proces-verbaux officie/s du Conseil de securite,
troisieme annee, n•• 1/ 15, 226' seance, p. 4 et 5 (document S/636).
2 Ibid., troisieme annee, Supplement de janvier, fevrier et
mars 1948, documents S/639 et S/640.

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Third Yeali,
Nos. 1-15, 226th meeting. pp. 4-5 (document S/636).
2 Ibid., Third Year, Supplement for January, February and
March 1948, documents S/639 and S/640.

1

doing or causing to be done or permitting any acts
which might aggravate the situation ;
2. Further requests each of those Governments to
inform the Council immediately of any material change
in the situation which occurs or appears to either of
them to be about to occur while the matter is under
consideration by the Council, and consult with the
Council thereon.

quer ou de permettre aucun acte susceptible d'aggraver
la situation ;
2. Demande, en outre, a chacun desdits Gouvernements que, tant que l'affaire est pendante devant le
Conseil, il informe celui-ci de tout changement materiel que la situation subirait ou serait, a son avis, sur
le point de subir, et qu'il consulte le Conseil a ce
sujet.

Adopted at the 229th meeting by 9 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Adoptee a la 229' si>ance
par 9 voix contre zero, avec
2 abstentions (Republique
socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques).

Decision

Decision

At its 229th meeting, on 17 January 1948, the
Council decided that the President should invite the
representatives of India and Pakistan to take part in
direct talks under his guidance in an effort to find
some common ground on which the structure of a
settlement might be built.

A sa 229• seance, le 17 janvier 1948, le Conseil
a decide que le President devait inviter Jes representants de l'Inde et du Pakistan a se rencontrer sous ses
auspices pour essayer de trouver un terrain d'entente
a partir duquel puisse etre elabore un reglement.

39 (1948). Resolution of 20 January 1948

39 (1948). Resolution du 20 janvier 1948

[S/654]
The Security Council,
Considering that it may investigate any dispute or
any situation which might, by its continuance, endanger
the maintenance of international peace and security
and that, in the existing state of affairs between India
and Pakistan, such an investigation is a matter of
urgency,
Adopts the following resolution :
A. A Commission of the Security Council is hereby
established, composed of representatives of three Members of the United Nations, one to be selected by
India, one to be selected by Pakistan, and the third
to be designated by the two so selected. 3 Each
representative on the Commission shall be entitled to
select his alternates and assistants.
B. The Commission shall proceed to the spot as
quickly as possible. It shall act under the authority
of the Security Council and in accordance with the
directions it may receive from it. It shall keep the
Security Council currently informed of its activities
and of the development of the situation. It shall report
to the Security Council regularly, submitting its conclusions and proposals.
C. The Commission is invested with a dual function: (1) to investigate the facts pursuant to Article 34

[S/654]
Le Conseil de securite,
Considerant qu'il peut enqueter sur tout differend
ou toute situation qui pourrait, par sa prolongation,
menacer le maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales, et que, dans l'etat actuel des choses entre
l'Inde et le Pakistan, une telle enquete s'impose
d'urgence,
Adopte la resolution suivante:
A. 11 est constitue une Commission du Conseil de
securite, composee de representants de trois Membres
de !'Organisation des Nations Unies, dont l'un sera
choisi par l'Inde, l'autre par le Pakistan et le troisieme
par les deux premiers3 • Chaque membre de la
Commission sera habilite a choisir ses suppleants et
assistants.
B. La Commission se rendra sur les lieux le plus
tot possible. Elle agira sous l'autorite du Conseil de
securite et conformement aux instructions qu'elle en
recevra. Elle tiendra le Conseil au courant de son
activite et de !'evolution de la situation. Elle lui fera
regulierement rapport, lui soumettant ses conclusions
et propositions.
C. La Commission est investie d'une double
fonction : 1) proceder a une enquete sur les faits en

8 By its resolution 47 (1948), the Council decided to
increase the membership of the Commission to five. The
composition of the Commission is given below, following
that resolution.

3

Par sa resolution 47 (1948), le Conseil a decide de porter

a cinq le nombre des membres de la Commission. La composition de celle-ci figure ci-apres, a la suite de ladite
resolution.

2
