UiVITEDlVATIONS

RITY
OFFICIAL

COUNC1.L
RECORDS

THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

10 OCTOBER

1978

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

. . . . . . . . . . ( . . . . . . . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 6 October 1978 from the Permanent Representative
of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12885) . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2090)

Adoption

of the agenda

S/PV.2090
g

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicatesthe supplementin which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordancewith a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of ResolutionsnrzdDecisiom of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, becamefully operative on that date.

2090th

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday,

10 October

President: Mr. Jacques LEPRETTE (France).

1978, at 3.30 p.m.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I
should now like to read out the new text of operative
paragraph 4, which will be used to replace the version
circulated in document S/ 12887 :

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

“Expresses the hope that the United States of America
will continue to exert its influence in order that genuine
majority rule may be achieved without further delay in
Southern Rhodesia”.
4. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the members
of the Council are ready to proceed to vote on the draft
resolution as amended[S/12887fReY.IJ.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2090)
1. Adoption of the agenda

A vote was taken by show of hands.

2. Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 6 October 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2885)

In favour: Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
India, Kuwait, Mauritius, Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, Venezuela.
Against: None.

The meeting was called to order at 5 p.m.
Abstaining:
Canada, Germany, Federal Republic of,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

Adoption of the agenda

The draft resolution
with 4 abstentions. 1

The agenda was adopted,
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 6 October 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/12885)

MS adopted by 11 votes to none,

5. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Mr, President, my delegation
extends to you its congratulations and good wishes on your
presidency of the Council for this month. There is a good
deal of important work to be done and difficult problems
will come up this month. It is indeed reassuring that YOU
are at the head of the Council, You have already demonstrated that you possess in large measure the special
qualities and skill that are needed to maint,ain the authority
of the Council.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Rench): Members of the Council have before them the text of a draft
resolution submitted by India, Kuwait, Mauritius and
Nigeria and circulated as document S/12887. The Council
also has before it document S/12885, which contains the
text of a letter dated 6 October 19’78 from the representative of India in his capacity as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established in pursuance of
resolution 253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern
Rhodesia.

6. The question before us today, namely, the violation of
the Council’s sanctions resulting from the visit to the
United States of Mr. Ian Smith, is not as simple as it might
seem. It is a matter for regret that the United States
Administration
felt obliged by the exceptional circumstances of the request for a visa for Mr. Smith to allow him
to enter the United States. My delegation does not agree
that the refusal of a visa for Mr. Smith might have been just
as bad as, if not worse than, the grant of a visa to him. What
is worse is the purpose for which Mr. Smith is using his
visit. He is obviously bent on winning support for a possible

2. Certain delegations have indicated to me their desire to
submit an amendment to document S/12887. In order to
facilitate the preparation of the text, I propose, unless
someone wishes to speak now, to suspend the meeting for
10 minutes.
L%e meeting was suspended at 5.05 p.m. and resumed at
5.15 p.m.

1 See resolution 437
1

(1978).

circles, whose clear intention it is to hamper any attempt to
find a just solution to the problem. My delegation feels that
internal decisions adopted by States in exercise of their
sovereign rights should be respected, but when such
decisions affect international commitments and ignore
obligations entered into through agreements in which those
States have taken part we feel it our duty to draw attention
to such counterproductive decisions.

withdrawal or suspension of’ sanctions since the future of
his illegal regime is closely linked to that. It is essential,
therefore, that the United States should maintain the
sanctions and scrupulously observe them. It is, of course,
within the power of the United States to do so, and indeed
the United States Government in its official statement
/S/12885, annexZ] has declared its intention to continue
to comply with Security Council sanctions. My delegation
welcomes that declaration of intention.

12. We are very well aware of the origin of such moves,
decided as they are by the ignoble, petty economic
interests, which are heeded by those intransigent circles
acting against the progressive trend of history. They are the
same circles that until recently opposed the initiatives taken
by President Carter to achieve the signing of a treaty in
relation to the Panama Canal, which amended long-standing
injustices and imperial acts. They are the same circles that
persistently advocate a return to the cold war. These are
people who are living 100 years behind the times and who
have a calcified, hard-headed attitude which prevents them
from seeing clearly the advantage of bringing themselves up
to date with the demands of the present. Those circles
which are now offering protection and support to the illegal
Smith regime are the same that offer protection and
support to the illegal, cruel and despotic regime of Somosa
in Nicaragua and condone the acts of genocide carried out
by that dictatorship against the noble and gallant people of
Nicaragua.

7. However, what might be more difficult for the United
States to do is to convince Mr. Smith of his mistaken ways
and that he should hand over power to a majority
Government freely elected on the basis of one man, one
vote. However, Mr. Smith may prove to be more susceptibIe
to pressure than to persuasion. At any rate, we hope that
the opposition of the United States Government to the
Smith regime will stiffen and that the forces in favour of
genuine majority rule will gain in strength.
8. In conclusion, I cannot help feeling that the Council
should have acted much earlier, and certainly before the
arrival of Mr. Smith. After all, it was public knowledge for
some weeks that Mr. Smith would be going to Washington
on invitation. Therefore, in conformity with its resolution
253 (1968), the Council could have called on the United
States in time to prevent Mr. Smith’s entry. The Council’s
failure to do so is a reflection of our own unsatisfactory
work methods. The question before us is not an allegation
of the violation of sanctions that needed investigation b.y
the Committee on Sanctions established in implementation
of that resolution; it is a political question, purely and
simply, and should have been taken up directly by the
Council. We have another similar case of proved violation of
sanctions in the Bingham report [see S/12894/ and I trust
that the Council will deal with it rather than leave it to the
Committee on Sanctions.

13. Our delegation considers that by acting in that way
they push those people to violence as the only effective
form of struggle to free themselves from the repression of
tyranny. We believe that, fortunately, such circles represent
a very small minority by comparison with the vast majority
which does not share their outdated and obscurantist
philosophy. It is possible that in acting in that way they
may obtain partial victories, but it is equally certain that in
the long run they will be beaten, because they are going
against the tide of history, against civic sense and the ethics
of the international community.

9. Mr. CARP10 CASTILLO (Venezuela) (interpretation
~?orrz Spanish): My delegation considers that we are dealing
with a serious event which involves the authority of the
United Nations and the Security Council. Further, it affects
the very prestige of the Organization because one Member
State has failed to comply with a Council resolution
relating to the treatment of the Southern Rhodesian regime
represented by Mr. Ian Smith.

14. My delegation also considers that the presence of Iarr
Smith in the United States, because of its negative
implications, may undermine the negotiating power of the
international community in the search for a peaceful
solution to the problem of the illegal occupation and the
independence of Namibia. The violation of the decisions of
the Security Council can only encourage those in South
Africa who are convinced that the hard line, the rigid
approach, sooner or later pays dividends in the weakening
or yielding of those who precisely have within their reach
the most effective instruments of pressure to bring to bear
against the most obdurate defenders and promoters of
illegahty and colonialism. In this respect, the precedent set
by the Smith visit to the United States could not be more
negative.

10. Mr. Smith is a rebel against the metropolitan Government responsible for the Territory and his Government has
usurped that power in order to impose the domination of a
racist minority on the people of Zimbabwe, which should
be allowed freely to determine its own future, Mr, Smith
and his groups of followers have hampered the process of
decolonization begun by the United Kingdom and have
obstinately opposed the international community, ignoring
the resolutions of the Security Council, On 12 November
1965, the Council adopted resolution 216 (1965) in which
the illegality of that spurious Government was declared and
its obduracy in rejecting a democratic solution for the
Territory of Zimbabwe was condemned.

15. In voting for the resolution we have just adopted, my
delegation wished to reaffirm its conviction that we must
maintain pressure on the illegal Smith regime to transfer
power to a Government representmg the real majority of
the people of Zimbabwe, which is a prerequisite for its
legitimacy and, consequently, its recognition by the inter.
national community.

1 I. It is in these circumstances that an invitation has been
extended to Mr. Smith to visit the United States at the
instigation and on the very strong pressure of reactionary
2

16. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Let me begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. In the few days since you assumed
the captaincy and presidency of the Council, you have
already displayed remarkable skill and a dignified composure which command sincere admiration. We wish you
good luck and pledge our co-operation.

out for converts. This brings home to us the danger
involved in preaching and defending the illegal. There has
undoubtedly been a collapse of the internationally maintained blackout on the views of the racist minority led by
Smith. An exit from the political and propagandistisolation
was offered and Smith wasted no time in maximizing the
advantage, presentinghis views and blasting his foes, whom
he portrays asinsatiably blood-thirsty.

17. I should like also to express to the outgoing President,
Ambassador Hulinskg of Czechoslovakia, our appreciation
of the able manner in which he conducted the deliberations
of last month. We thank him sincerely.

22. The opposition to the decision of the United States
Government becomesmore legitimate in the light of the
fact that an internationally boycotted illegal regime is
allowed to beamout its offensive views in a city that houses
the Headquartersof the United Nations, the very Organization that has declared that regime illegal and imposed
sanctions on it with a view to bringing about its downfall.
That act is untenable and becomesmore so in view of the
highly publicized concern for human rights. We are here to
take stepsagainstan act which is contrary to human rights,
in breach of fundamental human freedomsand in violation
of Security Council resolutions and the Charter of the
United Nations. It in no way promotes the rights of the
majority in Zimbabwe to give the embodiment of illegality
a propagandist red-carpet and VIP treatment that is usually
reservedfor the privileged few.

18. My delegation was in favour of holding a formal
meeting of the Security Council to discuss Smith’s visit to
the United States. My delegation believes that there is a
great advantage in such a meeting as it underlines the fact
that the Council views that visit with the seriousness that it
warrants. We were of the view that a secret exchange of
views or a closed meeting of the Council in an informal
session was not commensurate with the grave implications
of Smith’s visit. We have no reason to doubt the sincerity of
the United States Government, but we are certain that
Smith will take advantage of the visit to launch a
propaganda offensive to impress on American public
opinion the merit of his internal settlement. Yesterday was
in fact his field day in New York. We are sceptical about
the advantages of such a visit in regard to its utilization to
put pressure on him concerning majority rule in Zimbabwe.
My delegation drew attention to the danger of granting
Mr. Smith a flood of publicity. He is on the crest of the
wave of propaganda in his campaign to sell the internal
settlement to American public opinion.

23. In this regard, my delegationexpressesits disappointment that four Western Powers failed to support the
resolution,
24. My delegation is happy with the speedwith which the
Council acted on this grave development, which is unacceptable even in terms of human rights, quite apart from its
political implication’sasdefiance of the Council’s authority.
The senseof urgency, coupled with regret, that prompted
the Council to adopt this resolution should not be lost on
those who mastermindedthe abominablepropagandacrusadewhich Ian Smith is conducting.

19. The convining of the Council in order to reaffirm its
resolution 253 (1968), including paragraph 5 b, s1mw.s the
Council’s awarenessof the implications of this visit. It
could not afford to remain indifferent to such a gross
violation of its resolution. No doubt it is the continued
violation of that resolution that has so far kept the illegal
rdgime intact. Some may argue that, on the face of it, the
visit by Smith to the United Statesdoesnot seemso tragic.
It is the significanceand the consequences
that have urged
the Council to deliberate and to act in order to discouragea
repetition of the violation of its resolution. It was in this
spirit that my delegation joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution just adopted.

25. My delegation hopes that the reaction of the Council
to the decision of the United States Government will be
given its place in the American massmedia and not be lost
in the midst of the media stampedetriggered by Smith’s
visit. It is true that the massmedia never courts the banal,
but it is equally true that it is immoral to court the illegal.
Furthermore, it is obvious that the illegal r6gime in
Zimbabwe wants to inveigle the United Statesinto defending the internal settlement inasmuch asit wants the United
States to accept its assessment
of what the United States
can do to bolster the internal deal. In sum, the whole affair
boils down to salesmanshipregarding a deal which the
Security Council declaredasunacceptable.My delegation is
pleased with the speedy action of the Council and hopes
that the salestalk which Mr. Smith beamsout will fall on
deaf ears.

20. The delicacy of the issueof sanctionsis such that the
whole edifice falls apart if one component is ripped off.
Violations must be nipped in the bud, otherwise reluctant
applicants of sanctionswill follow suit. In other words, the
United States action should not be allowed to blaze the
trail for others. In this connexion, my delegationis gratified
to note that the United States did not opposethe decision
of the Council calling on it to observescrupulously the
provisions of Council resolutions concerning sanctions.
That shows that the visit goes against the grain of the
collective will of the Council, including the United States.

26. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (interpretation frurn Chimse):
Recently, in disregard of the strong opposition of world
opinion, the United States Government has flagrantly
decided to grant entry visasto Ian Smith, chieftain of the
racist r6gime in Southern Rhodesia, and others. This is in
direct contravention and violation of the relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and the resolutionsof
the Security Council on mandatory sanctions against the

21. My delegationalsowishesto expressits deep senseof
resentmentat the fanfare that has greetedMr, Smith’s visit
to the United States. It is obvious that he is making the
Inost of the sophisticated American massmedia to reach
3

racist regime in Southern Rhodesia. The fact that it is the
United States, a permanent member of the Security Council
that voted in favour of resolution 253 (1968), that has seen
fit to resort to the above course has added to the gravity of
the issue. The Chinese delegation cannot but express very
deep regret at it.
27. In recent years, with the continued development of
the Zimbabwe national liberation movement and the
powerful pressure of world opinion, the Smith racist regime
is beset with difficulties both at home and abroad and finds
itself in increasing isolation. While intensifying its repression of the Zimbabwe people at home, it has been
committing ceaseless aggression against the neighbouring
countries and obstinately pressing forward with its political
trick of a so-called internal settlement in an attempt to
legalize the white racist regime and thereby to perpetuate
its reactionary rule. In these circumstances, the action
taken by the United States Government cannot but arouse
concern.
28. It should also be pointed out here that, since the
adoption of resolution 253 (1968) on the sanctions against
the racist regime in Southern Rhodesia, this relevant
resolution is far from being effectively implemented. The
Security Council must not remain indifferent to this. The
Chinese delegation holds that the Council should deal
seriously with the aforementioned violation committed by
the United States Government and that, pending the
attainment of genuine independence by the Zimbabwe
people, the sanctions against the Smith racist regime must
only be strengthened and not weakened in any way.
29. Mr. PETREE (United States of America): I will be
brief in my remarks because I believe that a fair examination of the record would amply demonstrate that the
United States has been foremost in seeking to bring about a
peaceful resolution of the deeply troubling problem of
Rhodesia.
30. The decision by the United States to issue a visa to Ian
Smith, on an exceptional basis, was made only after the
most careful consideration. In reaching this decision, my
Government wasdeeply conscious of its commitment under
the Charter of the United Nations to imposing and
maintaining sanctions against the illegal regime in Rhodesia.
We were also profoundly aware of the ultimate purpose of
those sanctions: to bring the iIlega1 regime to an end and to
bring about anindependent Zimbabwe under the rule of a
majority of its population. Thus, the visa was finally issued
because it would permit a continuation of the discussions
which the United States and others have pursued in a
variety of locations with the many parties involved in the
tragedy of Rhodesia, What the issuance of this visa means is
that there is an additional chance to advance the cause of
majority rule and peaceful settlement, It does not mean
that the United States has decided to violate its respon.
sibihties, recognize the Smith regime or lift embargoes on
trade with Rhodesia.
31. As for the draft resolution which was considered
today, the United States will not take a position on its
merits or the fairness or the impartiality with which it
presents the issue. Since we are a party to this particular

matter, and acting in the spirit of Article 27, paragraph 3,
of the Charter, the United States has abstained,
32. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Mr. President,
first of all, I should like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the lofty and responsible functions of
President of the Council for this month. We are pleased to
see in that post the representative of France, a country with
which we are successfully developing relations of compred
hens&e co-operation, in the interests of peace and detente
in international relations. I would express our confidence
that your uncommon diplomatic experience and personal
qualities wiIl serve as a pledge of your successfulfulfilment
of the functions of the office of President.
33. We should also like to express our sincere thanks to
the representative of the fraternal Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic, Comrade Hulinsky, who conducted the work of
the Council during the past month with so much mastery
and skill, We wish to associate ourselves with the high praise
for his activities as President of the Council that has already
been expressedhere.
34. The delegation of the Soviet Union considers very
timely the convening of the Security Council for the
consideration of the question of Southern Rhodesia in
connexion with the unlawful actions of the Government of
the United States of America, which has permitted the
entry into the country to the head of the illegal racist
regime, Ian Smith, and other members of the so-called
Executive Council who are among the collaborating Africans.
35. We share the profound concern over the action of the
United States that has been expressed in a joint statement
issued by the Group of African States [S/12885, annex II].
We also concur in the assessment contained in that
statement according to which the decision of the United
States will undermine the efforts of the international
community to isolate the illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesia and encourage it to continue its policy of
repression and callous brutality against the people of
Zimbabwe.
36. Whatever arguments might be adduced by the representative of the United States in seeking to justify that
action, the fact remains a fact. We are faced with a gross
violation of numerous Security Council resolutions thal
prohibit giving any moral or political support to the
Southern Rhodesia regime and impose extensive and
specific sanctions against that regime. In particular, the
United States is acting contrary to resolution 253 (1968),
which provided that all Member States should take all
possible measures to prevent the entry into their territories
of persons whom they have reason to believe to have
furthered or encouraged the unlawful actions of the illegal
regime in Southern Rhodesia. It is also clear that the
actions of the United States constitute one further step
towards imparting the appearance of legality to the
manoeuvres of Smith, who is striving to bring about the
so-called internal settlement with the purpose of retaining
the colonial racist regime in Rhodesia. The United Statesis
thereby grossly violating the provisions of resolutiorl

423 (1978) of 14 March last, which declared illegal and
unacceptable any internal settlement in Zimbabwe concluded under the auspices of the illegal regime and calls
upon all States not to accord any recognition to such
settlement.

Statesunder Article 25 of the Charter, and inasmuchas
that resolutionalso containsan appealto the United States
strictly to comply with the sanctionsimposedby the
CouncilagainstSouthern Rhodesia.
42. The Soviet delegation has stated on a number of
occasions
in the Security Councilandin other organsof the
United Nations that only by total liquidation of the ilIega1
dgime in Southern Rhodesiain all its formsis it possibleto
ensuregenuine self-determinationfor the peopleof Zimbabwe. If that r6gime still exists today and continuesto
challengethe world community, it is becausecertain
Member States are not complying with the relevant
decisionsof the Council and are not applyingthe sanctions
that it hasdecreed.

37. In spite of the affirmations to the effect that the
actions of the United States Administration are allegecfly
designed to induce the Smith re’gime to make concessions,
what we see in fact is a magnificent reception being
accorded to Smith in the United States and extensive
facilities being granted to him for the propagation of his
views. All this leads him to defy the United Nations further
;uld to reject its demands for the speedy establishment in
Zimbabwe of genuine majority rule.

43. In order to put an end to the reign of the racistsin
Southern Rhodesia, it is necessaryto achievea comprehensivestrengthening of the sanctionsregimeestablished
under Chapter VII of the Charter. It is clear that any
statementsabout a “dialogue” with the racistsandthe need
to prevail upon them by meansof “arguments”merelylead
us away from effective measures
genuinelyaimedat the
solutionof the SouthernRhodesiaproblem.

38. It is impossible not to see a connexion between
Smith’s arrival in the United States and the campaign that
has been conducted here for the total repeal of sanctions
against the Smith rdgime, a campaign that has been
reflected in a resolution adopted by the United States
Congress in favour of such repeal. As is well known,
Southern Rhodesia is an important bastion of racism and
colonialism in southern Africa, where the economic interests of major Western monopolies are concentrated. It is
clear that highly influential circles in the United States,
including American legislators, are striving insistently to
prevent genuine self-determination for the people of Zimbabwe. They are striving by every possiblemeansto retain
control over the situation in Rhodesiaand maintain the
positionsof Westernmonopoliesin that country.

44. Guided by its policy of principle regardingthe total
liquidation of all remnants of the colonial system of
oppressionand alI hotbedsof colonialismandracism,the
Soviet Union will continue to supportefforts aimedat the
speedytransfer of authority in Zimbabweto the genuine
representativesof the peopleof that country, that is, the
Patriotic Front,

39. The question with which the Security Council is
dealing today alsohasbroader significance:it is a matter of
principle. The decisionof the United StatesGovernmentto
issue a visa to permit the entry into the country of Ian
Smith and his henchmencausesthe most seriousconcern,
in that it is a direct violation of a mandatory Security
Council decision by one of its permanentmembersand a
founder of the Orgahization. It is contrary to the obligation
nssumedby the United Statespursuant to Article 25 of the
Charter, which provides that “the Membersof the United
Nations agreeto accept and carry out the decisionsof the
&SecurityCouncil”.

45. Mr. BARTON (Canada):First, Mr. President,I should
like to join others in paying a tribute to you and to your
country on your assumptionof the presidency of the
Security Council. lt will be a busymonth. I know that you
will bring distinction to our work. At the sametime, I
should like to acknowledgewith gratitude the excellent
work of your predecessor,
Ambassador
Hulinskjr.
46. III approaching the questionbefore us, the Canadian
Governmenthastaken accountof the difficult andcomplex
factors at play in the Rhodesiansituation. We recognize
that the decisionof the United StatesGovernmentto allow
Ian Smith to visit its country wasa violation of Security
Council resolution 253 (1668), which established
sanctions
againstRhodesia,Canadahasalwaysconsideredthe effective enforcement of suchmeasures
to be a key elementin
bringing the full weight of internationalpresSureto bear
upon
the illegalrtgime at Salisbury.

40. These actions of the United States lead to the
undermining of the Security Council’s authority. They do
damage to the effectiveness of its measuresfor the
implementation of the purposes and principles of the
Charter, They contradict the numerousassurances
by the
United States that it is striving to strengthenthe United
Nations.

47. However, we are mindful of the necessity of not
leaving any stone unturned in seekingto enhancethe
possibility of making real progressin negotiationsinvolving
all parties to the conflict. Wenote that the United States
Governmenthas indicatedthat the visit wasagreedto on an
exceptional basisin the hopethat it wouldindeedhavethat
result. It is clear that, with the continuingbloodshedand
suffering, the need to find a solutionis moreurgent than
ever.

41, As the matter essentially involves a ViOhtiOn
Of the
Charter, the Security Council ought to condemn these
unlawful actions of the United States and call for the
immediate cessation of the flagrant violations of the
sanctions regime instituted against Southern Rhodesia.
Nevertheless,the Soviet delegationhas found it possibleto
support the draft resolution submitted to the Council,
bearing in mind that it expressesregret and concern in
connexion with the United States Government’sactions
lhal are under consideration, actions that are Contrary to
resolution 253 (1968) and the obligations of the United

48. In Canada’sview, it is not evident that the resultsof
his visit will necessarilybe harmfulto the objectiveswe all
support, and accordingly Canadadecidedto abstainon this
5

ernment remains genuinely committed to the principles and
ideals embodied in the proposals which we and they
worked out together over a year ago and have since been
working strenuously to put into practice. My Government
is totally convinced that it does.

resolution. We hope that the United States Government will
be successful in its efforts during the visit to impress upon
Smith and his colleagues the vital necessity of moving
forward to a genuine transfer of power to the majority. Let
there be no mistake about it, majority rule is inevitable.
The only question is whether it can be attained only at the
cost of more bloodshed or by peaceful means. MY country
has every confidence that the United States will continue to
do its utmost, in co-operation with the United Kingdom
and with the support of all Members of the United Nations,
to attain a peaceful Rhodesian settlement at the earliest
possible date.

54. We welcome the commitment expressed once again in
the joint United States-United Kingdom statement issued
following Mr. Smith’s call on Secretary of State Vance on
9 October, and we welcome also the fact that the United
States Government was able to use Mr. Smith’s visit to urge
him once again to consider seriously the framework of a
settlement which was put to him and to agree to an
all-party meeting.

49. Mr. RlCHARD (United Kingdom): Sir, I should like to
start by echoing the sentiments that have been expressed
around this table this afternoon and extend my congratulations to you on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. 1 think it will be a difficult month.
Speaking for the United Kingdom, 1 would say that we are
very pleased indeed to set you, with your skill, presiding
over us.

55. Mr. VON WECHMAR (Federal Republic of Germany):
I am delighted to see you, Sir, presiding over today’s
deliberations as President of the Security Council for the
current month. Our co-operation with you will be marked
by the close and friendly ties that exist between our two
delegations in the Security Council and between our two
countries.

50. I should also like to express our thanks to Ambassador
Hulinsk~ for the able way in which he led the Council
through last month, which was also a very difficult one, but
from which we emerged, I think, relatively unscathed.

56. My expression of appreciation and gratitude goes also
to Ambassador Hulinskf, who presided over the sometimes
extremely difficult deliberations of last month in so skilful
and efficient a manner.

51. In instructing me to abstain from voting on this
resolution, my Government has asked me to make it plain
that it does so in no spirit of disagreement with the positive
elements in the text. The British Government remains
whole-heartedly committed to a solution of the Rhodesia
problem in the spirit of the Anglo-American proposals of
1 September 1977 (S//2393]
and committed also to
observance of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. In co-operation with the United States Government, we shall continue to do everything in our power to
promote a settlement in Rhodesia which will bring the
Territory to legal independence in peaceful conditions and
in accordance with the wishes of the people. It is in the
context of that close co-operation that my Government has
concluded that the United Kingdom should abstain.

57. Let me now briefly state my delegation’s position on
the question under consideration.
58. Jn accordance with resolution 423 (1978), my Govcrnment has refrained from extending any kind of recognition
to the so-called internal settlement. We continue to believe
that only a process of negotiations in which all interested
parties, and in particular all political groups of the country,
participate can pave the way to a just and lasting settlement
of the Rhodesian conflict and to internationally accepted
independence for Zimbabwe.
59. In the meantime, the Federal Republic of Germany
adheres to the decision of the Council concerning sanctions
against Rhodesia. My authorities have taken all appropriate
steps within their jurisdiction to prevent any violation of
this decision, and they will continue to do so. Mr. Smith
would therefore not be able to enter the Federal Republic
of Germany.

52. The British Government has, from the time when this
visit was first mooted, expressed its view that the decision
whether or not to admit Mr. Smith and his colleagues to the
United States was a decision for the United States
Government. Its decision stems from a different political
and legal system from that which operates in the United
Kingdom. I should like to inform members of the Council
that my Secretary of State has today turned down a request
from British parliamentarians to grant immunity from
prosecution for Mr. Smith to visit the United Kingdom on
his way back from the United States, though Mr. Owen has
pointed out that if there appeared to be overriding reasons
for granting immunity in the interests of a negotiated
settlement the Government would consider this.

60. In view of the existing sanctions, the visit of the
leading representatives of the illegal rCgime at Salisbury to
the United States has aroused concern and apprehensions
within the international community and within the United
States itself. My delegation appreciates the explanation
given by the United States Government. We are convinced
that all relevant aspects of the problem have been duly
taken into account in its decision. We have noted in
particular that no recognition is in any way intended and
that the United States Government is willing to use every
opportunity to impress upon the parties the need for
negotiation and compromise as the only alternative to war

53. But the fundamental question which I know this visit

has raised in many people’s minds in fact is far wider than
the narrow issue of whether or not Mr. Smith should have
been granted entry into the United States. It is-and
Mr. Smith’s own propaganda has of course made its
contribution here-whether or not the United States Gov-

and violence.
61. In view of the particular role which the United States,
together with the United Kingdom, has assumed in the
6

negotiation process over Rhodesia, it seems to my delegation that the explanation given by the United States
delegation is sufficient and that there was no need for the
kind of resolution that has just been adopted. My delegation therefore abstained on the resolution.

68. In 1965 I was personally involved-I have said this
agk and again-in a situation in which the Prime Minister
of the United Kingdom made a declaration to the effect
hat, even if Smith seceded, the British Government would
not use force. Obviously, a unilateral declaration of
independence becomes automatic if you make such a
declaration beforehand.

62. Mr. HARRIMAN (Nigeria): This being the first formal
meeting of the Council I have attended under your
presidency, Sir, I join other speakers in congratulating you
on being President of the Council during the month of
October. You represent a country in which I had the
honour to serve for about six years as Ambassador, when I
tried to develop a very cordial relationship between our two
countries. However, on certain aspects, when it came to the
question of South Africa and your country’s arms deals
with the South African regime, I was very vocal, as
Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid, in
condemning France, and I believe that was fully in
conformity with the policies of my country.

69. I have decided to refrain from recalling the Bi@am
report, but we all how about it. This is the most recent
example of something I will not describe in order not to use
superlatives that will injure the very cordial relations which
I have with the representative of the United Kingdom, and
which I believe continue to exist between his country and
mine.
70. I believe that in 1965, when Ian Smith’s minority
racist regime declared what is called UDI-the unilateral
declaration of independence-which
t$e British Government rightly described as treason against the Crown, they
should have taken some action. As I said recently in
another forum, the British have been able to fight warsprobably in Belize they are going to fight-when it is
suggested that independence and freedom should be
granted to people. They have never been able to fight in
order to give freedom and independence to people. This is a
tragedy for a country which has such a great reputation as
one of the greatest democracies on earth. The Security
Council declared that the unilateral declaration of independence was treason against the Crown. The Council
called on the British Government in a unanimous resolution
in 1966, supported by the United Kingdom itself, to quell
that rebellion. As I have said, we know what action the
United Kingdom has taken.

63. Today you do not hear me condemn France. I have
seen a change of policy, and today I have seen the
quintessence of this new policy in the fact that you and
your delegation have extricated yourselves from the cabal
and the clique-the “gang of five” they call them in certain
quarters-by voting for a simple straightforward resolution
which reflects the spirit of all the decisions we have been
taking in the Council, much of the action we have been
taking and many of the objectives WC have been trying to
achieve,
64. I wish also to congratulate the last president of the
Council, Ambassador Hulinsk$, a good friend pnd neighbour of mine, for his excellent work during the month of
September.

71. The United Kingdom talks about differences between
the Zimbabweans which, presumably, it should resolve as a
moderator together with the United States. Ian Smith, a
criminal who represents nobody but a handful of very
self-centred criminal modern settlers, has now become a
party. And the United Kingdom, which is a colonial Power,
as I said, has become a moderator.

65. MY delegation was as surprised at the abstention of
Canada and the Federal Republic of Germany on the
resolution I have described as at the invitation of the
United States Government to Ian Smith to visit this
country-perhaps even more surprised. I have listened with
surprise, with regrot and concern to the explanations and, if
I might use the word, the explications of some of the
Western delegations regarding their reasons for abstention.

72, We have seen these antics before. We saw them in
India, Kenya and Nigeria. But in Rhodesia, after all these
years of discussion, it is worse than a cruel joke. Ian Smith
has no right to be anywhere except in the Queen’s custody.
It is the responsibility of the United Kingdom to transfer
power to the people in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 15 14 (XV).

6G. I believe that, as the representative of the United
Kingdom has said, pressure is already now mounting in
Europe, beginning in the LJnited Kingdom as we would all
expect, where several Conservative politicians are asking
that Ian Smith should be allowed to go to London.
Pandora’s box is open and we shall continue to hear a lot of
this.

73, Nobody has ever prevented Rhodesian leaders from
going to any part of the world. As a matter of fact, I have
on my desk a pile of requests from Sithole to see me, from
some others from Namibia to see me and I have had
meetings with Muzorewa. They have all been in and out of
his country. We have not raised objections; they are in that
Government. They have committed actions in COnfOmitY
with their own judgement. But when a great CoUntO’
like
the United States goes against its own word and when it
substitutes for legality the pressure of what might be
described as democracy by the VOC~, then we begin to
won&r what fie credibility of the SeCUrity
CoUd
is all
about. I would go further to say that, while we in this

67. What I want members to appreciate is that, if we go
into the history of Rhodesia, it is clear that, as one
representative of a world Power has said, the British have
tried to turn their backs on the matter. And on every
occasion t,. ,y have done so. They have not only done so,
they have gone beyond doing so and have taken direct
action in sustaining the Ian Smith regime. I would ,not be
surprised if, in spite of their declarations to the effect that
they will not allow Ian Smith into the United Kingdom,
they did’s0 at some point. It,is the excuse, probably, they
are looking for.
7

delegation do appreciate that the issues are clear and that
the United States has not acted in bad faith in acceding to
these pressures, and that the Carter Administration is
consistent in its policies towards Rhodesia, it is most
unfortunate that we read that what has happened is “in the
interest of making every effort to conclude a Khodesian
settlement” and that it is intended “to use this unique
opportunity
to continue the discussions” (S/12885,
annex I/. But for this, I would not have taken any interest
in Smith’s being here. But when a raison d’&tre is being
provided for a case that contravenes commitments in
accordance with the Charter it is a very serious matter. I
shall read from resolution 253 (1968) because some people
may not know why we are so serious about so futile a
matter. In this passage, the Council decided that all Member
States should:

pursuance of resolution 2.53 (1968), fully shares the
concern at the granting by the United States Government
of entry visas to Mr. Ian Smith and members cf his illegal
regime, in contravention of express provisions of Council
decisions.
80. The United States like any other State, may, irk the
exercise of its sovereignty, take the measures dictated by its
interests. But in this instance, the exercise of that power
has acquired a discouraging and, therefore, regrettable
significance since, both legally and politically, it results in a
weakening of the authority of the supreme body of the
Organization. It also-and this must be recognized, painful
as it may be-creates an unfortunate precedent, which is ali
the more significant because it constitutes open disregard
for the obligations assumed by this State in its capacity asa
permanent member of the Security Council.

“Take all possible measures to prevent the entry into
their territories of persons whom they have reason to
believe to be ordinarily resident in Southern Rhodesia
and whom they have reason to believe to have furthered
or encouraged, or to be likely to further or encourage, the
unlawful actions of the illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesia or any activities which are calculated to evade
any measure decided upon in this resolution or resolution
232 (1966) of 16 December 1966”.

81. Thus, a disturbing situation has been created, We ate
back in the sphere of odious exceptions. For, while the rest
of the international community must carry out its duties,
even at the cost of sustained and harsh sacrifices-and this is
certainly true for Rhodesia’s immediate neighbours in
regard to the sanctions against Rhodesia-it would seein
that some privileged countries are to be allowed not to
fulfi their obligations when they decide that their interests
or internal pressures require that.

74. As the African Group quite rightly states in the
document from which I have been quoting [ibid., annex
II], Article 25 of the Charter enjoins every Member of the
United Nations to accept and carry out the decisions of the
Security Council.

82. And that is exactly what is so serious about this
matter. Influential circles that exercise internal pressure
exist everywhere. Indeed, it is against such circles that
Governments have to defend themselves when principles
and standards of conduct are involved-principles and
standards of conduct which are reflected in decisions that
have been freely and willingly adopted and that, as in GC
present instance, represent a commitment and a respoJksibility within the historical process of decolonization and
the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination which
we are all committed to carry out.

75. The commission of such acts as the one before the
Council today becomes even more serious when a delegation has itself supported a resolution by which it is not
abiding.
76. The 49 African countries are beginning to wonder
whether they are the fools. We decided at meetings of the
Organization of African Unity at Lusaka and LibreviUe to
form the Patriotic’ Front. That was a well-considered
decision. Sithole and Muzorewa were there, angling for
recognition as part of this Front. At one stage we described
it as a front of patriotic forces. They could not show us
where their forces were.

83. A painful question must now be asked by the Security
Council and the Committee established in pursuance of its
resolution 253 (1968): To what extent has the force of
their mandate been weakened? Has this given new strength
to the opportunists and the adventurers, allowing them to
attain their objectives without redressing the illegal situ*
tion or desisting from their rebellion? Do we have lo
accept asvalid the periodic contradictions in the behaviour
of a great Power? Do such contradictions go hand in hand
with the traditional feelings of a high-minded people, a
people that loves freedom and human dignity-such as Ihc
people of the United States? We refuse to believe that,
although frequently we are confronted by paradoxical
events in which influential American circles and opinions
are involved.

77. As I said earlier, 49 African States have decided to
support the genuine leaders of the country of Rhodesia,
and we believe it is nothing but arrogance for people to
play up to Ian Smith, who has been declared an international rebel and who, I repeat, should be in custody for
treason.
78. I shall conclude my statement by repeating what I said
midway through it. My delegation does not consider that
the Carter Administration has acted in bad faith. We are
rather worried that certain somewhat facile arguments have
been adduced to engender the raison d%tre for the presence
of Smith here.

84. We also have government leaders and legislators ~11~
have poor memories and who treat with the Pharisee aad
forget the friend. In this connexion, I would note that tl~
people of Bolivia contributed, at great sacrifice, to the
victory of a great cause-a cause supported by the I.f&ed
States during the Second World War. Today, however,that
same people, a staunch friend in difficult times, finds itself
with its back to the wall of poverty each time the General

79. Mr. FUENTES IBAREZ (Bolivia) @terpretution from
Spanish): The delegation of Bolivia, as it has already made
clear in the Security Council Committee

established in
8

Services Administration announces that it is going to place
part of its Strategic reserves on the mineral market, By
lowering the price of tin through the creation of an
artificial surplus of that mineral, they show their disregard
for the serious disturbances caused by the mere announcement of the sale of these reserves.

Chairman of the Committee on Sanctions, Ambassador
Jaipal, has time and again taken up the thread of a fabric
that has been visibly damaged, until, in co-operation with
the African Group and through laborious consultations, he
has managed to arrive at a draft resolution which attempts
to repair the damage and reaffirm the principles. It has been
prepared in such a way that the text does not dwell on the
more negative aspects of the problem so that the precedent
established does not savour of jurisprudence and its harmful
effects are mitigated by the reaffirmation of a moral basis
and a feeling of reiterated good faith and hope. This latent
hope comes from on high and in any good cause, whatever
the circumstances that seem to run counter to it and keep it
from final success,it is always the providential factor that
turns discouragement into renewed faith and an ill wind
into a following breeze. Those are the reasons we voted in
favour of the draft resolution.

85. In that way, the weak economy of the Bolivian
people-which in good faith contributed to the accumulation of those reserves through its high-minded and
idealistic acceptance of burdensome frozen prices, in the
name of an alliance of solidarity for the defence of freedom
and democracy-has been weakened even further, and that
people is reduced to a level of overwhelming poverty that is
conducive to deep-rooted social disquiet, a cause of
unforeseeable evils.
86. As Mr. Ricardo Anaya, in his capacity as Minister for
External Relations of Bolivia, said on 27 September last in
the General Assembly, because of the simple announcement
that the General Services Administration would put on the
market part of 35,000 tons of tin from its strategic reserves,

90. Finally, Sir, my delegation wishesto thank you for the
comprehensive way you have handled this matter, in a
manner characterized by the proverbial wisdom of the
French mind, and 1 wish you every success in yom
presidency during the month of October. Similarly, I wish
to express again my admiration for Ambassador Hulinsky,
whose lot it wasto have a very busy September. However,
thanks to his thoughtfulness and experience, it was a
fruitful period.

“the price of tin has been radically affected because of
the fear of a drop in the price such that Bolivia’s
economy will be adversely affected and its income
reduced by something in the order of $20 million a
year:‘.2

91. Mr. NGUEMA-MBA
(Gabon) (interpret&on front
Rench): Mr. President, it is with special pleasure that I
extend to you the congratulations of my delegation on
your assumption of the presidency of this important organ,
the Security Council. In the circumstances, so fraught with
consequences, in which this debate is held, the Council can
only rejoice at being able to benefit from your experience
and skill. I would also address my congratulations to your
eminent predecessor, the representative of Czechoslovakia,
who guided the work of the Council last month with great
tact and competence.

And he added:
“A drop in income such as that diminishes the
capability of the State to meet the needs of its people
and, consequently, to provide for human rights. That is
confirmed by the fact that the rich countries, which are
always recommending respect for human rights, are those
which cause the conditions that vitiate such rights.“3
87. The ambivalence of conduct reflected in the treatment
given to us poor countries, it must be said yet again, does
not derive from the people of the United States but from
the manipulations of the major financial consortia in the
sectors of power.

92. My delegation is seriously concerned by the situation
in Zimbabwe. As we all know, that explosive situation
remains critical. In fact, the rebel chief, Ian Smith, not only
continues to adopt new measures further to strengthen his
illegal regime, but is still forcing the majority African
population to endure the most horrible trials and atrocious
suffering.

88, As is also reflected in the matter which gave rise to the
convening of this Security Council meeting, it is those same
sectors of influence which condone the illegality of a
regime which has based its power on a system of oppression
and violence. While the weak countries are driven by
difficult demands to achieve miracles within very short
time-limits, the hand of friendship is held out to a rebel
leader who bears a very heavy responsibility. That hand is
held out knowing that his presence not only will be used
for his own ends but also will mean that latent racism will
rise to the surface, The attention he is given might be
interpreted as tacit acceptance of his conduct, and that will
naturally disconcert people.

93. The position of my delegation on this entire matter is
well known. We abide by the decisions of the Organization
of African Unity and the General Assembly. Yet I wish to
state once again that no solution to the Rhodesian problem
can bring real peace unless it is effectively upheld by all the
parties to the conflict. Therefore any arrangement designed
to give power to the so-called representatives of the
Rhodesian people would be doomed to failure.

89. The Security Council has had to deal with a fait
accompli, Patiently and with high-minded dedication, the

94. In this connexion, my delegation supports all those
who feel that the holding of a conference with the
participation of all the parties offers the best and the only
hope of a peaceful settlement in Zimbabwe.

2 &cial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-thin? Session,
Plenary Meetings, 11th meeting,
para. 363.
3 Ibid., para.364.

95. But, to return specifically to the subject on our
agenda, I wish to say that my delegation’s deep concern is
9

reflected in what today might be called the statement of
the African Group regarding the visit to the United States
of Ian Smith, the rebel chief [S/12885, u!rnex II’.

lutions on the question of Rhodesia, in particular restlutions 253 (1968) and 423 (1978), and that it contravenes
the Charter of the United Nations. The Czechoslcvak
delegation already indicated its position at the meeting cn
6 October of the Security Council Committee established in
pursuance of resolution 253 (1968).4 The decision of the
United States Administration undermines the efforts of the
international community aimed at the complete isolatiou cf
the illegal racist regime. Its significance and danger can be
fully appreciated, particularly if we view this in ccnjunctica
with other steps undertaken by the United States in order
to repeal unilaterally the mandatory economic sanctions
that have been imposed against the illegal regime. Tire
decision of the United States Administration is clearly
aimed at giving a semblance of legality to the minority
regime or to the so-called internal settlement which is the
result of an illegal deal concluded on 3 March this year.

96. Therefore I shall limit myself to saying that my
delegation does not quite understand why such an equivocal attitude has been adopted towards Ian Smith when it
is remembered that, in the past, the Anglo-American efforts
to convene a conference of all the parties in order to find a
solution to the Rhodesian problem were always frustrated
by the recalcitrance of Smith himself.

!

i

97. Having voted in favour of the draft resolution that has
just been adopted, my delegation fervently hopes that this
visit will not enable Ian Smith to convince anyone that his
so-called internal settlement would be acceptable, or, above
all, to give rise, among the members of Congress or among
the American people, to support for the lifting of the
sanctions imposed by the United Nations against the illegal
regime in Rhodesia. We hope that the United States
Government will never allow such an important decision of
the Security Council to be made meaningless.

102. The consequences of that decision are extremely
dangerous and, therefore, we cannot justify it by referring
to “democratic principles” nor the so-called attempt to
maintain negotiations on a solution to the Rhodesian
problem. Its result can only be an intensification of the
recalcitrant attitude of the authorities towards the transfer
of power to the majority. In the statement of the African
Group to which I referred previously the following is
stated:

98. Mr. HULINSK? (Czechoslovakia) (interpretation from
l+enc?z): On behalf of my delegation, 1 would first of all
extend to you, Sir, my sincere congratulations on your
accession to the high office of President of the Security
Council for this month and assure you of our complete
co-operation.

“Such a gesture to the rebel leader can only serve to
embolden the illegal regime in its recalcitrance and
continued defiance of the will of the international
community, enable the rebel leader to persist in his
treasonable acts against the administering Power and
further encourage him in his policies of repression and
callous brutality against the people of Zimbabwe.”

99. In this connexion, I am very pleased to refer to the
very positive trends that have occurred in the development
of relations between France and Czechoslovakia. Both our
countries are making efforts to bring about a harmonious
and balanced development of their mutual relations based
on their rich traditions and the role which France and
Czechoslovakia have been playing in the process of detente
and peaceful co-operation in Europe. The visits to France in
1975 by the head of Government and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Czechoslovakia, as well as the exchange of
parliamentary and other delegations, have provided new
impetus in this regard. The visit of the Secretary of State
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of France to Prague
last July has confirmed our common interest in further
deepening and developing relations between the Ministries
of Foreign Affairs in our two countries at an operational
level.

[Ibid.]

103. In view of what I have just said, the Czechosiovak
delegation supported the call for the Security Council to
adopt the sort of resolution that would clearly express the
fact that the action of the United States Administration
represented a violation of the relevant resolutions of the
Council and was also contrary to the aim of achieving a just
solution of the Rhodesian problem.
104. While we voted in favour of the draft resolution
which we have just adopted, we should like to point out
that, in our opinion, it ought to have expressedmore
specifically that we are here witnessing a violatioll of
Security Council resolutions and the Charter of the United
Nations.

[The speakercontinued in Russian.]

IOO. The decision of the Government of the United States
to grant an entry visa to this country to the head of the
illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia merits
particular attention from the Security Council, since it may
have serious consequences not only for the just solution of
the Rhodesian problem but also for the effectiveness of the
further work of the Council itself,

105. Finally, I should like once again to thank members ef
the Council for the very kind words they have addressedtc
me at today’s meeting.
106. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Frenclrl: 1
thank the representative of Czechoslovakia for the VeW
kind words he said about my country and me.

101. As far as the Czechoslovak delegation is concerned,
we fully share the assessment of Mr. Smith’s visit made by
the African Group in a statement of 6 October [S/1288.5,
uirrzexl IZ]. Together with the African and other States
members of the Council, we consider that this visit is a
direct violation of the spirit and letter of Council reso-

107. Since there are no more speakers, I should now like
to make a statement in my capacity as representative cf
FRANCE.
4 S/AC.H/SR.316.
10

109. The terms of the resolution that we have just
adopted express feelings shared by the French delegation.
The granting of a visa to Ian Smith in fact runs counter to
the regime of sanctions against Rhodesia established by
resolution 253 (1968).

taken a calculated risk and wishes to make use of this
occasion in order to bring Ian Smith to reason. We have no
doubt of its intentions; we are even ready to express the
hope that the United States Administration will succeed in
forcing its visitor to see the light and rcalize that he has to
transfer power to the true representatives of Zimbabwe.
Nevertheless, the initiative adopted has not taken into
account the terms of a resolution approved and supported
by the United States Government itself. It is for that reason
that the French delegation cast its vote in favour of the
resolution just adopted.

110. The United States Government has told us that by
allowing the rebel leader to come to this country it has

The meeting rose at 6.50 pm.

108. I should like to pay a tribute to my predecessor, the
representative of Czechoslovakia, who presided over the
Council’s work in September with skill, authority and
effectiveness. I should also like to thank my colleagues for
the very kind words addressedto me.

11

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
ddpositaires
du monde entier. Xnformez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
a : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Genkve.
KAK

IIOJIYUIITL

Hs~arru~

MB,&bHZiR

Oprawaaquu

OPI’AHH3AUHN

O~-MAWH~HH~JX

OG%EAMHEHHbIX
HaqaR

MOXHO

HAI&UR

qmwrb

B KHHXH~IX

3nnax
same~
WaqG,

r3 aremrcz3ax
so scex paaorrax
pupa. HaBcgrrTe
cnpanmi
~~RW~OM
Mara~sine
unw nmmrre
no aspecy:
Oprannaarmfl
CeKqKR
“0
npoflame
KlAawui+, HblO.lilOpK
unu XCerreea.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACKONES

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

DE LAS

NACIONES

wwa-

06 H~A~HARX
06’beAnHeHHhlX

s

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de Ias Naciones
Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo:
Consulte
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seccicn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$W.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

78-70005-February

1980-2,266
