Resolutions adoptNI on the reports o_f__'lie Second Comm_ittee_-_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

t<) enable him to submit periodic reports to the Trade

and Development Board.
2 I I 5th 11/enary meeting
19 December 1972

:\037 ( X'\. VII). Chari Pr of the t•eonomie rights
and 1]utiP~ of ~talP!-1

The General Assembly,
Havin~ considered the report of the United Nations
Confcre~cc on Trade and Development on its third
session, 94
Decides to enlarge the composition of the Working
Group on the Chartc~ of the Economi~ Rights and
Duties of States established under resolutrnn 45 (III)
of 18 May 1972 of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, 9 " and authori~es t~e Secr~tary-Gcncral of the Conference to appomt mne additional members, in consultation with Governments of
member States.
] 1 I 5 th plenary meeting
19 December 1972

3038 (XXVII). Dissemination of information and
mohilization of public opinion regarding
prohl1•1ns of trade and development

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind paragraph 84 of the International
Devclu 11mcnt Strnteg:y for the Second United Nations
Development Decade/'; relating to the mobilization of
public opinion,
Recalling its resolution 2800 ( XXVI) of 14 December 1971, regarding the dissemination of information and the mobilization of public opinion relative to
the review and appraisal of progress in the implementation of the International Development Strategy,
Noting with satisfaction resolution 43 (III) of 17
May 1972, 97 in which the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development proposed a series of specific measures for the dissemination of information and
the mobilization of public opinion relative to problems
of trade and development,
Noting aha agreed conclusion 89 (XII) of 20 October 1972, 98 adopted on the subject by the Trade and
Development Board at the first part of its twelfth session,
Convinced that improvement in the dissemination of
information and the mobilization of public opinion,
particularly among young people, would be an important factor for greater awareness of the general
problems of development and would thus promote the
increased efforts required in the sphere of interna~4 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade "nd Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication. Sales No.: E.73.II.D.4).
!l5 fbid., annex I.A.
HG Resolution 2626 (XXV).
!J7 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes <United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.11.D.4),
annex I.A.
!i8 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyseventh St'ssion, Supplement No. 15 (A/8715/Rev.1), part one,
annex I.

tional co-operation for development and the success of
the International Development Strategy,
1. Decides to institute a World Development Information Day with the object of drawing the attention
of world public opinion each year to development problems and till'. necessity of ~trcngthcning international
co-operation to solve them;
2. Further decides that the date for this day shall
coincide in principle with United Nations Day, 24
October, which is also the date on which the International Development Strategy for the Second Nations
Development Decade was adopted in 1970;
3. Invites the Tracie and Development Board to
study at its fifth special session, devoted to the review
and appraisal of the Second United Nations Development Decade, the preliminary report of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, 11 " as well as the interim
report requested of the Secretary-General of the U nit~d
Nations Conference on Trade and Development 111
agreed conclusion 89 (XII);
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to prepare, for the fifth special session of the
Trade and Development Board, a detailed report elaboratin~ the elements outlined in his preliminary report;
5. ~Further invites the Secretary-General o( the
United Nations to indicate in the detailed report mentioned in paragraph 4 above what measures he is c~msidering, in accordance with paragraph 5 of resolution
43 (II]) of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, to strengthen the informatiC?n services of the Conference and to regroup them, 111 close
liaison with the Office of Public Information, in particular the Centre for Economic and Social Information and other United Nations information sources, in
an information unit responsible for giving wider publicity to the debates and decisions of the Conference
concerning problems of trade and development and to
the objectives of the International Development Strategy
of concern k• the Conference;
6. Requests the Trade and Development Board at
its fifth special session to outline a programme of
events for World Development Information Day in
1973 and to make specific proposals to that end;
7. Requests the Economic and Social Council at its
fiftv-fifth session, taking into consideration the report
of the Trade and Development Board on its fifth special sc:,sion, to draw up a programme of events for
World Development Information Day in 1971.
2 l l 5th plenary meeting
19 nc,emher 1972

:10;19 (XXVII). External debt servtcmg hv the
devPloping countriPi;1

The General A ssemf1ly,
Mind! ul of the purposes set forth in Article 55 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which specifics that the
United Nations should promote higher standards of
living, full employment. and conditions of economic and
social progress and development,
Recalfing its resolutions 2170 (XXI) of 6 December
1966, 2415 (XXTJI) of 17 December 1968 and 2807
(XXVI) of 14 December 1971 concerning the need
n9 A/8893.
