XVIII
RESOLUTION ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON
HEADQUARTERS AND THE FIFTH COMMITTEE
RESOLUTION ADOPTEE SUR LES RAPPORTS DE LA COMMISSION SPECIALE DU
SIEGE PERMANENT ET DE LA CINQUIEME COMMISSION
182 (ID. Headquarters of the United
Nations

182 (II). Siege de !'Organisation des

The General Assembly,

L' Assembl,:,, genera le.

Nations Unies

Desiring ts> proceed as rapidly as possible with
the construction of the permanent headquarters,
in accordance with the decision taken under resolution 100 (1) 1 of 14 December 1946, in order
that a major part of the project may be completed
and ready for use by the fourth regular session of
the General Assembly;
Noting with satisfaction the letter dated 29 October 1947 from the representative of the United
States to the Secretary-General ( document A/ AC.
15 / 7), stating that the Government of the United
States would be prepared to enter into negotiations with the Secretary-General with a view to
concluding a loan agreement whereby an interestfree United States Government loan for an
amount not exceeding $65,000,000 would be
made available for the purpose of financing the
cost of constructing the United Nations headquarters, and that the President of the United States
would be willing to request the Congress of the
United States to grant its approval, which would
be required for such a loan,

1. Approves the general plan and design set
forth in the report by the Secretary-General on the
permanent headquarters of the United Nations
( document A/311) as revised in the further report by the Secretary-General ( documents
A/311/Add.l/Rev.1, A/311/Add.2 and Add.
:3).
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General:
(a) To negotiate and conclude, on behalf of
the United Nations, a loan agreement with the
Government of the United States of America,
for an interest-free loan which would require approval by the Congress of the United States, in
an amount not to exceed $65,000,000 to provide
for the payment of the costs of construction and
other purposes provided for in paragraph 3 of this
resolution. Such loan should be for a term of not
less than thirty years and should be repayable in
annual installments from the ordinary budget of
the United Nations, the first installment to be
payable out of the budget for the year 1951 ;
( b) To receive and expend, or direct the expenditure of, the sum borrowed in accordance
with the foregoing authorization for the purposes
~et forth in paragraph 3 of this resolution;
( c) With the consent of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Ouestions
to obligate or expend sums fr~m the~Workini

dur-1

l Sec Rrs.nlutions adopted by thf' Gcnl'Ja[ Assembly
ing the seco11<l p;:irl uf ib ri1'.'-.t ~cssiun_, µages 196--197.

Desirant voir entreprendre Jc plus rapidement
possible la construction du siege permanent, conformement a la decision prise clans la resolution
100 (Ii' du H dccembre 1946, afin que le projet
puisse etre realise dans sa plus grande part et prct
a etre utilise pour la quatricmc session ordinaire
de I' Assemhlcc generalc;
A yant pris note avec gratitude de la kttre, en
date du 29 octobre 194 7, adrcssee par le representant des Etats-Unis d'Amcrique au Secrctairc
general ( document A/ AC.15 / 7), lettre declarant
que le Gouvernement Jes Etats-Unis scrait prct a
entrer en conversation avec le Secretairc general
en vue de la conclusion d'une convention aux
termes de laqudlc le Gom·ernement des EtatsUnis accorderait un prct sans intcrhs, dont le
montant ne s'cleverait pas a plus de 65.000.000 de
dollars, pour rnuvrir Jes dcpcnses entraim{es par
la construction du siege de !'Organisation des Nations Unies, et que le President des Etats-Unis
serait dispose a demander au Congrt'-s son approbation pour un tcl prct,
l. Approuve lcs plan et projet generaux exposes
clans le rapport du Secretaire general Sur le siege
permanent ck !'Organisation des Nations Unies
(document A/311 ), rt:vise clans le rapport additionnel du Secretaire general ( documents A/311 /
Add.I /Rev.I, A/31 J IAdd.2 et Add.3);

2. A utorise Jc Secretaire general:
a) A negocier et a condure, au nom de !'Organisation des Nations Unies, une convention avec
le Gouvcrnemcnt de~ Etats-Unis d' Amerique pour
l'obtention d'un pret sans intcrcts, qui devrait recevoir l'approbation du Congr<'s des Etats-Unis
et qui n'exccderait pas G'i.000.000 de dollars, pour
pourvoir au paiement des frais de construction et
autres travaux prevus au paragraphe 3 de cette
resolution. Ledit prct devrait ctre acrnrd1: pour
une periode d'au moins trentc ans et devrait etre
remboursable par annuitcs prclevces sur le budget
ordinairc de !'Organisation; h premicrc annuite
serait prclevcc sur le budget de l'annec 1951 ;
b) A rccevoir et i't ntiliser, dircctcmcnt 011 sous
son contr6le, la sommc empnl!ltcc, co11formC-111ent
a l'autori,:ation ri-dr,,sus, aux fins t:~1u1116ccs au
paragraphc '.I deb prt:sc1,tc rc:,olutio,;;
c) A cngagcr <HI :, d{pcnscr, a\·L'.C le consentement du Comitt: consult:itif pciur les questions administrativcs et budgctaircs. des !-ornmcs pn'·kvfrs
1
Voir ks Rlsolutirn1s atloptCes par l'Assr.mblcr ,1;/ru:ra!f
pendant la sccondl' partic de sa pn·n1it're session, pages
] <l{j 1'Ii

l'il

Capital Fund not exceeding $1,000,000, in order
to continue detailed architectural and engineering planning and research, and to meet commitments for other necessary arrangements in preparation for the construction antl other work provided for in paragraph 3 of this resolution;

sur le Fonds de roulcrnent et n'excedant pas
1.000.000 de dollars, afin de continuer l'ctablissement dans le detail du programme d'architecture
et de construction, et les rcchcrches a cct effet, et
pour faire face aux depcnscs deja cngagecs pour
Jes autres dispositions ncccssaires a la preparation
de la construction et autre.~ travaux cnumcrcs au
paragraphe 3 de la prescnte resolution;

3. Further authorizes the Secrcta1y-Gencral,
after the conclusion of the loan agreement authorized in paragraph 2 of this resolution and approval of the proposed loan by the Congress of
the United States of America:
(a) To proceed with the construction and furnishing of the General Assembly building, conference area and Secretariat building, together with
the necessary landscaping, underground construction and other appropriate improvements to the
land and approaches;
( b) To enter into contracts for the construction, furnishings and other work referred to in
paragraph 3 (a) hereof, and to make:: expenditures
to an amount not exceeding $65,000,000 for these
purposes and for related purposes as set forth in
document A/311 / Add.1 /Rev.I.
4. Further authorizes the Secretary-General,
(a) While adhering to the general plan and design referred to in paragraph 1 hereof, to make
such modifications in the plans, design, building,
furnishings, landscaping, underground construction and other improvements, a.-; he finds necessary or desirable, provided that such modifications shall not increase the total cost beyond the
sum proviclctl for in paragraph 3 ( b) ;
( b) To enter into appropriate arrangements
with the United States Government, the State of
New York, and the City of New York, with regard
to easements, public services, sub-surface facilities,
the approaches to the site, the vehicular traffic,
water front and pier rights, and similar matters.

'.). Autorise en outre le Sccrctaire general, aprcs
la conclusion de la convention prcvue au paragraphc 2 de cctte resolution et !'approbation par
le Congrcs des Etats-Unis d'Amerique du prct
envisage,
a) A entreprendre la construction et l'amcublement des batiments de I' Assemblce genera le,
des conferences et du Secretariat, en mcme temps
que les arrangements neccssaires pour l'amenagement du site, des sous-sols et autres ameliorations
appropriees du site:: et de ses abords;
b) A passer des contrats pour la construction,
l'ameublement c::t les autres travaux dont ii est
question au paragraphe 3 a) ci-dc::ssus, et d'autoriser a ces fins, et aux fins connexes exposces dans
le document A/311 / Add. l /Rc::v. l, des dcpcnses
qui nc devront pa~ depasser 65.000.000 de dollars;

4. Autorise en outre le:: Secretaire general,
a) Tout en sc conformant aux plan et projet
gcneraux dont ii est question au paragraphe 1 cidc::ssus, a apportcr des modifications aux plans,
projets, batiments, amcublcmcnts, amcnagements
du site, sous-sols et autres ameliorations qu'il jugera necc::ssairc::s OU desirables, a condition que ccs
modifications ne portent pas le:: cout total au dcla
de la somme prevuc:: au paragraphc:: 3 b) ;
b) A passer les accords appropries avec le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis, l'Etat de New-York et
la ville de New-York, en ee qui concerne les servitudes, les services publics, les installations souterraincs, Jes acces au siege::, la circulation des voiturt',s, Jes droits de quai et de debarcadcre et toutes
questions analogues.
5. In carrying out his responsibilities as set
5. Pour remplir les taches qui Jui sont confiees
forth in this resolution, the Secretarv-General en vertn de la presente resolution, le Secrctaire
shall be assisted by an Advisory Comn{ittee run- : general sera aide par un Comite consultatif comsisting of representatives of the following Mon- I pose de represcntants des Etats Mcmbrcs suibc::rs:
vants:
Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, CoAustralie, Belgique, Bresil, Canada, Chine, Colombia, France, Greece, India, Norway, Poland, lombie, France, Grece, Inde, Norvege, Pologne,
Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Syrie, Union des Republiques socialistes sovieKingdom, United States of America and Yugo- tiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique et
slavia.
Yougosla vie.
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to
6. Invite le Secretaire general a rendre compte
the third regular session of the General Assembly de l' execution de la prcsentc resolution a la troion the execution of this resolution.
sieme session ordinaire de I' Assemblee generale.
flundred and twenty-first plenary meeting,
20 November 1947.

Cent-vingt et unieme seance pleniere,
le 20 novembre 1947.
