A/RES/73/301

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 June 2019

Seventy-third session
Agenda item 70

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 20 June 2019
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/73/L.93)]

73/301.

Commemoration of the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
The General Assembly,
Emphasizing that the Convention on the Rights of the Child 1 constitutes the
standard in the promotion and protection of the rights of the child, and, bearing in
mind the importance of the Optional Protocols to the Convention, 2 calling for their
universal ratification and effective implementation, as well as that of other human
rights instruments,
Welcoming the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, the human rights treaty with the most ratifications in history, and
acknowledging that the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Optional
Protocols thereto contain a comprehensive set of international legal standards for the
protection and well-being of children,
Recognizing that, while progress has been made, the situation of children is
critical in many parts of the world and many challenges remain to ensure the full
realization of their rights, and that in this regard the thirtieth anniversary of the
Convention is an occasion for States to reflect on implementation gaps and to
undertake additional measures to ensure children’s rights,
1.
Decides to convene a high-level commemorative event to mark the
thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child 1
during the high-level week of the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly, on
25 September 2019, from 8.30 to 9.30 a.m. in the Trusteeship Council Chamber;
2.
Also decides that, in addition to the participation of the President of the
General Assembly and the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of the United
Nations Children’s Fund, United Nations Messenger of Peace Ms. Malala Yousafzai,

__________________
1
2

19-10299 (E)

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.

250619

*1910299*

A/RES/73/301

Commemoration of the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child

and representatives of Poland, as the initiator of the Convention of the Rights of the
Child, and of the first Member State from each regional group to have ratified the
Convention, in their national capacity, will address the high-level commemorative
event;
3.
Further decides to convene a one-day high-level meeting in the General
Assembly Hall on 20 November 2019 on the occasion of the thirtieth anniversary of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and that the high -level meeting will begin
with an opening plenary meeting and an interactive segment with the meaningful
participation of children, and will continue with a high-level plenary meeting;
4.
Decides that, in addition to the President of the General Assembly and the
Secretary-General, the Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children, the Chair of the Committee
on the Rights of the Child and the Special Rapporteur on the sale and sexual
exploitation of children, including child prostitution, child pornography and other
child sexual abuse material, as well as a representative of civil society enga ged in the
promotion of the rights of the child, to be identified by the President of the General
Assembly, will address the opening plenary meeting, and that following the
interactive segment, Member States will address the high-level plenary meeting and
observers of the General Assembly will also be invited to address the high -level
plenary meeting;
5.
Requests the President of the General Assembly, in a transparent manner
and in consultation with Member States, with support from the United Nations
Children’s Fund, to finalize the organizational arrangements for the high -level
commemorative event and the high-level meeting, with due regard given to gender
balance and equitable geographical distribution, as well as the meaningful
participation of children;
6.
Encourages Member States and observers of the General Assembly to be
represented at the high-level commemorative event and the high-level meeting at the
highest possible level and to include children and young persons in their delegations;
7.
Encourages Member States to incorporate the views and perspectives of
children in their commemorative activities on the thirtieth anniversary of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child at the regional, national and subnational levels,
with a view to continuing to take action and to strengthen efforts for the advancement
of the rights of the child, and to consider sharing their experiences during the high level meeting;
8.
Invites all relevant United Nations entities and other relevant
intergovernmental, regional and subregional organizations to participate in the highlevel commemorative event and the high-level meeting at the highest possible level;
9.
Requests the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of
interested representatives of non-governmental organizations in consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council who may participate in the high -level
commemorative event and the high-level meeting;
10. Also requests the President of the General Assembly, in a timely manner,
to draw up a list of other representatives of relevant non-governmental organizations,
civil society organizations, academic institutions and the private sector who may
attend the high-level commemorative event and participate in the interactive segment
of the high-level meeting, taking into account the principles of transparency and of
2/3

19-10299

Commemoration of the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child

A/RES/73/301

equitable geographical representation, and with due regard to the meaningful
participation of women, and to submit the list to Member States for their consideration
on a non-objection basis; 3
11. Further requests the President of the General Assembly, with support from
the United Nations Children’s Fund, to prepare a summary of the high-level meeting
in November and to bring the summary to the attention of Member States, relevant
United Nations entities and other stakeholders.
91st plenary meeting
20 June 2019

__________________
3

19-10299

The list of proposed as well as final names will be brought to the attention of the General
Assembly. Where a name is objected to, the objecting Member State will, on a voluntary basis,
make known to the Office of the President of the G eneral Assembly the general basis of its
objections and the Office will share any information received with any Member State upon its
request.
3/3
