United Nations

A/RES/62/170

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 March 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 70 (e)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2007
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/62/439/Add.5)]

62/170. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and
the Optional Protocol thereto
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions, the most recent of which was
resolution 61/106 of 13 December 2006, as well as relevant resolutions of the
Commission for Social Development and the Commission on Human Rights,
Welcomes the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
1.
Disabilities 1 and the Optional Protocol thereto 2 on 13 December 2006, and
expresses the hope that they will enter into force at an early date;
0F

1F

2.
Also welcomes the fact that since the opening for signature of the
Convention and the Optional Protocol on 30 March 2007, one hundred and nineteen
States have already signed and fourteen States have ratified the Convention and
sixty-seven States have signed and three States have ratified the Optional Protocol,
and calls upon those States which have not yet done so to consider signing and
ratifying the Convention and the Optional Protocol as a matter of priority;
Invites the Secretary-General to intensify efforts to assist States to
3.
become parties to the Convention and the Optional Protocol, including by providing
assistance with a view to achieving universal adherence;
Requests the Secretary-General to provide the staff and facilities
4.
necessary to support the effective performance of the functions of the Conference of
States Parties and also to foresee all the necessary requirements for the installation
and functioning of the Committee established under the Convention and the
Optional Protocol after the entry into force of the Convention, as well as for the
dissemination of information on the Convention and the Optional Protocol;
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue the progressive
5.
implementation of standards and guidelines for the accessibility of facilities and
services of the United Nations system, taking into account relevant provisions of the
Convention, in particular when undertaking renovations;

_______________
1
2

07-47397

Resolution 61/106, annex I.
Ibid., annex II.

A/RES/62/170

6.
Requests United Nations agencies and organizations, and invites
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to continue undertaking
efforts to disseminate accessible information on the Convention and the Optional
Protocol, to promote their understanding, to prepare for their entry into force and to
assist States parties in implementing their obligations under these instruments;
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
7.
sixty-third session a report on the status of the Convention and the Optional
Protocol and the implementation of the present resolution.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 2007

2
