A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/45
26 January 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 141
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/50/638)]
50/45.

Report of the International Law Commission
on the work of its forty-seventh session

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its forty-seventh session, 1/
Emphasizing the importance of furthering the progressive development of
international law and its codification as a means of implementing the purposes
and principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and in the
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, 2/
Emphasizing also the role of the International Law Commission in the
fulfilment of the objectives of the United Nations Decade of International
Law,
Recognizing the desirability of referring legal and drafting questions
to the Sixth Committee, including topics that might be submitted to the
International Law Commission for closer examination, and of enabling the Sixth
Committee and the Commission further to enhance their contribution to the
progressive development of international law and its codification,

1/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fiftieth Session,
Supplement No. 10 (A/50/10).
2/
96-76207

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
/...

A/RES/50/45
Page 2

Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of international
law which, given their new or renewed interest for the international
community, may be suitable for the progressive development and codification of
international law and therefore may be included in the future programme of
work of the International Law Commission,
Stressing the usefulness of structuring the debate on the report of the
International Law Commission in the Sixth Committee in such a manner that
conditions are provided for concentrated attention on each of the main topics
dealt with in the report,
Wishing to enhance further the interaction between the Sixth Committee
as a body of government representatives and the International Law Commission
as a body of independent legal experts, with a view to improving the dialogue
between the two organs,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its forty-seventh session and of the
Commission’s efforts to advance the work currently under consideration;
2.
Notes the intentions of the International Law Commission for the
programme of work for the last year of office of its members;
3.

Urges the Commission at its forty-eighth session:

To resume the work on the draft Code of Crimes against the Peace
(a)
and Security of Mankind in such a manner that the second reading of the draft
Code may be completed at that session;
(b)
To resume the work on the draft articles on State responsibility
in such a manner that the first reading of that draft may be completed at that
session, taking into account the divergent views expressed during the Sixth
Committee’s debate on the topic, so that alternative approaches may be
developed when necessary;
To resume the work on the topic "International liability for
(c)
injurious consequences arising out of acts not prohibited by international
law" in order to complete the first reading of the draft articles relating to
activities that risk causing transboundary harm;
4.
Notes the beginning of the work on the topics "The law and
practice relating to reservations to treaties" and "State succession and its
impact on the nationality of natural and legal persons", and invites the
Commission to continue its work on these topics along the lines indicated in
the report;
5.
Invites States and international organizations, particularly those
which are depositaries, to answer promptly the questionnaire prepared by the
Special Rapporteur on the topic concerning reservations to treaties;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to again invite Governments to
submit as soon as possible relevant materials, including treaties, national
legislation, decisions of national tribunals and diplomatic and official
correspondence relevant to the topic "State succession and its impact on the
nationality of natural and legal persons";

/...

A/RES/50/45
Page 3

7.
Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the update
of the survey of State practice relevant to international liability for
injurious consequences arising out of acts not prohibited by international
law, prepared by the Secretariat in 1984; 3/
8.
Notes the suggestions of the International Law Commission to
include in its agenda the topic "Diplomatic protection" and initiate a
feasibility study on a topic concerning the law of the environment, and
decides to invite Governments to submit comments on these suggestions through
the Secretary-General for consideration by the Sixth Committee during the
fifty-first session of the General Assembly;
9.

Requests the International Law Commission:

(a)
To examine the procedures of its work for the purpose of further
enhancing its contribution to the progressive development and codification of
international law and to include its views in its report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-first session;
To continue to pay special attention to indicating in its annual
(b)
report, for each topic, those specific issues, if any, on which expressions of
views by Governments, either in the Sixth Committee or in written form, would
be of particular interest in providing effective guidance for the Commission
in its further work;
10.
Requests the Secretary-General to invite Governments to comment on
the present state of the codification process within the United Nations system
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-first session;
11.
Takes note of the comments of the International Law Commission on
the question of the duration of its session, as presented in its report, 4/
and expresses the view that the requirements of the work for the progressive
development of international law and its codification and the magnitude and
complexity of the subjects on the agenda of the Commission make it desirable
that the usual duration of its sessions be maintained;
12.
Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the role of the
Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and
those concerning the summary records and other documentation of the
International Law Commission;
13.
Once again expresses the wish that seminars will continue to be
held in conjunction with the sessions of the International Law Commission and
that an increasing number of participants from developing countries will be
given the opportunity to attend those seminars, appeals to States that can do
so to make the voluntary contributions that are urgently needed for the
holding of the seminars, and requests the Secretary-General to provide the

3/
Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 1985, vol. II, part I
(addendum).
4/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fiftieth Session,
Supplement No. 10 (A/50/10), para. 513.
/...

A/RES/50/45
Page 4

seminars, from within existing resources, with adequate services, including
interpretation, as required;
14.
Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the International Law
Commission, for its attention, the records of the debate on the report of the
Commission at the fiftieth session of the General Assembly, together with such
written statements as delegations may circulate in conjunction with their oral
statements, and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate,
following established practice;
15.
Recommends that the debate on the report of the International Law
Commission at the fifty-first session of the General Assembly commence on
4 November 1996.
87th plenary meeting
11 December 1995
