A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/81
23 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 90
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/54/577)]
54/81.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations
in all their aspects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965 and all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling in particular its resolution 53/58 of 3 December 1998,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization,1
Affirming that the efforts of the United Nations in the peaceful settlement of disputes, including
through its peacekeeping operations, are indispensable,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations to continue to improve its capabilities in the field of
peacekeeping and to enhance the effective and efficient deployment of its peacekeeping operations,
Considering the contribution that all States Members of the Organization make to peacekeeping,
Noting the widespread interest in contributing to the work of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations expressed by many Member States, in particular troop-contributing countries,

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/54/1).

00 30355

/...

A/RES/54/81
Page 2

Bearing in mind the continuous necessity of preserving the efficiency and strengthening the
effectiveness of the work of the Special Committee,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations;2

2. Endorses the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee, contained
in paragraphs 43 to 130 of its report;
3. Urges Member States, the Secretariat and relevant organs of the United Nations to take all
necessary steps to implement the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee;
4. Reiterates that those Member States that become personnel contributors to United Nations
peacekeeping operations in years to come or participate in the future in the Special Committee for three
consecutive years as observers shall, upon request in writing to the Chairman of the Special Committee,
become members at the following session of the Special Committee;
5. Decides that the Special Committee, in accordance with its mandate, shall continue its efforts
for a comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects and shall
review the implementation of its previous proposals and consider any new proposals so as to enhance the
capacity of the United Nations to fulfil its responsibilities in this field;
6. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at its
fifty-fourth session;
7. Decides to keep open during its fifty-fourth session the item entitled “Comprehensive review of
the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”.
71st plenary meeting
6 December 1999

2

A/54/87.
