A/62/PV.109

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-second session

109th plenary meeting
Friday, 20 June 2008, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kerim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now consider the reports of the Fifth Committee
on agenda items 125, 140 to 144, 146 to 156, 161, 164
and 126.
I request Mr. Steven Ssenabulya Nkayivu of
Uganda, Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee, to
introduce in one intervention the reports of the Fifth
Committee that are before the Assembly.
Mr. Nkayivu (Uganda) (Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee): I have the honour today to present to the
General Assembly the reports of the Fifth Committee
containing recommendations on issues that require
action during the second part of the resumed
sixty-second session of the General Assembly.
In the course of the second part of the resumed
session, which took place between 5 May and 13 June
2008, the Fifth Committee held 15 formal meetings, as
well as numerous informal meetings and informal
consultations. In accordance with General Assembly
resolution 49/233 of 23 December 1994, the second
part of the resumed session of the Fifth Committee was
devoted primarily to considering the financing of
United Nations peacekeeping missions and associated
peacekeeping issues. The Committee considered the

(The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia)

financing of 18 peacekeeping missions,
peacekeeping items and other issues.

With regard to sub-item (a), entitled “United
Nations peacekeeping operations”, of agenda item 125,
entitled “Financial reports and audited financial
statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors”, in
paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/62/534/Add.l, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution
that was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
In paragraph 13 of its report under agenda item
140, entitled “Administrative and budgetary aspects of
the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations”, which is contained in document
A/62/600/Add.1, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of three draft
resolutions. Draft resolution I is entitled “Support
account for peacekeeping operations”, draft resolution
II is entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy” and draft resolution
III is entitled “Reformed procedures for determining
reimbursement to Member States for contingent-owned
equipment”. In paragraph 14 of the same report, the
Committee also recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of an oral draft decision entitled “Use of
300-series and 100-series appointments”. All the draft
resolutions and the decision were adopted without a
vote.
With regard to the draft proposals on the
financing of peacekeeping operations, I should like to
inform the General Assembly that, with the exception

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-39604 (E)

*0839604*

related

A/62/PV.109

of sub-item (b), entitled “United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon”, of agenda item 153, entitled “Financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the
Middle East”, the Committee adopted all the draft
proposals without a vote.
The reports of the Fifth Committee are presented
under the following agenda items: 141, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Burundi”; 142, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire”; 143, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus”; 144, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo”; 146, entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor”;
147, entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste”; 148, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea”; 149, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia”; 150, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti”; 151, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo”;
152, entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia”; sub-item (a), entitled “United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force”, of item 153, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces
in the Middle East”; 154, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone”; 155, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan”; 156, entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara”;
161, entitled “Financing of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur”; and 164, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad”.
With regard to sub-item (b), entitled “United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”, of agenda item
153, entitled “Financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the report of
the Fifth Committee is contained in document
A/62/878. With regard to the draft resolution
recommended by the Committee to the General
Assembly for adoption, the Committee decided to
retain the fourth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraphs 4, 5 and 21 by a single recorded vote of 74
in favour, 4 against and 45 abstentions. In paragraph 14
of that report, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution

2

as a whole, which was adopted in the Committee by a
recorded vote of 124 in favour, 2 against and
1 abstention.
Under agenda item 126, entitled “Review of the
efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, the Committee had
before it a draft resolution entitled “Procurement
reform”, which the Committee adopted without a vote.
Under the same agenda item, in paragraph 15 of
document
A/62/604/Add.2,
the
Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft decision entitled “Questions deferred for future
consideration”, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
Before I conclude, allow me again to thank
delegations for their cooperation in the conduct of
negotiations. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Hamidon Ali, Chairman of the Fifth Committee, for the
way in which he guided us through our difficult work. I
should also like to thank the members of the Bureau,
with whom it was, as always, a pleasure to work. On
behalf of all of us, I would also like to express our
profound thanks to the representatives of the
Secretariat — and especially the secretariat of the Fifth
Committee — for their cooperation, patience and
support.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
reports that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting unless that
delegation’s vote is different from its vote in the
Committee”.

08-39604

A/62/PV.109

May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance. That means that where
separate or recorded votes were taken, we will do the
same. I should also hope that we may proceed to adopt
without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Fifth Committee.
Agenda item 125 (continued)
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/534/Add.1)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/233 B).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
125.
Agenda item 140 (continued)
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/600/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it three draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 13 of its report, as well as a
draft decision recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 14 of the same report. We will now take a
decision on draft resolutions I to III and on the one
draft decision.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Support account for
peacekeeping operations”. The Fifth Committee

08-39604

adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
62/250).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Logistics
Base at Brindisi, Italy”. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
62/251).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Reformed procedures for determining
reimbursement to Member States for contingent-owned
equipment”. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
62/252).
The Acting President: The draft decision is
entitled “Use of 300-series and 100-series
appointments”. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
decision without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 140.
Agenda item 141
Financing of the United Nations Operation
in Burundi
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/866)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now
take action on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/253).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 141.

3

A/62/PV.109

Agenda item 142
Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/867)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/254).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
142.
Agenda item 143
Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
144.
Agenda item 146
Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/870)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/257).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
146.

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/868)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/255).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
143.
Agenda item 144
Financing of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/869)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/256).

4

Agenda item 147
Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/871)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/258).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
147.
Agenda item 148
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/872)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The

08-39604

A/62/PV.109

Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/259).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
148.
Agenda item 149
Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/873)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/260).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
149.
Agenda item 150
Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/874)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/261).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
150.

08-39604

Agenda item 151
Financing of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/875)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/262).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
151.
Agenda item 152
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/876)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/263).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
152.
Agenda item 153
Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces
in the Middle East
(a) United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/877)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled
“Financing
of
the
United
Nations

5

A/62/PV.109

Disengagement Observer Force”. The Fifth Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/264).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 153.
(b) United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/878)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 14 of its report. The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon”.
A single separate vote has been requested on the
fourth preambular paragraph and operative paragraphs
4, 5 and 21 of the draft resolution. Is there any
objection to that request? There is none. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Benin, Bolivia,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji,
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian

6

Republic of),
Zimbabwe.

Viet

Nam,

Yemen,

Zambia,

Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Moldova, Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The fourth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraphs 4, 5 and 21 were retained by 90 votes
to 4, with 45 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Malta and
Slovenia advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote
the draft resolution as a whole. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,

08-39604

A/62/PV.109

Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Australia.
The draft resolution as a whole was adopted by
142 votes to 2, with 1 abstention (resolution
62/265).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Malta advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, who wishes
to speak in explanation of vote following the voting.
Mr. Diab (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation joined in the consensus
adoption of the resolution entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force”. We
also voted in favour of the resolution entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon”. We did so on the basis of a principle that we
have always emphasized, namely, that the
responsibility for financing those two missions must be
borne by Israel, the aggressor and occupying Power
responsible for the establishment of those operations.
Our position is in line with the general principles
enshrined in resolution 1874 (S-IV), adopted on
27 June 1963 during the fourth special session of the
General Assembly.

08-39604

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 153.
Agenda item 154
Financing of the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/879)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The Assembly
will now take action on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/266).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 154.
Agenda item 155
Financing of the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/880)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. The Assembly
will now take action on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/267).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 155.
Agenda item 156
Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/881)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.

7

A/62/PV.109

We will now take action on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/268).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 156.
Agenda item 161 (continued)
Financing of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/601/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take action on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/232 B).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 161.
Agenda item 164 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/602/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take action on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/233 B).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 164.

8

Agenda item 126 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/604/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 14 of its report, as well as a
draft decision recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 15 of the same report. We will now take
action on the draft resolution and the draft decision.
The draft resolution is entitled “Procurement
reform”. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/269).
The Acting President: The draft decision is
entitled “Questions deferred for future consideration”.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
126. The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(c) Election of five members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
in accordance with paragraph 4 (a) to (e) of General
Assembly resolution 60/180 of 20 December 2005, the
Organizational Committee shall comprise the
following: seven members of the Security Council,
including permanent members; seven members of the
Economic and Social Council, elected from regional
groups; five top providers of assessed contributions to
United Nations budgets and of voluntary contributions
to United Nations funds, programmes and agencies,
including a standing peacebuilding fund; five top
providers of military personnel and civilian police to
United Nations missions; and seven additional

08-39604

A/62/PV.109

members elected by the General Assembly, giving due
consideration to representation from all regional
groups in the overall composition of the Committee.
Members will further recall that, at its 82nd
plenary meeting, on 16 May 2006, the General
Assembly elected Burundi, Chile, Egypt, El Salvador
and Fiji as members of the Organizational Committee
of the Peacebuilding Commission for a term of office
of two years, which expires on 22 June 2008.
It is my understanding that consultations are still
ongoing among the regional groups regarding the
election by the Assembly for membership in the
Committee. As an interim measure, and with the hope
that a solution can be found soon, the President of the
General Assembly has proposed extending until 11 July
2008 the term of office of the current members of the
Assembly on the Committee that is due to expire on
22 June 2008.
In that connection, I also wish to inform members
that by today’s date, the terms of the current members
of the troop-contributing countries are also extended to
11 July 2008.
I understand that the Economic and Social
Council has taken similar action concerning its current
members of the Organizational Committee.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly as an interim measure to extend the terms of
office of the current members of the Assembly on the
Organizational Committee — Burundi, Chile, Egypt,
El Salvador and Fiji — to 11 July 2008?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bahamas.
Ms. Bethel (Bahamas): I have the honour of
making this statement on behalf of the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States, which has actively
participated in the ongoing consultations concerning
the composition of the Organizational Committee of
the Peacebuilding Commission. We thank the President
of the General Assembly and his Office for all their
efforts in that regard, and while we welcome this
decision as an interim accommodation, we must state
unequivocally that it does not address the fundamental
concerns of the Latin American and Caribbean Group
regarding the composition and distribution criteria of
the Peacebuilding Commission.

08-39604

After many months of continued discussions, it
remains clear to us that the Commission is a body
created by the United Nations that does not respond
adequately to the principle of equitable geographical
distribution. As currently constituted, the Commission
stands as an organ primarily for troop and financial
donors, and that is not a trend that the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States is willing to advance.
We are of the conviction that it would be in the best
interests of the entire Organization to continue to
review the composition of the Peacebuilding
Commission with a view to redressing imbalances on a
sustainable basis, thus reflecting the reality that the
experience and contributions of all regions are valuable
to the work of the Commission.
For the Latin American and Caribbean States, the
principle of equitable geographical representation is
fundamental to the consolidation of universal
multilateralism. From the time of its inception and,
more recently, in the framework of ongoing
consultations, we have continuously defended a
balanced representation in the overall composition of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We firmly believe that a balanced
representation of all regional groups is fundamental to
the legitimacy of the body and that the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission would
benefit greatly from such a composition.
In that context, the States members of our Group
intend to pursue, in consultation and collaboration with
the other regional groups, a solid and long-term
solution to the challenge of underrepresented regional
groups. We reiterate our conviction that this can and
should be done through the election of members from
within the wider General Assembly, a component of the
constituting resolution that was included precisely for
the purpose of balancing the general composition of
this Commission. That continues to be our
interpretation of sub-item (e) of operative paragraph 4
of resolution 60/180.
Once again, on behalf of the States members of
the Latin American and Caribbean Group, I thank
President Kerim for his guidance and assistance in
bringing us to this critical point, where the only option
is one of forward movement. We look forward to
working with him and all Member States in a spirit of
cooperation and mutual support in finding a lasting and
equitable solution for regional representation on the

9

A/62/PV.109

Organizational
Commission.

Committee

of

the

Peacebuilding

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 113.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/62/L.25/Rev.2)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the sponsoring countries Belarus, Chile,
Colombia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Fiji, Guatemala,
Honduras, Kyrgyzstan, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, the
Dominican Republic, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan, Venezuela
and Mexico, I have the honour to introduce the draft
resolution contained in document A/62/L.25/Rev.2,
entitled
“Global
Forum
on
Migration
and
Development”.
The draft resolution takes into consideration,
among other elements, the fact that the summary of the
High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development, held in 2006, underlined the close link
among migration, development and human rights, as
well as that respect for the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all migrants was essential for
taking advantage of the positive aspects of
international migration.
The draft resolution stresses the need to promote
a comprehensive and coherent discussion on all aspects
of the phenomenon of migration, taking into account
its importance on the global agenda.
It also recalls that Member States participating in
the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development expressed interest in continuing the
dialogue on migration and supported the proposal of
the Secretary-General to create a global forum to
address, in depth and in a systematic manner, all topics
related to international migration and development. In
that sense, it recognizes that the Global Forum on
Migration and Development should be strengthened
with the aim of addressing the multidimensional
aspects of international migration and development
with a comprehensive approach.

10

In paragraph 1, it recognizes that exchanges of
information and expertise, consultation and closer
cooperation between the Global Forum on Migration
and Development and the United Nations could have a
positive impact and, in that regard, proposes a series of
measures to be taken.
In paragraph 2, it welcomes the inclusion of the
topic of the human rights of migrants in the Forum’s
agenda.
I would like to point out that in the Chinese and
English versions of the draft resolution, there is a
mistake in the third preambular paragraph. The subject
of resolution 62/156 should read “protection of
migrants” instead of “protection of migrant workers”.
The draft resolution on which we are taking
action today has been the subject of four open-ended
consultative processes and a significant number of
consultations in other formats since December 2007.
The differences between the original version, in
document A/62/L.25, and the revised version speak for
themselves and show the enormous flexibility and
political will of the sponsors in addressing all
concerns. On that basis, we invite all delegations to
support the draft resolution.
I would now like to make some remarks in my
national capacity. The issue of migration is of
unquestionable historical relevance and has become a
topic of major importance in the context of
globalization. It is evident that, in a significant number
of cases, the current composition of our societies is
indissociably connected to historical and current
migratory flows. A clear example of that is the western
hemisphere, which, from North to South, is made up of
societies that are the product of various migratory
flows originating from every region. These are mixed
societies on several different levels. Mexico is proud of
its mixed heritage.
Migration enriches our societies, rendering them
more diverse and pluralistic, encouraging the exchange
and evolution of ideas. In conjunction with the
implementation of adequate policies, we can advance
towards creating more tolerant, open, universal and,
above all, humane communities. As sponsors of the
draft resolution, we believe in the capacity of the
United Nations to reach that objective.
In addition, regarding the topic of development,
the receiving countries benefit from migratory flows

08-39604

A/62/PV.109

that complement their need for skilled and unskilled
labour. That is particularly relevant in societies whose
demographic structure does not guarantee growth or
the maintenance of their current economic standards.
On the other hand, in the countries of origin, diaspora
communities generally play a relevant role within the
economic structure.
Nevertheless, it is important to recognize that
migration poses a number of important challenges.
Those challenges are serious and varied. There are
concerns regarding security; economic consequences,
such as the loss of human capital from developing
countries; and social consequences, such as the
disintegration of the family.
In the vast majority of cases, migrants’ only
intention is to secure a better future for themselves and
their families, even at the cost of risking their lives,
leaving their homes, cultures and language, only to
then encounter foreign and, in some cases, hostile
environments. In that regard, tendencies to criminalize
the most vulnerable populations are particularly
alarming.
My delegation considers that cooperation and
dialogue among all stakeholders involved in
migration — including, inter alia, Governments,
specialized agencies, civil society and the private
sector — are essential if we are to take full advantage
of the potential benefits of migration, consistently
facing the challenges posed by the various aspects of
the issue through an integrated and multidimensional
approach.
That approach should take into consideration
above all that migration is not about the flow of goods
or resources, but about human beings, who cannot be
handled or managed in a mechanical way. It is
therefore indispensable to keep human beings and the
need to decisively guarantee the protection of human
rights and dignity at the core of our considerations. The
fight against racism and xenophobia and the defence of
all the rights of migrants, particularly when they
constitute a vulnerable population, are essential efforts.
That is in line with the spirit and the letter of the
United Nations Charter, as well as its highest values
and the agreements reached in various documents
within the framework of the Organization. We are
aware of the way in which the topic of migration has
been addressed within the framework of the United

08-39604

Nations in recent years and
accumulated knowledge.

we

embrace that

Allow me to explain the main factors that
motivated us in presenting this draft resolution. The
first was our commitment to multilateralism and our
trust in the United Nations as the most democratic and
representative international organization, as it
promotes open and honest dialogue among Member
States as partners for development. The second was our
commitment to the universal and non-selective
protection of human rights, including those of
migrants, regardless of their migratory status.
In that context, we believe that the Global Forum
on Migration and Development proposed by the
Secretary-General can provide a privileged space for a
full and coherent discussion of all the topics related to
international migration and development. In that
regard, the draft resolution recognizes that, although
the United Nations and the Forum are of different
natures, closer cooperation between the two could have
a positive impact in addressing the topic of migration.
The draft resolution also sends a clear message
that discussions on migration cannot exclude the
human component, and it therefore welcomes the
inclusion of the topic of human rights in the agenda of
the second session of the Forum.
On the eve of the sixtieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and given the
current challenges in this area to which we all are
witness on an almost daily basis, we believe it crucial
to point out that full respect for the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all migrants is a sine qua non
condition for taking advantage of the positive aspects
of international migration. We believe that, in
addressing the topic of migration, human beings should
be at the centre of our discussions.
For Mexico, supporting this draft resolution
means supporting an integrated approach to the topic
of migration, taking into account human beings; it
means supporting a more effective multilateralism and
the role that the United Nations can play in the search
for solutions to the challenges we face. We are
convinced of the great value of the work of the United
Nations and the benefits that can be reaped from it in
other forums. No matter now difficult an issue might
be, the United Nations has an historical role to play in
its treatment. Supporting the draft resolution is an
additional step in our commitment to creating more

11

A/62/PV.109

tolerant, open, universal and, above all, humane
communities.

implications statement of draft resolution A/62/L.25 as
follows.

The Acting President: We will now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/62/L.25/Rev.2, as orally
corrected. In connection with the draft resolution, I
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.

The Secretary-General’s report requested in
resolution 61/208, to be submitted at the sixty-third
session, is to be ready by the end of July 2008. Given
the short lead time, the evaluation would not be as
detailed as originally envisioned in the original
programme budget implication statement, contained in
document A/C.5/62/19. Therefore, the consultant to
carry out the evaluation could be hired for a maximum
of one work month at $10,000. That amount would be
met from within existing resources under section 9,
Economic and social affairs, of the programme budget
for the biennium 2008-2009. The contractual service
requirements originally envisaged in document
A/C.5/62/19 would no longer apply.

Ms. Kelley (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to inform
members that, under the terms of paragraph 1 (b) of
draft resolution A/62/L.25/Rev.2, the General
Assembly would request the Secretary-General to
include in his report, called for in resolution 61/208, an
evaluation of the existing cooperation mechanisms on
migration and development and to make it available to
the second meeting of the Global Forum.
It is recalled in this connection that the
programme budget implication statement, contained in
document A/C.5/62/19, was issued in December 2007
in response to the request in paragraph 1 (a) of draft
resolution A/62/L.25 to present at the second meeting
of the Global Forum, to be held in Manila, an
evaluation of the existing cooperation mechanisms on
migration and development.
It is further recalled that, at its 26th meeting, on
26 December 2007, the Fifth Committee, having
considered the statement of programme budget
implications submitted by the Secretary-General and
the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, decided to
inform the General Assembly that, should it adopt draft
resolution A/62/L.25, additional requirements of
$110,000 would be met within the overall
appropriations under section 9, Economic and social
affairs, of the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2008-2009 and also decided to report thereon
in the context of the performance report.
The General Assembly, however, did not adopt
draft resolution A/62/L.25 in December 2007. The
request in paragraph 1 (b) of draft resolution
A/62/L.25/Rev.2 provides for a change from a standalone report on the evaluation of existing cooperation
mechanisms on migration and development to a part of
the regular Secretary-General’s report to be submitted
by the General Assembly in accordance with its
resolution 61/208. That change would also result in the
amendment to the programme budget implications
contained in the previous programme budget

12

As the requested evaluation would be part of the
Secretary-General’s report, the additional translation,
editing and printing costs would be accommodated
within the resources allocated for the preparation of the
report. Since the report would be issued as an official
United Nations document, it could be distributed to all
permanent missions in New York prior to the Global
Forum’s meeting. Copies of the report could also be
delivered by Department for Economic and Social
Affairs staff attending the Forum, disseminated
electronically and/or reproduced locally.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/62/L.25/Rev.2, no additional
resources would be required over and above the level
of resources approved under section 9, Economic and
social affairs, of the programme budget for the
biennium 2008-2009. As the requested evaluation
would be part of the already programmed report, no
modifications would be required for the programme of
work of section 9, Economic and social affairs.
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote before the voting, allow
me to remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Hagen (United States of America): The
United States will vote against this draft resolution
because it seeks to link the Global Forum on Migration
and Development with the United Nations. The Forum
is an independent, intergovernmental process that falls
outside of the United Nations system, and we believe
that separation should be maintained. We do not see the

08-39604

A/62/PV.109

need for closer cooperation between the Forum and the
United Nations, as called for in the draft resolution, nor
do we believe that the Secretary-General should be
requested to prepare reports for the Forum, as the draft
resolution also proposes. The United States believes
that follow-up to the High-level Dialogue on Migration
and Development should appropriately be addressed in
the Second Committee of the General Assembly, which
has a biennial agenda item on the topic of international
migration and development. That item is on the
provisional agenda of the Assembly’s sixty-third
session, and we look forward to a thorough discussion
of it this fall.
The United States values international migration
and is proud of its strong immigrant tradition.
According to United Nations statistics, the United
States is home to 20 per cent of the world’s migrants.
Between 2000 and 2006, over 6 million migrants
became legal permanent residents of our country. We
believe that those facts speak to the level of
opportunity, integration and success that immigrants in
the United States enjoy.
United States policy on international migration
focuses on the promotion of respect for the human
rights of migrants, the protection of asylum-seekers
and refugees, opposition to uncontrolled and illegal
migration, support for anti-trafficking efforts, and
encouragement of the rapid and successful integration
of our legal immigrants. The United States believes
strongly that orderly migration, when managed
effectively, benefits countries of origin and destination,
as well as migrants themselves.
Ms. Brown (Canada): Canada will vote against
draft resolution A/62/L.25/Rev.2 because we have
serious reservations both about its objective and about
certain elements of the text. We deeply regret that
Mexico and the group of sponsors were not willing to
continue with the regular process of open and inclusive
informal negotiations on the text in order to address in
a satisfactory manner the concerns raised repeatedly by
a large number of delegations since the first draft was
submitted in December.
Allow me to explain clearly what Canada’s
position concerning the draft resolution does not
reflect. Our position is not a reflection of the
importance that Canada attaches to constructive
dialogue between States on the multidimensional
aspects of international migration and development.

08-39604

Over the past few years, we have witnessed a growing
sophistication in the way migration is considered.
Linkages between migration and development are
being explored in greater depth — an approach that
Canada finds valuable. Canada is actively involved in
international relations related to migration and
development at the bilateral and regional levels, as
well as in a variety of multilateral forums, including
the Global Forum on Migration and Development.
Our position on the draft resolution is not in any
way a reflection of the importance we attach to human
rights issues. Canada fully supports the protection and
the promotion of human rights for all. We hope that all
countries participating in the second meeting of the
Global Forum, to be held in Manila in October 2008,
will come prepared to share information on the
practical steps that they have taken in their own
countries to advance the issues that will be discussed at
the Forum, including the very important question of
human rights. Canada considers that the Global Forum
on Migration and Development presents an opportunity
for constructive, productive dialogue on that subject
and for advancing the human rights of migrants
through concrete and practical initiatives.
Less than two years ago, after participating in the
High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development, the vast majority of countries
represented at the High-level Dialogue opted to launch
an independent, States-led Global Forum on Migration
and Development outside the framework of the United
Nations. Canada has been actively involved in those
efforts. The Global Forum has an appropriate
mechanism for States to consider its direction — the
assembly of countries known as the Friends of the
Forum, whose responsibility it is to determine the
direction of the Global Forum. Given that arrangement,
Canada does not believe that a General Assembly draft
resolution focused on the Forum is appropriate.
Canada also regrets that the draft resolution does
not
respect
the
intergovernmental
agreement
concerning deliberations on international migration and
development that Member States agreed to at the sixtyfirst session following the High-level Dialogue. In
resolution 61/208, the General Assembly decided that
possible options for appropriate follow-up to the Highlevel Dialogue would be considered at its sixty-third
session.

13

A/62/PV.109

Further, Canada supports the efficient and
rational management of the General Assembly’s work.
The General Assembly has a dedicated agenda item on
international migration and development, and that is
where matters related to international migration and
development should be taken up. We trust that the
present draft resolution will not become an annual
occurrence, resulting in unnecessary duplication of
work and of reporting.
In relation to the draft resolution, Canada recalls
the remarks of the Secretary-General at the time of the
High-level Dialogue: “There is no consensus on
making international migration the subject of formal,
norm-setting negotiations” (A/61/PV.3, p. 4). In the
absence of such consensus and in light of the widely
differing views on the appropriate role for the United
Nations in that area at this time, Canada encourages
Member States that wish to further constructive, rather
than divisive, dialogue to focus their efforts on the
work of the Global Forum in order to develop concrete
approaches and practices that further the positive
outcomes of international migration and development.
Mrs. Asmady (Indonesia): Indonesia takes the
floor to give an explanation of vote before the voting
on the draft resolution entitled “Global Forum on
Migration and Development”, contained in document
A/62/L.25/Rev.2.
Indonesia, as a country of emigration,
immigration and transit, has always made the issue of
migration a top priority of our policy. It is therefore
very important to have a common and global
framework in the United Nations based on the
multidimensional nature of migration that captures the
opportunities and tackles the challenges arising from
international migration.
At this juncture, it is crucial to maintain a
consensus on the draft resolution in support of that
important issue, which has also been addressed at the
bilateral, regional and global levels, and by
international organizations, including within the
framework of the United Nations.
Indonesia does not believe that voting is the
appropriate decision-making process to resolve the
issues surrounding the draft resolution, and we are of
the view that voting on the draft resolution would only
diminish the basic framework on international
migration that we have been working towards. For that

14

reason, we shall abstain in the voting on the draft
resolution, which should be adopted by consensus.
Nevertheless, my delegation fully supports all
positive measures, such as the Global Forum on
Migration and Development, that broaden our
perspective and provide insight for States Members of
the United Nations. While the Forum is an informal
and State-led initiative, it can serve as a confidencebuilding
measure
to
discuss
the
complex,
multidimensional aspects of international migration
and development in a systematic and comprehensive
way.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/62/L.25/Rev.2,
entitled
“Global
Forum
on
Migration
and
Development”, as orally corrected. Additional sponsors
are Bolivia and Venezuela.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Bolivia,
Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Guatemala,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Qatar, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Togo, Tunisia, United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Canada, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,

08-39604

A/62/PV.109

Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malaysia,
Malta,
Moldova,
Monaco, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation,
San Marino, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
Draft resolution A/62/L.25/Rev.2, as orally
corrected, was adopted by 86 votes to 2, with 55
abstentions (resolution 62/270).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote, I would remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats. I now give the floor to the representative of
Cuba.
Mr. Cumberbach Miguén (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Our delegation wishes first of all to thank the
authors of the resolution we have just adopted for their
efforts to find common ground for understanding on
the complex subject of international migration and its
implications for the development of our countries. We
were powerfully struck by the double standard with
which forums that are organized outside of the United
Nations are handled. Some that are used to attack and
defame Members of this Organization seem to be
favoured, while others that have more noble intentions
are rejected when they are not to the liking of some of
the most powerful countries of the world.
The current phenomenon of global migration is
directly related to the present and unsustainable
international economic and political order in which the
poor majorities are simply marginalized by the
ultra-orthodox logic of the market of neoliberal
globalization. It is necessary to consider that subject
comprehensively, linking it, above all, to development
policies that respond to the structural causes of
migration flows in our day.
To criminalize migrants, to militarize or build
walls at borders, to adopt laws and resolutions that
make it possible to detain migrants for long periods of
time without legal guarantees or, worse yet, to
politicize the subject of migration, inciting many to
migrate illegally in insecure and risky circumstances,

08-39604

do nothing to help the genuine cooperation that is
needed in this regard.
Partisan approaches only fuel xenophobia,
racism, racial discrimination and prejudices against
minorities, and promote the inhuman illegal trafficking
in persons. The Cuban delegation hopes that the
initiatives on global migration promoted within and
outside the framework of the United Nations will
contribute to the emergence of solutions that change
the structural causes of the phenomenon. If we limit
ourselves to formulas to control migration flows, we
will merely be postponing the crisis that looms on the
horizon.
The beneficiaries of the present world order
should reflect and at least act with intelligence and
common sense if they do not wish to act with
generosity.
Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): I have the honour to
take the floor in explanation of my delegation’s vote
after the voting.
It is the view of Malaysia that the resolution just
adopted does not accurately or in a nuanced manner
convey how the rights of migrants are to be discussed
across the entire migration chain and the role of
sending and receiving States alike as duty-bearers at
the second meeting of the Global Forum on Migration
and Development in Manila at the end of this year. We
regret that the resolution does not treat all the issues
before the Global Forum in an equal manner and with
the same emphasis.
It is also the view of my delegation that the
overall concept of the resolution creates a bad
precedent for involving the United Nations in an
essentially independent State-led initiative. As was
decided in resolution 61/208, the question of the
Global Forum is to be considered as a follow-up to the
2006 High-level Dialogue on International Migration
and Development, and that the relationship between the
Forum and the United Nations is to be discussed at the
upcoming sixty-third session of the General Assembly.
As such, it was premature at this stage for the
resolution to have been discussed. We believe that the
resolution should not in any way prejudge or be used
as a basis of discussions for the negotiations that we
are to have at the sixty-third session. Malaysia looks
forward to constructive discussions at that time.

15

A/62/PV.109

It is for the reasons that I have explained that my
delegation has abstained in the voting on the
resolution.

bring added value, provided that it is informal,
voluntary, non-binding and driven by interested United
Nations Member States and participants.

Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): It is my honour to take the
floor on behalf of the European Union. On 6 June, the
European Union asked for the postponement of the
consideration of the agenda item on the Global Forum
on Migration and Development. We did so because we
believe that, in today’s world, marked by globalization
and significant demographic change, the dialogue on
migration and development has become very
important. In that context, the need for a resolution on
the Global Forum on Migration and Development that
represents the view of the wider membership of the
United Nations is even greater; hence the need to strive
for a consensual outcome.

The cooperation between the United Nations and
the Forum is through the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, which was reaffirmed by the members
of the Forum in its guiding principles. Members of the
Forum have not agreed on a stronger link and therefore
we should not act prematurely, with only one Forum
meeting behind us. Rather, we should take advantage
of its consultative nature for confidence-building
among States and for achieving progress towards better
integrating migration as a positive factor in
development policies. In the contrary case, we risk
jeopardizing a process that brings practical responses
to the challenges and opportunities of migration and
development.

In 2006, the topic was addressed at the High-level
Dialogue in New York. In the same year, the General
Assembly adopted the Second Committee resolution on
international migration and development, also
mentioned in the resolution considered in today’s
plenary meeting. It is in that document that States
Members of the United Nations agreed to include in
the agenda of the sixty-third session of the General
Assembly the issue of international migration and
development. The European Union believes that the
discussion introduced with the item on today’s agenda
is premature and not in accordance with the will
expressed by the General Assembly during its sixtyfirst session.
The 2006 resolution on international migration
and development noted with interest in its preambular
part the offer of the Government of Belgium to
convene in 2007 a State-led initiative, the Global
Forum on Migration and Development. In his address
to the Forum, the Secretary-General noted that, “For
many years, Member States of our United Nations
found it hard to discuss the sensitive issue of migration
in the international arena”. The importance of the
Global Forum is therefore tremendous, as it offers the
opportunity for countries to continue the dialogue on
migration and development and to contribute to the
development of holistic approaches to the issue.
The Forum is a useful tool for the exchange of
views and ideas on how to tackle challenges emanating
from the nexus between migration and development.
The European Union has always been a strong
supporter of the Global Forum in the belief that it can

16

On 6 June, we expressed our view that the draft
resolution presented on that date failed to represent the
view of the wider membership of the United Nations.
Since then, we have engaged in further informal
consultations, which have resulted in the text before us
today. The European Union appreciates that the
sponsors have incorporated some amendments.
Nevertheless, the new resolution presented today does
not address all of our concerns. It is for that reason that
the European Union abstained in today’s voting.
Furthermore, the European Union is of the view
that the follow-up to the High-level Dialogue on
International Migration and Development should
continue to be dealt with in the context of the biennial
Second Committee agenda item dedicated to
international migration and development.
Mr. Gatan (Philippines): My delegation would
like to put on record the simple reason why it abstained
in the voting on resolution 62/270. The obvious reason
was to demonstrate our neutrality on this polarized
issue, as expected of the host of the second meeting of
the Global Forum on Migration and Development.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the vote.
Several delegations have asked for the floor to
make statements after adoption, and I shall call on
them now.
Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution 62/270
today because we believe that it will facilitate greater

08-39604

A/62/PV.109

cooperation between the Global Forum on Migration
and Development and the United Nations system. As a
sponsor of the resolution, Ecuador associates itself
with the statement made by the representative of
Mexico and wishes to reiterate its traditional position
that the analysis and discussion of migration and
development being conducted at various levels, in
particular multilaterally, should include the issue of the
human rights of migrants in all forums, whether by
Member States, United Nations bodies, civil society or
the private sector, pursuant to the close link among
migration, development and human rights that has
already been highlighted as a result of the High-level
Dialogue on International Migration and Development,
held by the Assembly in September 2006.
Ecuador supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that the Global Forum examine in
depth and systematically all topics related to
international migration and development. The
Secretary-General emphasized in his report of 18 May
2006 (A/60/871) that, within the United Nations
system there is no single entity that examines those
subjects systematically.
Following several months of negotiations, the
sponsors displayed great flexibility and a spirit of
conciliation to achieve consensus on subjects related to
the link between the Forum and the United Nations
system and the human rights of migrants on the agenda
of the Manila meeting. That reflects the commitment of
all United Nations Members that consideration of the
human rights of migrants should be comprehensive and
holistic.
Ecuador believes that the huge interest shown by
a number of delegations in the subject before us today
demonstrates the need for the link among migration,
development and human rights to be discussed and in a
systematic and sustained manner in the Assembly; in
adopting today’s resolution, Member States are thus
working in the right direction towards that end.
Ecuador, in co-sponsoring and supporting the
resolution, acted consistently with its migration policy
at the national and international levels as a country of
origin and destination for migration. It suffices to
mention that in the Constituent Assembly, which is
now preparing a new constitution for Ecuador, we have
approved the recognition of universal citizenship,
which would entail, among other things, the

08-39604

elimination of tourist visas for the admission into our
territory of all citizens of the world.
Ecuador views with concern the fact that, in the
context of the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights — which in article 13
highlights the right of everyone to freedom of
movement and residence within the borders of each
State and to leave any country, including his own, and
to return to his country — the European Parliament has
adopted a directive of return, applicable in European
Union member States, to residents from third countries
residing illegally, by which persons with an illegal
status can be imprisoned for a period of between 6 and
12 months if they do not comply with a deportation
order 30 days after notification. Those measures are a
violation of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and of international human rights instruments
because they criminalize illegal immigration, which is
prohibited under the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families. Ecuador believes that the
penalization of illegal immigration cannot be
concealed behind a policy of return because the latter
is imposed not by force, but voluntarily in the context
of basic respect for human rights and guarantees in a
spirit of cooperation and dialogue.
Ecuador regrets that the resolution that we have
adopted on a topic that means so much to us all was
not adopted by consensus and that some delegations
opposed it despite the fact that the issue of migration,
from a human rights perspective, is of supreme
importance on the global agenda and, as a multilateral
topic, falls within the Organization’s responsibility.
Ecuador will continue to work towards
constructive dialogue on migration without limiting the
comprehensive focus on the human rights of migrants
and their families, in accordance with the mandate
established by our heads of State in the final document
of the 2005 World Summit.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): The Nicaraguan delegation, as a sponsor,
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Mexico. We welcome the adoption of
resolution 62/270 on the Global Forum on Migration
and Development and are grateful to those who
supported us.
At the same time, we regret that some delegations
did not support the initiative and remained inflexible

17

A/62/PV.109

throughout a lengthy process of negotiations, in which
the sponsors clearly showed flexibility towards
reaching consensus. The sponsors were aware of the
great need for dialogue on this subject at different
levels — particularly at the multilateral level, where it
is possible to consider the problems and opportunities
presented by migration from a multidimensional
perspective — and to adopt measures to protect and
promote the human rights of migrants.
The High-level Dialogue on International
Migration and Development, held in 2006, emphasized
the close relationship among migration, development
and human rights. For that reason, we believe that any
initiative to discuss the issue under that principle will
always be welcome. Likewise, we are pleased that the
initial proposal of the Secretary-General to create a
global forum that would address that issue in depth and
systematically has been brought to fruition by the
convening of the Global Forum on Migration and
Development in Brussels in 2007 and its second
meeting, to be held in the Philippines this year.
We hope that the adoption of resolution 62/270
will be the beginning of a close and constructive
relationship between the Forum and the United Nations
as the universal body where the interests of all actors
involved converge and where subjects are approached
on terms of equality, justice and solidarity so as to
ensure that the outcome of discussions is aimed at
improving situations and not at favouring a certain
group. Far from resolving the problem, addressing the
topic of migration with agendas imposed by receiving
countries only exacerbates it.
My delegation also wishes to express its concern
at the directive of return recently adopted by the
European Parliament. In addition to highlighting once
again the contradictions of the free market model
imposed on our countries, which promotes the mobility
of goods and services while opposing the free
movement of the human beings who produce those
goods and services, the directive violates the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and several
articles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
in particular article 13, which establishes that
“[e]veryone has the right to freedom of movement and
residence within the borders of each State”.
I would ask the Europeans who came to our
America and went to other continents whether they
encountered the same restrictions and hostility when

18

they arrived in our lands to take our resources. The
directive was drafted without taking into account the
contributions that migrations, especially from Latin
America, the Caribbean, Asia and Africa have made to
the prosperity of the European Union, making its
markets dynamic and correcting the demographic
deficit.
Today more than ever, we need to reactivate
dialogue among the countries of destination and of
origin to promote viable solutions that are respectful of
the human rights of migrants and their families.
Nicaragua appeals to the countries of Latin America
and the Caribbean, Asia and Africa to join the
initiatives of all fraternal countries to unite in defence
of the human rights of migrants.
Mr. Siles Alvarado (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
The Bolivian delegation does not want to make a
lengthy statement since most of the concepts that we
should have liked to mention have already been put
forward by the delegations that sponsored resolution
62/270.
Nonetheless, I want to emphasize that, in the
view of the Bolivian delegation, the resolution
constitutes one more step in defence of those millions
of migrants who find themselves obliged to live in
often subhuman conditions — those thousands, indeed
millions, of migrants who are obliged to live in secret.
Those countries that benefit from the contribution of
those millions of migrants are precisely those that
simply do not understand that humanity is moving
forward. The resolution is yet another step in defence
of respect for the human rights of those millions of
migrants.
We are delighted that only two countries voted
against the resolution because that helps us to see with
great hope that even those countries of the European
Union that do not yet understand the contribution of
those migrants voted in favour of it. We are also quite
concerned about decisions taken in the European
Parliament this week. We hope that, in spite of those
decisions, the European Community will become
increasingly aware and take decisions that promote the
defence of the human rights of migrants.
Mr. Labbé (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation takes the floor as one of the sponsors of the
resolution that has just been adopted.

08-39604

A/62/PV.109

Chile is a country of immigration. The presidency
of the Republic of Chile has been occupied by
descendants of Spanish, Swiss, German, French, Italian
and English immigrants. Chile is home to the largest
community of descendants of Croatians that exists
outside of Croatia. Chile is home to the largest
community of descendants of Palestinians living
outside the Middle East. Last month, the President of
Chile, Michelle Bachelet, welcomed at the Palacio de
La Moneda in Santiago 108 new Palestinian
immigrants who formerly lived near the border with
Iraq and who have become Chilean citizens and been
welcomed with open arms.
Chile, which has become a host country for
immigration from neighbouring countries, recently
enacted a law under which amnesty was granted to
over 50,000 illegal immigrants from fraternal countries
who have come to our country to seek a better future
for themselves and their families.
We understand the importance of the contribution
of migration because we have experienced it and are
grateful for it. That is why we sponsored today’s
resolution and voted in favour of it. We see nothing in
it that can prejudge the final outcome of the
discussions that will be conducted within the United
Nations to define forward-looking policies regarding
immigration.
We also know that the United Nations and its
system rest on three pillars — international security,
human rights and development. Immigration has an
extremely important role to play in those three pillars.
Chile views the problem of immigration in the same
way as it views all problems that relate to the human
person — from the perspective of the human security
paradigm.
The entire United Nations agenda must be seen
from the perspective of the inherent dignity of human
beings. We are a social organization created by and for
the benefit of human beings. Concepts such as dignity
and solidarity resound in the collective heart of
Chileans in the strongest manner because, at certain
dramatic points in our history, we ourselves benefited
from solidarity.

We want to call here for a universal vision and
for all to approach this phenomenon with generosity
because some day, be it in some other court or in some
other life or when we have to face our own
consciences, we will have to respond to the question:
“What have we done for our fellow man?” And we are
talking about our fellow man here.
We hope that in the future the force of our
reasoning, the importance of the values that we are
defending and ultimately the dignity of flesh-and-blood
human beings will be taken into account as the
backdrop for this entire discussion so that we can feel
truly proud of an organization which, I repeat, was
created by and for human beings.
Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I should like to express my thanks to the
delegations that supported resolution 62/270.
For my delegation, it was surprising to note that,
after almost a year of intensive consultations and
efforts to address a subject that is in every way relevant
to the United Nations context, some delegations could
not muster the political will to adopt the resolution
without a vote. My delegation expresses its profound
disappointment at the fact that all the sponsors’ efforts
were not reciprocated.
It is not a question of bringing a new matter
before the United Nations; this is a subject that has
been debated in the Organization for many years, as
delegations emphasized in their explanations of vote. It
is a question of complementing the efforts of the
international community to promote a comprehensive
approach to the matter and, above all, international
cooperation in this field.
Migration is a subject that is very relevant to a
large number of countries, if not to all Members of the
Organization. That is why it is inconceivable that it
was not possible to approach the matter on a consensus
basis today. My delegation will continue to make every
effort to bring the positions closer together, but Mexico
will never agree to the Assembly’s ignoring the issue.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 116.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

08-39604

19
