United Nations

A/RES/69/159

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 February 2015

Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 65 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2014
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/69/485)]

69/159. Rights of indigenous peoples
The General Assembly,
Recalling all relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council and the Economic and Social Council relating to the rights of indigenous
peoples, reaffirming its resolutions 65/198 of 21 December 2010, 66/142 of
19 December 2011, 67/153 of 20 December 2012, 68/149 of 18 December 2013 and
69/2 of 22 September 2014, and recalling also Human Rights Council resolution
27/13 of 25 September 2014,
Welcoming the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the
General Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples, held in
New York on 22 and 23 September 2014,1 in which Heads of State and Government,
ministers and representatives of Member States reiterated the important and
continuing role of the United Nations in promoting and protecting the rights of
indigenous peoples and welcomed the inclusive preparatory process for the highlevel plenary meeting, including the comprehensive engagement of the
representatives of indigenous peoples,
Reaffirming the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples,2 which addresses their individual and collective rights,
Stressing the importance of promoting and pursuing the objectives of the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples also through
international cooperation to support national and regional efforts to achieve the ends
of the Declaration, including the right to maintain and strengthen the distinct
political, legal, economic, social and cultural institutions of indigenous peoples and
the right to participate fully, if they so choose, in the political, economic, social and
cultural life of the State,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 3 the 2005 World
Summit Outcome,4 the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the
_______________
1

Resolution 69/2.
Resolution 61/295, annex.
3
Resolution 55/2.
4
Resolution 60/1.
2

14-67607 (E)

*1467607*

Please recycle

A/RES/69/159

Rights of indigenous peoples

General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals 5 and the outcome
document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,6
Recognizing the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Indigenous and
Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169) of the International Labour
Organization,7
Taking note of the outcome documents of the recent regional review
conferences on population and development, including the Regional Conference on
Population and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean, which included
“Indigenous peoples: interculturalism and rights”,
Recognizing the value and the diversity of the cultures and the form of social
organization of indigenous peoples and their holistic traditional scientific
knowledge of their lands, natural resources and environment,
Recognizing also the importance of traditional sustainable agricultural
practices, including traditional seed supply systems, as well as access to credit and
other financial services, markets, secure land tenure, health care, social services,
education, training, knowledge and appropriate and affordable technologies,
including efficient irrigation, the reuse of treated wastewater and water harvesting
and storage for indigenous peoples and others living in rural areas,
Welcoming the achievements made during the Second International Decade of
the World’s Indigenous People, and recognizing that challenges remain in finding
solutions to the problems faced by indigenous peoples in such areas as traditional
knowledge, science, culture, education, health, human rights, the environment and
social and economic development,
Concerned about the extreme disadvantages that indigenous peoples have
typically faced across a range of social and economic indicators and about the
impediments to their full enjoyment of their rights,
Stressing the need to pay particular attention to the rights and special needs of
indigenous women, children, youth, older persons and persons with disabilities, as
set out in the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,
including in the process of protecting and promoting their access to justice,
Recognizing the forthcoming thirtieth anniversary of the United Nations
Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Peoples, in 2015,
1.
Notes the work of the Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples, of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues and of the Special
Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the rights of indigenous peoples, takes
note of her report,8 and encourages all Governments to respond favourably to her
requests for visits;
2.
Welcomes the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the
General Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples,1 and
urges Governments and the United Nations system, in consultation and cooperation

_______________
5

Resolution 65/1.
Resolution 66/288, annex.
7
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1650, No. 28383.
8
A/69/267.
6

2/5

Rights of indigenous peoples

A/RES/69/159

with indigenous peoples through their representatives and institutions, to implement,
when necessary, appropriate measures, concrete policies, plans, programmes,
projects and other measures to realize the commitments made in the outcome
document, and invites international and regional organizations, within their
respective mandates, national human rights institutions, where they exist, civil
society, including non-governmental organizations, and other relevant actors to
contribute to those efforts;
3.
Reiterates the commitment of Member States to cooperate with
indigenous peoples, through their own representative institutions, to develop and
implement national action plans, strategies or other measures, where relevant, to
achieve the ends of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples;2
4.
Takes note with appreciation of the final report of the Secretary-General
on the achievement of the goal and objectives of the Second International Decade of
the World’s Indigenous People, 9 one of the major highlights of which was the
adoption, in 2007, of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples, but regrets that gaps remain between the formal recognition of indigenous
peoples’ rights and the implementation of policies on the ground;
5.
Decides to convene a high-level event to mark the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,
to be held during the seventy-first session of the General Assembly, in 2017, and
that the event will take stock of the achievements of the preceding 10 years and
assess the remaining challenges for the rights of indigenous peoples, and also
consider the further follow-up to the Declaration, including the consideration of a
third International Decade;
6.
Welcomes the designation by the Secretary-General of the UnderSecretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs as the senior official of the
United Nations system responsible for coordinating follow-up action to the World
Conference on Indigenous Peoples, in order, in consultation and cooperation with
indigenous peoples, the Inter-Agency Support Group on Indigenous Peoples’ Issues
and Member States, to begin development, within existing resources, of a systemwide action plan to ensure a coherent approach to achieving the ends of the
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, raising awareness of the rights of
indigenous peoples and increasing the coherence of the activities of the system in
this regard;
7.
Encourages those States that have not yet ratified or acceded to the
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169) of the International
Labour Organization7 to consider doing so and to consider supporting the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, and welcomes the
increased support of States for the Declaration;
8.
Urges Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to continue to contribute to the United Nations Voluntary Fund for
Indigenous Peoples, the Trust Fund on Indigenous Issues and the United Nations
Indigenous Peoples’ Partnership, and invites indigenous organizations and private
institutions and individuals to do likewise;

_______________
9

A/69/271.

3/5

A/RES/69/159

Rights of indigenous peoples

9.
Decides to continue observing in New York, Geneva and other United
Nations offices every year on 9 August the International Day of Indigenous Peoples,
to request the Secretary-General to support the observance of the day from within
existing resources and to encourage Governments to observe the day at the national
level;
10. Encourages States to consider including in their reports related to
indigenous peoples and women information on the progress made and challenges in
the implementation of Commission on the Status of Women resolutions 49/7 of
11 March 2005, entitled “Indigenous women: beyond the ten-year review of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action”,10 and 56/4 of 9 March 2012, entitled
“Indigenous women: key actors in poverty and hunger eradication”; 11
11. Also encourages States, in consultation and cooperation with indigenous
peoples, to take the appropriate measures at the national level, including legislative,
policy and administrative measures, to achieve the ends of the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, and to promote awareness of it
among all sectors of society, including members of legislative, judicial and civil
service bodies;
12. Underlines the need to intensify efforts, in cooperation with indigenous
peoples, to prevent and eliminate all forms of violence and discrimination against
indigenous women, children, youth, older persons and persons with disabilities and
to support measures that will ensure their empowerment and full and effective
participation in decision-making processes at all levels and in all areas and eliminate
barriers to their full, equal and effective participation in political, economic, social
and cultural life;
13. Stresses the need to strengthen the commitment of States and the entities
of the United Nations system to mainstream the promotion and protection of the
rights of indigenous peoples into development agendas at the national, regional and
international levels, and encourages giving due consideration to the rights of
indigenous peoples in the ongoing discussion of the post-2015 development agenda;
14. Encourages States and entities of the United Nations system to
strengthen international cooperation, including to address the disadvantages faced
by indigenous peoples, and to increase technical cooperation and financial
assistance in this regard;
15. Reaffirms its decision in the outcome document of the high-level plenary
meeting of the General Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous
Peoples to continue at its seventieth session the consideration of ways to enable the
participation of indigenous peoples’ representatives and organizations in meetings
of relevant United Nations bodies on issues affecting them, including any specific
proposals made by the Secretary-General in this regard;
16. Welcomes the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on the status of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous
Peoples 12 and requests the High Commissioner to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session;
_______________
10
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum
(E/2005/27 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. D.
11
Ibid., 2012, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2012/27 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. D.
12
A/69/278.

4/5

Rights of indigenous peoples

A/RES/69/159

17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventieth session,
under the item entitled “Rights of indigenous peoples”, a sub-item entitled
“Follow-up to the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the
General Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples”.
73rd plenary meeting
18 December 2014

5/5
