A /76/PV.84

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

84th plenary meeting

Monday, 20 June 2022, noon
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

The meeting was called to order at 12 noon.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I should like to draw the attention
of the General Assembly to draft resolution A/76/L.66,
which has been distributed in connection with agenda
item 29, entitled “Advancement of women”.
Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded its consideration of agenda item 29 at its 61st
plenary meeting, on 15 March 2022. In order for the
Assembly to take action on the draft resolution before
it today, it will be necessary to reopen consideration of
agenda item 29.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen its consideration of agenda item 29?
It was so decided (decision 76/506B).
Agenda item 29 (continued)
Advancement of women
Draft resolution (A/76/L.66)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives to introduce draft resolution
A/76/L.66.
Ms. Hussain (Maldives): It is my honour to
introduce to the General Assembly draft resolution

A/76/L.66, which proclaims 24 June as the International
Day of Women in Diplomacy.
Momentum has been building on this important
issue across the global community in recent years.
Women’s participation in decision-making is absolutely
vital, and that is reflected in Sustainable Development
Goal 5 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
However, despite that progress, far too often we still
see situations in which, as women climb within the
diplomatic ranks, they remain outnumbered by their
male peers. Here at Headquarters, where we call for
and work towards equality every day, only one fifth of
Permanent Representatives are women.
By establishing an International Day of Women
in Diplomacy, the draft resolution will provide
a springboard for the United Nations, national
Governments, foreign ministries, civil society, the
private sector, schools, universities and other actors to
raise awareness on the issue. It also presents an annual
opportunity to reflect on the advances that we have
made, the challenges we face as women diplomats and
the actions that can be taken at various levels as we strive
for the goal of achieving women’s full equal, effective
and meaningful participation of women in diplomacy.
I would like to thank you, Sir, for making gender
equality one of your priorities and for your instrumental
leadership in championing the issue as President of
the General Assembly, as well as in your capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of my own country, the
Republic of Maldives. I also want to thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for making gender equality a

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-38994 (E)

*2238994*

A/76/PV.84

20/06/2022

top priority as well. I further acknowledge the presence
of Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed at
today’s meeting.
We welcome the overwhelming and broad crossregional support that the draft resolution has received.
At a time when multilateralism is under intense strain,
it is heartening that the draft resolution has been
sponsored by more than 187 members. I would like
to take this opportunity to commend the efforts of El
Salvador, Eritrea, Grenada, Guyana, Kenya, Latvia,
Lebanon, Malta, Qatar, Saint Lucia and South Africa as
the core team that worked diligently with Maldives to
garner support for the draft resolution. I must add that
it was not at all difficult for countries across regions
to come together and support this initiative. It is a
testimony to our collective commitment to achieving
gender equality at all levels and in all fields.
Today marks an important day. It is my sincere hope
that the draft resolution and its far-reaching support will
provide inspiration and optimism to women diplomats
and young girls aspiring to careers in diplomacy. It is
truly heartening that we will be taking the opportunity
to reflect on the role of women in diplomacy every
year. I look forward to continuing to work together
to overcome the challenges to realizing women’s
full, equal, effective and meaningful participation in
diplomacy and beyond.
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft resolution A/76/L.66, entitled “International
Day of Women in Diplomacy”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda: (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the
draft resolution, and in addition to the delegations
listed in document A/76/L.66, the following countries
have also become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, the Comoros,
Congo, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Estonia, Eswatini, Finland,
France, Germany, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary,
Iceland, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico,
Montenegro, Myanmar, Nauru, the Netherlands,
Nicaragua, the Niger, Norway, Papua New Guinea,
2/5

Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Somalia, South Sudan, Spain, the State of
Palestine, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Tonga, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the United Republic
of Tanzania, the United States of America, Yemen,
Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.66?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/269).

A/76/L.66

was

adopted

The President: It is a great privilege to have presided
over and witnessed the adoption of resolution 76/269,
on the International Day of Women in Diplomacy,
henceforth to be celebrated on 24 June every year.
In February, during a Holhuashi dialogue that I held
with women experts from all six committees, there was
a call to recognize the indispensable role of women in
diplomacy through the observance of such a day. I thank
the Member States that have carried this conversation
forward, and I am overjoyed that, in just four months,
their vision has come to fruition. I thank all sponsors
and Member States that supported this initiative.
Women working in diplomacy have made critical
contributions to shaping the multilateral system we
have inherited today. For example, women diplomats
played an essential role in drafting the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the first treaty to
articulate the fundamental human rights that should be
universally protected.
Yet, despite the evident contributions of women
to diplomacy and multilateral decision-making, they
continue to be underrepresented in senior diplomatic
positions, and they still suffer the deep-rooted legacies
of sexism, which has hindered their professional
advancement and obscure their contributions and
achievements. These facts underscore the importance
of this resolution being adopted. Now we have a day
specifically devoted to celebrating women in diplomacy
who have blazed trails, negotiated peace, strengthened
international relations, survived hardships and danger,
and facilitated intercultural linkages. With resolution
76/269, we open the door to discuss the challenges
women in diplomacy face. With this celebration of
women in diplomacy, we inspire the next generation.
22-38994

20/06/2022

All too often women and their stories are edited out
of history. Those “her-stories” must be told to inform our
broader efforts to advance gender equality. We cannot
foster the level of diplomatic, engagement and global
solidarity needed to overcome today’s challenges, from
climate change to pandemics to human rights violations
to economic uncertainty, unless we not only give women
a seat at the table, but also facilitate their ability to take
on leadership roles, including in diplomacy. To reverse
that injustice, we must empower women to pursue
careers in diplomacy, support and recognize women
who are already involved in diplomacy, and shatter the
glass ceilings that hindered them from serving at the
top levels of diplomacy.
Adopting this resolution is just the first step. We
must continue to think about what more we can do
and what more we should do. The Assembly can rest
assured that I will continue to do all that I can in my
power to provide the necessary support.
In accordance with rule 70 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed, Deputy SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
The Deputy Secretary-General: It is a real
pleasure to be in the General Assembly Hall today
for the adoption of the resolution on the International
Day of Women in Diplomacy (resolution 76/269). I
am so excited about this, and I welcome and applaud
the leadership of Maldives and the core group of
countries and their amazing women — El Salvador,
Eritrea, Grenada, Guyana, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon,
Maldives, Malta, Qatar, Saint Lucia and South Africa.
I congratulate them on enabling this resolution, and
I congratulate the sponsors for the resolution’s really
broad cross-regional support.
In 2022, women represent slightly over a third of
the Security Council’s Permanent Representatives.
However, this is far higher than the average. It is
still not enough; like Olivia Twists, we ask for more.
Evidence has shown us that women’s representation
has not always been linear, with numbers dependent
on women trailblazers, as we all know. As Ghanaian
barrister, politician and former Minister Hanna Serwaa
Tetteh, the current Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Horn of Africa, has said, “very often,
this is a path that you walk alone”. But I dare say today
there are many of us walking this path together.

A/76/PV.84

As the Secretary-General often reminds us,
gender equality is essentially a question of power, and,
historically, power has been mostly in the hands of our
men. Gender equality and women’s equal leadership
are fundamental prerequisites for a safe, peaceful and
sustainable world for all, and we must all do everything
possible to ensure that women are at the table, our
voices are heard, and our contributions are valued.
Women bring immense benefits to diplomacy, as the
President of the General Assembly has said. Women’s
leadership styles, their expertise, their lived experiences
and priorities broaden the breadth of issues under
consideration and the quality of outcomes by making
decisions more durable and much more inclusive. Our
research shows that when women participate in peace
negotiations, they are more sustainable, and when
women serve in cabinets and parliaments, they pass
laws and policies that are better for ordinary people,
children, the environment and social cohesion.
Advancing positive, proactive measures to increase
women’s participation in peace and political processes
is vital to achieving women’s de facto equality
and sustainable peace in the context of entrenched
discrimination. Addressing violence against women is
also critical to protecting their ongoing participation
and preventing their voices from being silenced.
The United Nations is leading by example and
continues to demonstrate its commitment to women’s
equal rights and empowerment within our Organization
and around the world. At the most senior level, we
achieved gender parity early last year among heads
and deputy heads of mission and resident coordinators
in the field, and we are working to maintain that. In
Iraq, the political messaging of the United Nations
to boost women’s participation and counter genderbased violence and hate speech targeting women
candidates contributed to the election of almost 30 per
cent of women to the Council of Representatives in
October 2021. That was a historic achievement. The
Peacebuilding Fund is also investing in initiatives that
address violence against women in politics and promote
peaceful and credible political processes, including in
Guinea-Bissau, Colombia and Sierra Leone.
From the socioeconomic impacts of the coronavirus
disease pandemic to the devastating global effects of
the war in Ukraine, the global challenges facing our
world are many and multidimensional. Achieving peace
and sustainable development requires that we mobilize

22-389943/5

A/76/PV.84

the abilities and potential of everyone in our human
family. We can never succeed without the best efforts
of half the population. This means taking bold action
to fast-track women’s leadership and participation. I
therefore welcome the adoption of resolution 76/269, on
the International Day of Women in Diplomacy.
I encourage all to see this day as an annual
opportunity to reflect on the successes of women
who have paved the way, on whose shoulders we have
stood, and to commit the United Nations women’s
leadership — 50 per cent of our management — to
doing everything in our power to promote the cause
of women diplomats until we achieve parity in every
United Nations organization, including the Security
Council and the General Assembly.
Finally, I would like to express deep appreciation to
the Feminist-in-Chief in the Hall today, our President
of the General Assembly, who has helped us to usher
in this day.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for her statement.
We will now hear statements after the adoption of
the resolution.
Ms. McGuire (Grenada): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the core group
of delegations that spearheaded the initiative to
establish 24 June as the International Day of Women
in Diplomacy, namely, El Salvador, Eritrea, Grenada,
Guyana, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon, Maldives, Malta,
Qatar, Saint Lucia and South Africa.
At the outset, we would like to thank the 85 Member
States that agreed to be main sponsors of resolution
76/269, just adopted, as well as the membership,
for the overwhelming and historic support of 191
co-sponsoring Member States — near unanimity. Such
resolute support is a further testament to our collective
commitment to achieving gender parity at all levels,
including in diplomacy.
Permit us to also thank you, Mr. President, for
making gender parity a priority. We recognize your
success in achieving parity in your team, including
at the level of senior management. We also recognize
and welcome with gratitude here today the presence
of the Deputy Secretary-General and thank her for her
inspiring words and call to action. We further commend
the Secretary-General for also making gender parity a
top priority, as he made clear in his oath of office.
4/5

20/06/2022

We are at a seminal moment for multilateralism.
Sustainable Development Goal 5 calls for women’s
equal participation in decision-making, and,
as the growing evidence establishes, political
decision-making processes are improved by women’s
leadership. Yet between 1992 and 2019, women were
on average just 13 per cent of negotiators, 6 per cent of
mediators and 6 per cent of signatories in major peace
processes worldwide.
About seven of every 10 peace processes did not
include any women mediators or women signatories.
In 2020, women represented only 23 per cent of
conflict-party delegations in United Nations-supported
peace processes, a share that would have been even
lower without persistent measures by the United
Nations. In our community of nations, at United
Nations Headquarters, only 21.7 per cent of Permanent
Representatives are women.
Simply put, change is necessary. As set forth in
resolution 76/269, systemic mainstreaming of a gender
perspective in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development is crucial. We must
empower all women and girls to foster the invaluable
contribution that will surely follow to make progress
on all the Sustainable Development Goals and targets.
Indeed, the full, equal, effective and meaningful
participation of women at all levels of decision-making
is essential. Women and girls are vital agents for
sustainable development. This newly established
International Day of Women in Diplomacy allows the
United Nations, national Governments, civil society,
the private sector, schools, universities and other actors
to use the International Day not only as a springboard
for awareness-raising but also for critical action.
It provides an annual opportunity to reflect on
advances on women in diplomacy and on the actions
that have been and can be taken at various levels to
recognize and advance women in diplomacy.
As we anticipate our first commemoration, on
24 June, let us continue to strengthen and amplify our
efforts to achieve gender parity in all spheres of society
and have this Day serve as a catalyst to that end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Ms. Popan (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
22-38994

20/06/2022

member States. The candidate countries Türkiye, North
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, the country of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the European
Free Trade Association countries Liechtenstein and
Norway, members of the European Economic Area, as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
In the 76 years since the foundation of the United
Nations, the Organization has never had a woman
Secretary-General. Outside of this Hall, the wall
of pictures of the past 75 Presidents of the General
Assembly includes only four women. And of the
193 Member States of the United Nations, less than
30 per cent are represented by women Ambassadors in
New York.
All United Nations bodies have adopted ambitious
commitments on gender equality, but the fact is that
we are not living up to our own expectations. What
is true in diplomacy is true in all sectors of society.
Gender-based discrimination, stereotypes and negative
social norms continue to hamper women’s full, equal,
effective and meaningful participation and leadership.
Last year, the Commission on the Status of Women
agreed on a series of concrete recommendations to
ensure women’s full, equal, effective and meaningful
participation and leadership in public life, including
the adoption of special measures. We have a shared
understanding of challenges. We have the tools to achieve
our objectives. All we need now is implementation.

A/76/PV.84

That can be done. Through his System-wide
Strategy on Gender Parity, the Secretary-General
achieved gender parity in leadership positions in record
time, and he is set to achieve gender parity at all levels
of the United Nations by 2028. For gender parity to
become reality, we must also create safe and enabling
environments for all women and girls. We welcome the
efforts of the United Nations in that regard, notably
the adoption of a United Nations Code of Conduct on
sexual harassment.
Women’s full, equal, effective and meaningful
participation is essential in all areas and at all levels of
diplomacy, including in security issues. We pay tribute
to the contributions of all women in diplomacy, including
women diplomats, women civil-society leaders, women
human rights defenders and women mediators.
We understand the technical nature of this
resolution, which does not constitute a precedent to alter
language and standards otherwise set by the Assembly.
We would have also wished to have more consultations.
The establishment of this new International Day is
a call on all of us to do better and to lead by example.
The European Union can be counted on to do its part.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 29?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

22-389945/5
