S/2021/206

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 March 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 1 March 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by Mr.
Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; and Ms. Sonia Khush, Syria Response Director, Save the
Children, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of China,
Estonia, France, India, Ireland (on behalf of Ireland and Norway), Kenya, Mexico,
the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America
and Viet Nam in connection with the video-teleconference on “The situation in the
Middle East (Syria)” convened on Thursday, 25 February 2021. Statements were
also delivered by the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Turkey.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 by the
President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the
members of Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the extraordinary
circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these briefings and
statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Linda Thomas-Greenfield
President of the Security Council

21-02992 (E) 040321 230321

*2102992*

S/2021/206

Annex I
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock
I will focus on three points today. First, the economic crisis and the rise in food
insecurity; secondly, humanitarian access; and thirdly, the protection of civilians.
In addition, I have been asked by the Secretary-General to provide, on behalf
of the United Nations system, a briefing on the United Nations strategic framework
and the “Parameters and Principles” document. This was a request made by the
Russian Federation as conveyed to the Secretary-General’s Office by this month’s
President of the Security Council.
Let us start with the economy and disturbing new food security data published
by the World Food Programme last week. Around 60 per cent of the Syrian population,
12.4 million people, do not have regular access to enough safe and nutritious food.
An additional 4.5 million people have fallen into this category over the past year.
The increase is shocking, but not surprising. Syria’s fragile economy suffered
multiple shocks over the past 18 months. The steep depreciation of the Syrian pound,
which lost more than three quarters of its value over the past year, has been one of
the visible effects of this. While the value of the pound dropped, prices of food and
other essential items increased by over 200 per cent. Purchasing power has dwindled
quickly as a result. Average household expenses now exceed average income by an
estimated 20 per cent.
The result is that millions of Syrians are resorting to desperate measures to
survive. Over 70 per cent of Syrians say they have taken on new debt over the past
year. Many are selling assets and livestock. Parents are eating less so they can feed
their children and sending them to work instead of to school. Those who have run
out of options are simply going hungry.
More than half a million children under 5 in Syria suffer from stunting as
a result of chronic malnutrition, according to our latest assessments. We fear this
number will increase. These problems are visible in many parts of the country, but
the situation is particularly bad in the north-west and north-east, where nutrition
surveillance data show that up to one in three children in some areas suffers from
stunting. The effects this will have on their development and learning will be lifelong
and irreversible.
Last week I spoke with a group of Syrian doctors. A doctor at a paediatrics
hospital told me that of his 80 in-patient beds, half are occupied by malnourished
children. Five children died at his hospital as a result of malnutrition in the past two
months. Another paediatrician told me that she diagnoses malnutrition in up to 20
children a day. But parents are bringing their children to her for completely different
reasons, unaware that they are suffering from malnutrition. Malnutrition, she said,
has become so normal that parents cannot spot the signs in their own children.
Some doctors also told me how concerned they are about a potential disruption
of cross-border aid into the north-west of Syria. That brings me to my next point,
namely, humanitarian access. All humanitarian assistance that enters north-west
Syria is delivered cross-border. It supports 2.4 million people on average each
month, and the majority of this is delivered by the United Nations operation. Without
the cross-border operation, doctors in north-west Syria, like some of those I spoke
to, would not be able to provide those children the care they need to survive. They
would not have the resources and supplies to carry on. Within a short period of time,
they said, the situation would go from terrible to catastrophic.
2/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

As the Secretary-General notes in his latest report (S/2021/160) when it comes
to delivering life-saving aid to people in need, all channels should be made, and
kept, available. Conditions in the north-west are worse now than they were when the
Security Council decided to extend its authorization for cross-border assistance last
July. A failure to extend the authorization would trigger suffering and loss of life on
a massive scale.
The United Nations is continuing its efforts to conduct a first cross-line
mission into north-west Syria. The aim is not to have a one-off mission, but to have
regular cross-line missions that complement the ongoing cross-border operation.
A new operational plan is being developed to accommodate the concerns of
the relevant parties. The new proposal, which is in the process of being submitted,
foresees a United Nations aid convoy crossing front lines and distributing aid in
Al-Atareb with appropriate involvement from local volunteers and other relevant
partners, the precise details of which and composition of whom need to be agreed.
We continue to discuss this but have yet to reach an agreement with all the parties
concerned. Without that, we will not be able to conduct the cross-line mission.
Let me be absolutely clear: the United Nations is ready. We have been ready
for a long time. What is needed now is wider agreement so that the first mission can
go ahead.
Turning to the north-east, an increase in tensions in recent months caused
temporary disruptions in emergency assistance for hundreds of thousands of people.
The United Nations, however, has continued to make every effort to scale up
cross-line deliveries of medical supplies into the north-east. This includes deliveries
of 344 tons of health supplies, amounting to almost 3 million treatments, in 2020.
The World Health Organization plans to deliver another 50 tons of health supplies
during the first quarter of 2021.
Expanding the reach of medical supplies delivered cross-line will continue to
depend on expedited approvals, improved security conditions leading to an end to
road blockages and access to adequate funding.
These deliveries are critical, but given the immense health needs in this
region, they are not enough. Only 6 per cent of public hospitals and none of the
public health centres in the north-east are assessed to be fully functioning. As the
Secretary-General observes in his report,
“a year on from the expiration of the Security Council’s authorization
for the United Nations entities and their implementing partners to use the
Ya‘rubiyah border crossing, humanitarian needs in the north-east remain
high, and have been exacerbated by the [coronavirus disease] pandemic.”
(S/2021/160, para. 57)
My next point concerns the protection of civilians.
I am deeply saddened to report the death of another humanitarian worker
in north-western Syria on 16 February. The colleague was working on a United
Nations-supported health project in Al-Bab, providing services for people affected
by the coronavirus disease. He was killed by a car bomb in a market in the middle of
Al-Bab city on 16 February. Two others — a driver and a co-worker — were injured
in the attack.
This was the latest in a series of horrific bombings that have killed dozens of
civilians and injured many more in northern Syria in recent months.
The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights has the mandate in
the United Nations to document incidents of this sort, involving civilian casualties.
21-029923/41

S/2021/206

It has recorded an increase in civilian casualties in northern Syria due to increased
use of attacks using improvised explosive devices. As the Secretary-General has
repeatedly said in his reports on Syria, perpetrators of serious violations and abuses
of human rights and serious violations of international humanitarian law must be
held accountable.
On 17 February, a day after I spoke with the group of doctors, a hospital in
Afrin was damaged when a missile struck a building right in front of it. A hospital
staffer, his wife and three children who were nearby were injured in the attack.
Humanitarian workers in Syria are delivering aid every day under the most
difficult circumstances and at great personal risk. They must be protected.
Finally, let me update you on the United Nations Strategic Framework for
the Syrian Arab Republic and the Parameters and Principles of United Nations
Assistance in Syria, which the Secretary-General has asked me to speak to, on behalf
of the United Nations system and as requested by the Russian Federation.
The drafting of the United Nations Strategic Framework covering the period
2021-2023 was initiated last year and is aimed at reflecting the agreed operational
activities of the United Nations country team in response to needs and priorities in
Syria, from which the programmes and projects of specific United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes will be derived. The United Nations is moving the process
forward and currently working on the third draft of the document, in consultation
with all stakeholders in Syria and elsewhere.
The programmatic priorities reflected in the current draft result from an
extensive dialogue with national partners and are informed by ongoing programmes
and available resources. Consultations also continue with all other partners, in
line with established practice, to help enrich the outcome and secure wide support,
including financial support, for the successful implementation of the Strategic
Framework.
To allow for further consultation on all the pending issues, the United Nations
has sought a six-month extension to the current Strategic Framework. Our Resident
and Humanitarian Coordinator and country team are moving ahead in an open and
transparent process, working with our national counterparts to deliver the best
possible outcome.
As the drafting process proceeds, the Parameters and Principles of United
Nations Assistance in Syria document serves as a key internal guidance tool to help
target the operations of the United Nations country team in what remains a very
complex context.
The Parameters and Principles were formulated through a consultative
process, drawing on existing mandates, and shared within the United Nations system
to ensure that support and assistance are provided to those in need in all areas of
Syria in an equitable and non-discriminatory manner, with a needs-based approach
upholding neutrality and impartiality. The document is consistent with the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and relevant Security Council resolutions. It
reconfirms core humanitarian principles, ensuring that the principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence lie at the core or our work.
Ultimately, all United Nations operations in Syria are conducted in full
compliance with resolutions adopted by the Security Council and with other relevant
decisions, including General Assembly resolutions 46/182 and 75/233, on the
quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development
of the United Nations system.
4/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

I also note that activities undertaken by the United Nations country team
under the Strategic Framework are complementary to the humanitarian response
plan in order to save lives, enhance protection and increase resilience and access
to services, including through the rehabilitation of critical civilian infrastructure,
which serve a crucial humanitarian function. This is essential at a time when the
economy continues to suffer severe decline, poverty and hunger are on the rise, and
humanitarian needs are increasing.

21-029925/41

S/2021/206

Annex II
Briefing by the Syria Response Director, Save the Children, Sonia
Khush
I would like to thank you for this opportunity to address the Council on the
humanitarian situation in Syria and for allowing us to bring the voices of children
and their families to this key institution.
While this year marks 10 years of conflict in Syria, the situation facing
children today is as urgent as it has ever been. During the last decade, more than
half the population has been forced to flee their homes and thousands of children
have been killed. Around half of Syria’s children are now growing up having known
nothing but conflict, which has permeated all aspects of their lives and robbed them
of their childhoods.
The outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has added another layer
of suffering to an already dire situation. Children today are facing a graver reality
than at any other point in the 10-year conflict. They are more likely to be in need of
humanitarian assistance and more likely to go hungry, die from preventable diseases,
miss out on school and face protection risks.
I would like to start today by addressing the issue that children consistently
raise with us — which is, their wish to go to school.
We are facing an unprecedented education crisis in Syria. The combination of
conflict, displacement, poverty and now COVID-19 has created conditions in which
millions of children are missing out on education. Research carried out by Save the
Children last December found that in northern Syria, for example, two out of three
children are now missing out on school.
Schools should be safe places where children can learn, play and dream about
what they want to be when they grow up. Instead, after 10 years we continue to
witness attacks on schools, the use of schools by armed groups and the prevalence of
unexploded ordinance in schools.
We met 11-year-old Basma in Al-Hol camp. She remembers the time when
she was in second grade and a shell fell next to her school. She told us: “We were all
girls and we hid under the school desks in the classroom. There were loud explosions
and glass from the windows shattered everywhere.” Yet Basma still has dreams of
becoming a doctor to treat her sick mother.
The immediate effects of attacks on a school can include death, injury and
the destruction of the building. However, in the longer term, attacks can lead to
diminished education quality, loss of teachers, weakened educational systems and
the risk of children never returning to school. Education is also being impacted by
the economic crisis, exacerbated by the COVID-19 crisis. As 10-year-old Ziad told us:
“The war forced us to flee and made me drop out of school. I started
working in cleaning tiles. I work from morning till night and make less than
three dollars a week. I am very tired from working.”
Our same research last December showed that 79 per cent of teachers in
north-eastern Syria reported that their students had dropped out of school because
they had to support their families financially. As many as one in two teachers in
north-western Syria is also working without pay, and hundreds of others are going
on strike for their salaries as we speak.
Loss of physical learning spaces due to COVID-19 restrictions has also meant
that the only option for children to learn is remotely. But most children do not have
6/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

access to the Internet and eventually start dropping out of school. We know from
experience that many children who have dropped out of school will never return.
Layla is a 38-year-old mother of five, including of a boy named Husam. Layla
told the team:
“My son Husam had never been to school until we got to this camp. I
really wanted him to learn how to read and write, as no one in our family
can do that. He was so excited. Unfortunately, the school closed because of
COVID-19, and now he is scared because he does not know if he will ever
have the chance to learn again.”
We are very concerned at the impact that the lack of education of Syria’s
children will have on them now and on the country’s future, as another generation of
children now begins its journey under the shadows of the conflict in Syria.
The second issue I would like to raise is the serious protection crisis facing
children in the country. Across northern Syria, five million people continue to rely
on humanitarian assistance, delivered mostly cross-border, to meet their basic needs.
This includes at least 2 million children. At least half of these children are displaced.
Some have been displaced more than 10 times in their short lives, with no view of
achieving a durable solution soon.
Basic needs for adequate food, shelter, water and hygiene are still not being
met, and each year families face either intense heat or brutal cold and flooding in
flimsy shelters. Just last month, flash floods in north-west Syria led to the death of
a six-year-old boy and affected over 140,000 displaced people, the majority of whom
were women and children. People are in desperate need of heating, fuel, cash, food,
mattresses and blankets.
The nutrition situation in the country is becoming alarming. One in eight
children in Syria is now stunted. This means they have gone for months without
eating nutritious food that is vital to their survival and development, and the number
of children who go to bed hungry every day is in the millions.
Child labour is becoming increasingly prevalent, and children may also be
engaged in harmful work and exploitation. Meanwhile, teenage boys are particularly
vulnerable to recruitment by armed groups.
In many instances, girls are being forced to end their education and engage
in early marriage. This will have profound and long-term consequences on them,
including the loss of education and personal and economic independence. Last year
we met 15-year-old Dalia who had just gotten engaged. She told our local partner
staff, “Every time my fiancé calls, I feel a sense of anxiety. I dream about continuing
my education and finding a job in the future, not marriage.” Our team worked with
Dalia and her parents. Luckily Dalia is not engaged anymore and is back in school,
but there are thousands more of girls like her that are not so lucky.
In this context, COVID-19 and the socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic
are making an already dire situation worse and increasing children’s vulnerability
to protection risks. The way we can address the profound challenges facing children
today has not changed. Continued delivery of life-saving supplies — through all
possible means, including the cross-border mechanism — is essential for their
survival. This must also come with a focus on addressing the root causes of children’s
suffering, prioritizing investment in education and child-protection programming,
including mental-health and psychosocial interventions.
Finally, I would like to draw the Council’s attention to the specific protection
risks being faced by children and their mothers in camps in north-eastern Syria,
21-029927/41

S/2021/206

including in Al-Hol and Roj camps, home to 64,000 people, more than 90 per cent of
whom are women and children. This population includes more than 10,000 foreign
children and their mothers, who come from every region of the world. The majority
of children in these camps are under the age of 12, and half of them are less than five
years old.
The conditions in the two camps are dire, and critical gaps continue to exist
across all services. Lately, there has been an alarming increase of violent security
incidents in Al-Hol, putting children further at risk, and regularly disrupting our
humanitarian programmes. A 13-year-old girl named Salma in Al- Hol camp told us,
“We had to go through a lot to extend electricity to our tent. It was
amazing to finally have light inside the tent. But after the killings started,
there were rumours that people who have electricity in their tents were being
targeted. So now, we do not turn our lights on at night because of the fear of
being killed.”
There are confirmed cases of COVID-19 in Al-Hol. Yet we remain very
concerned about the health-care response capacity in both the camp and the
region, particularly in the context of restrictions in humanitarian access to
north-eastern Syria.
Over the last few months, my team in the Al-Hol annex watched as a nineyear-old girl from Azerbaijan got progressively sicker due to a kidney disease. We
raised her plight repeatedly to the authorities in order for her to be able to access
kidney dialysis outside the camp. We also urgently tried to arrange her repatriation
to her country of origin as a humanitarian case. To my great frustration, we were not
successful with either effort, and tragically she died last month.
We witnessed an innocent child die in a foreign country, a needless death from
a disease that is treatable. At the end of the day, foreign children trapped in Syria are
innocent victims of the conflict and must be treated as such, not as deadly security
threats to be kept behind barbed wire. Like all children inside Syria, they have
lived through conflict, bombardment and acute deprivation. Some know nothing
but conflict. Indeed, when one of my colleagues asked a foreign girl in the Al-Hol
annex, “What country are you from?”, she replied, “I’m from that tent.”
They are also unfortunately losing faith in our ability to help. A mother from
Turkey told us that her children asked her many times to register them as orphans,
because orphans are more likely to be repatriated from the camp. These children
need specialized help to recover from the brutal experience of being the first victims
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, physically and mentally, and they need
help to return to normality. The kind of support they need is impossible to provide
in a place like Al-Hol.
We therefore urge all Member States to repatriate these extremely vulnerable
children to their country of origin, together with their families. Like any other child,
they deserve a chance to become doctors, artists or engineers.
In conclusion, to bring the suffering of children in Syria to an end, first
and foremost the fighting must stop. There can be no lasting solution to this crisis
without peace. Furthermore, in order to address the immense needs that children and
their families are facing, humanitarians must be supported to scale up aid safely and
effectively through all modalities.
Ten years into the conflict, the challenges I have set out today are more
complex than they have ever been, but the standards by which we must respond are
simple. Children and their families, wherever they are in Syria, deserve to live with
the security of knowing that they will continue to have safe access to the life-saving
8/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

support on which they depend, and that the international community will not turn
their backs on them at this critical time.
Security Council members continue to have a vital role to play in this effort.
Seven years after coming together to pass resolution 2165 (2014) and creating a system
whereby humanitarian aid can reach all Syrians wherever they are, the number of
people in need of humanitarian assistance has only grown. Amid the worst pandemic
the world has seen in a hundred years, I would not know how to tell families in Syria
that the Security Council has again limited our access. We welcome — and urge —
continued discussion on improving principled humanitarian access and on how to
better reach all populations in need. For now, however, there is no other way to
sustainably program help for millions of people without the cross-border resolution.
I will end with what seven-year-old Lara told us:
“When I grow up, I want to become a teacher and teach children, so they
will not stay out of school. I wish the war would end and all the children could
learn how to read and write and go back to their homes.”
I hope I will be able to go back to Lara and the other children I tried to give a voice
to today and let them know that Security Council will do everything within its power
to ensure they are protected and educated.

21-029929/41

S/2021/206

Annex III
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: English and Chinese]
I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and Ms. Sonia Khush
for their briefings. I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the new
Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations,
Mr. Bassam Sabbagh.
The past two months have witnessed the continued depreciation of the Syrian
pound, food prices soaring to the highest level since 2013 and crippling shortages
in the reserves of oil and other essential commodities. The coronavirus disease
pandemic and natural disasters have conspired to exacerbate the humanitarian plight
in Syria. The country’s dire economic and humanitarian situation leaves us deeply
worried. China calls on the international community to provide more humanitarian,
development and reconstruction assistance to support the Syrian Government in
responding to the pandemic, revitalizing the economy and providing livelihood
assurances. A holistic approach is in order, so the conditions the Syrian people find
themselves in can be improved, and that includes emergency assistance to deliver
food and medicines, such basic services as water and electricity, and sufficient
supplies to stabilize the market.
I wish to underscore once again that unilateral sanctions and an unlawful
blockade have been seriously undermining Syria’s ability to mobilize resources,
develop its economy and launch its reconstruction. It is nothing short of a noose
around the collective neck of the Syrian people. It must be undone and undone
without delay.
China calls on the United Nations and the international community at large
to ramp up humanitarian assistance to Syria with stronger cooperation with its
Government. While continuing the cross-border humanitarian operations and
making the best use of Bab Al-Hawa crossing point, efforts should be made to make
more cross-line deliveries and steadily scale up this modus operandi. We are pleased
to know that last year the World Health Organization delivered large quantities of
medical supplies to the north-east of the country, with six road convoys and 13 air
convoys from within the Syrian territory and that, on a monthly basis, the World
Food Programme has provided millions of civilians with food aid through crossline deliveries.
Through bilateral and multilateral channels, China has provided Syria with
$130 million in aid. Early this month, China announced an aid package of 150,000
doses of vaccine, 20 ventilators and the first shipment of 750 tons of rice. These aid
supplies will be arriving in good time. Where we can ensure it, our assistance and
support to the Syrian people shall continue.
It warrants underlining that eradicating terrorism once and for all is the only
hope that Syria has of returning to normality. This is the sine qua non of improving
the economic and humanitarian situation in the country. It behoves the international
community to support serious counter-terrorism operations that are in line with
international law and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, with a view to
maintaining the country’s security and stability.
China takes the accounts given by the briefers earlier very seriously. We are
concerned at the incidents that led to civilian casualties, especially casualties among
children, who are the future of Syria, and whose lives, nutrition and education must
10/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

be safeguarded with utmost effort, so that they can survive, thrive and grow up to
become a vital force in building their country.
It is imperative that the international community work together to help
extricate Syria from the mire of war and safeguard the basic livelihoods of the
Syrian people, especially women and children. The humanitarian issue must not be
politicized by attaching political strings to humanitarian aid or by instrumentalizing
such aid to exert pressure.

21-0299211/41

S/2021/206

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank Under-Secretary Lowcock for his briefing on the humanitarian
situation in Syria.
As the Syrian conflict approaches its tenth anniversary, let us consider the
following. About half a million people have lost their lives, and millions of others
have been deprived of their homes and livelihoods. Civilians in Syria still suffer
from widespread insecurity and violations of international law. Continued violations
and a deteriorating humanitarian situation in the country are also the result of a
political impasse in the Security Council. Unfortunately, permanent members have
used their veto to block Council actions aimed at ending this tragedy.
One of these vetoes was cast last year (see S/2020/661), which cut in half the
cross-border mechanism, which provides life-saving aid to millions of people in
northern Syria. The promises of replacing cross-border deliveries with cross-line aid
have fallen short. The cross-line aid clearly remains irregular and unreliable, while
the ongoing access restrictions continue to hamper the response to the growing needs.
It is especially worrying, considering the significant increase of food insecurity.
Humanitarian access in Syria is one of the priority issues for the Donor Support
Group of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, of which Estonia
is a member.
Against the backdrop of the decision to cut back humanitarian aid, the spread
of coronavirus disease continues to endanger Syrian civilians, especially the most
vulnerable communities, including women and children. We welcome the plan to
commence vaccinating the Syrian population through the COVID-19 Vaccines
Global Access programme, and we appreciate the efforts of humanitarian workers
at this front line.
Instability continues across Syria. We condemn the recent series of terrorist
attacks that took place in the areas of Azaz, Al-Bab and Afrin. Stability and granting
unimpeded humanitarian access are fundamental preconditions for humanitarian
action to be effective.
Military solutions cannot bring peace to Syria. That is why the European
Union and its member States are determined to continue their support to the Syrian
people. Mitigating the consequences of the Syrian conflict has been one of the
priorities of Estonian humanitarian assistance. We look forward to the fifth Brussels
Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region, to be held at the end
of March. Estonia has contributed financially for years to support alleviating the
human suffering of the Syrian people and will continue to do so until they no longer
need our support.
At the same time, we reiterate the European Union position that there will be
no funding of reconstruction unless a genuine and inclusive political transition, in
line with resolution 2254 (2015), is firmly under way.

12/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas De Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I would like to thank Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Khush for their briefings.
The Syrian population continues to pay the heaviest price of this conflict,
which has now gone on for 10 years. More than half of the population experiences
food insecurity. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to spread
and we all know that the figures are well below reality.
Everything must be done in order to put in place an immediate cessation
of hostilities, under United Nations supervision at the national level, as well as a
humanitarian pause, in accordance with resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2254 (2015) and
the Secretary-General’s call. Ongoing air strikes in the Idlib region are an alarming
sign, as is the instability in the south-west and north-east.
The protection of civilians must be an absolute priority. Fourteen humanitarian
personnel have lost their lives in the north-west since the beginning of 2020 and
more than 900 medical personnel have lost their lives since the beginning of the
conflict. We strongly condemn such attacks, and these crimes will not go unpunished.
France will continue to fully support the mechanisms to fight impunity. Yesterday’s
sentencing by a German court of a former Syrian security agent for complicity with
crimes against humanity is an important first step in putting an end to impunity for
the regime’s crimes.
The 20 per cent increase in humanitarian and medical needs in 2021 makes it
more essential than ever to ensure full humanitarian access. All parties, especially
the Syrian regime, must respect their obligations under international humanitarian
law. We call on Russia to put pressure on the regime in this regard.
It is also essential to ensure equitable access to vaccines against COVID-19.
All guarantees must be taken to ensure independent monitoring of their distribution.
The COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility has a key role to play here.
The systematic blocking of humanitarian assistance by the regime shows
more than ever the need to preserve the cross-border aid mechanism. The approval
rates of United Nations missions by the regime remain largely insufficient: how can
we explain the refusal of 30 per cent of such missions? We must also draw lessons
from the loss of Al-Yarubiyah crossing point; no operation to date has compensated
for the disappearance of cross-border convoys. As long as the regime continues to
highjack aid to punish the population, it is clear that “cross-line” aid from Damascus
will remain dysfunctional and cannot be the only viable option.
The donor conference organized by the European Union and the United
Nations for 29 and 30 March will be an important step. The European Union and its
member States will continue to ensure full respect for the guarantees of impartiality
and transparency in the delivery of aid, and the implementation of the Parameters
and Principles of United Nations Assistance in Syria document.
Attempts to accuse Europe and its partners of conditioning aid must not
mislead anyone. I would like to recall that the European Union and its member States
are the main funders of the humanitarian response in Syria, including in the areas
held by the regime. Since 2011, nearly €20 billion have been mobilized by Europeans
in response to this crisis. The humanitarian response plan was financed last year at
about 85 per cent by the European Union, its member States, the United Kingdom
and the United States.
21-0299213/41

S/2021/206

Finally, until a credible political process in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
has been engaged, France, like the European Union, will not finance reconstruction
or any assistance aligned with the regime’s development priorities. States calling for
the reconstruction of Syria should start by strengthening their contributions to the
humanitarian response.
Our positions on the lifting of sanctions and normalization also
remain unchanged.

14/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T. S. Tirumurti
Let me begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his
briefing on the humanitarian situation in Syria and the United Nations Strategic
Framework for the Syrian Arab Republic.
The 10-year long Syrian conflict has brought much suffering to the Syrian
people. Syria is facing a dire situation compounded by a multiplicity of factors,
including the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), harsh winter conditions and food
insecurity, putting into peril the future of its 17.6 million citizens, including nearly
6.2 million displaced people, the largest internally displaced population anywhere
in the world. Across the region, 10 million people, including 5.5 million Syrian
refugees, continue to depend on humanitarian assistance. Children have been
particularly badly affected.
Since we last met in this Council, the dire humanitarian situation has been
further worsened by deteriorating economic conditions as well as continuing food
insecurity. According to a January 2021 World Food Programme (WFP) report, the
price of Syria’s standard basic food items basket in December 2020 was 236 per
cent higher compared to December 2019, a month-to-month increase of 13 per cent,
which brought the price to its record high since WFP started monitoring in 2013. In
addition, the recent increase in the price of bread has added to the vulnerability of
the population. The supply of fuel has also been affected by delays in the arrival of
supplies. Furthermore, the floods in late January destroyed more than 21,000 tents
in internally displaced person camps in Syria, affecting more than 120,000 people.
The scale, severity and complexity of humanitarian needs should provoke
the collective conscience of this Council, particularly of those who advocate
linking humanitarian assistance to their expected outcomes on the political track.
It is difficult to comprehend such an approach. Politicization of the humanitarian
track must end. It is not feasible for people in need of urgent and dire humanitarian
assistance to wait endlessly until political objectives of all parties to the conflict are
fully met.
Allow me now to address two interlinked questions of humanitarian access
and principles, which are closely interrelated in the context of Syria.
India firmly believes that all humanitarian aid delivery to Syria must be
consistent with United Nations guiding principles for humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian assistance to Syria, be it cross-border or cross-line, must take into
consideration the independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Syria. At
the same time, concrete steps need to be taken to address hurdles obstructing the
functioning of both cross-border and cross-line operations, in particular, the delays
in granting requisite approvals to humanitarian aid convoys. All parties need to
protect health and humanitarian workers.
The other interconnected issue is that of comprehensive and objective
assessment of unilateral measures imposed by countries on Syria. Such measures
only aggravate the prevailing economic, humanitarian and development crisis,
with devastating effects for the entire population, particularly women, children
and the elderly.
We also underscore the importance of the active engagement of the United
Nations with Syria towards implementation of the United Nations strategic framework
to achieve the outcomes that have been set out.
21-0299215/41

S/2021/206

For its part, India continues to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with the people of
Syria in this grave hour of need. Earlier this month, responding to the request for
emergency humanitarian assistance from the Syrian Government, India delivered
more than 2,000 metric tons of rice for the people of Syria through the port city of
Latakia. We shared more than 10 metric tons of medicines for the people of Syria in
July 2020 to help them through the COVID-19 pandemic. We stand ready to work
with the United Nations and its agencies to ensure that “Made in India” vaccines, in
keeping with the clarion call of our Prime Minister for vaccines for all, can also be
brought to the aid and assistance of the people of Syria.
As regards our development partnership with Syria, India has extended $265
million in soft loans for projects in the steel and power sector and $12 million in
humanitarian assistance to the Government of Syria through both bilateral and
multilateral channels. India has also set up a biotechnology park and an information
technology centre. Keeping the conflict in mind, we also organized an artificial
limb-fitment camp in Damascus in 2019-2020, which benefited over 500 Syrians.
Given the education crisis pointed out by the briefer, allow me to mention that India
has extended 1,000 scholarships to Syrian students for higher education in India.
Those have been welcomed and are already benefiting Syrian youth.
In conclusion, I reiterate my country’s commitment to supporting Syria and
its people in these challenging times.

16/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I make this statement today on behalf of the co-penholders of the Syrian
humanitarian file, Ireland and Norway. We would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock for his briefing today. We are also very grateful for the
presence of our civil society briefer, Sonia Khush of Save the Children, and for the
insights she has just shared with us.
Next month will mark 10 long years of conflict in Syria, a conflict that has
driven widespread suffering for the Syrian people and created a deeply embedded
humanitarian crisis, underscored by a shattered economy and deeply degraded health
and education systems.
Over the past 10 years, this Council has heard many harrowing reports. Each
time, we imagine things could hardly get worse. However, the Secretary-General
tells us that humanitarian needs have increased by one-fifth in the past year alone.
A record 12.4 million Syrians, 60 per cent of the population, are being denied
their most basic right to food, struggling to find enough food to eat, and, as we
heard, child malnutrition is rapidly increasing.
Harsh winter conditions have coincided with rising fuel prices, making basic
heating out of reach for many Syrians. Tragically, lives continue to be lost among
Syria’s most vulnerable in fires resulting from efforts to keep warm.
The dreadful conditions caused by flooding in the north-east have added to
the hardship for 141,000 displaced persons, as tents and schools have been destroyed,
demonstrating once again the fragility of the situation and the imperative of ensuring
that help can reach those most in need.
We recognize the disproportionate impact that these conditions, and the
ongoing conflict and violence, have on women and on children. The misery endured
by Syrian civilians is unimaginable for most of us.
We are alarmed by the conflict-related sexual violence against children in Syria.
This has had devastating consequences for these children, for their communities and
for society at large. All parties to the conflict must take immediate and specific
measures to end this scourge and comply with international humanitarian law and
human rights law.
The threat of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) further adds to the urgency of
protecting access to water and sanitation. It is crucial that the health-care system
across Syria be supported in battling the pandemic. All parties must facilitate
humanitarian access and uphold ceasefires to enable humanitarian medical teams to
undertake their vital functions, including safely delivering COVID-19 vaccinations
to those who need them most.
As humanitarian penholders, we are keenly aware of the necessity to ensure
that humanitarian assistance reach all Syrians in need. We are also aware of the
depth and breadth of humanitarian need across Syria and the complex challenge they
present to life-saving — and life-sustaining — humanitarian operations.
We must do everything in our power to support these operations, both by
providing funding and by ensuring that humanitarian actors can carry out their
work, utilizing all necessary modalities, and with the necessary support. All parties
must allow rapid, safe and unimpeded access — humanitarian access — to all
people in need, wherever they are located, in line with the humanitarian principles
of independence, impartiality and neutrality
21-0299217/41

S/2021/206

We offer our deep condolences to the family of the humanitarian health worker
killed last week in Al-Bab city. At least 14 humanitarian workers have been killed in
Syria in the last 14 months.
We are deeply troubled by the ongoing violence across Syria, which continues
to cause deaths and injuries, and we condemn all violence against civilians. The
latest toll we have for December to January counts 67 people who lost their lives,
among them 17 children. We call on all parties to enter into a nationwide ceasefire,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Shelling and violence in the north-east, at Ain Issa, has forced 3,000 people
to leave their homes, all the while life-saving humanitarian deliveries have been
delayed due to bureaucratic impediments.
We are very concerned about the deteriorating security situation at the AlHol camp, as reported by the Secretary-General this month, where 23 people are
reported to have been killed since 1 January. This situation is particularly worrying
given that over half of the residents in the camp are aged under 12.
We remind all parties, in the strongest terms, of their obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, with regard to the protection of civilians, and we reiterate the call of the
Secretary-General for an immediate cessation of hostilities.
Let me close as I began, casting an eye over 10 years of conflict and looking
to the future. We cannot face another 10 years of human suffering driven by conflict.
This Council has a responsibility to stand together in solidarity with those who find
themselves without a voice.

18/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and Sonia Khush for their
briefings on the humanitarian situation in Syria. I also welcome the new Permanent
Representative of Syria.
It is unfortunate that the dire humanitarian situation in Syria, marked by the
untold and seemingly unending suffering of the innocent, peace-loving people of
Syria, including vulnerable groups, especially the elderly, women and children, has
persisted against the backdrop of protracted violent conflict. This Council has a vital
duty to engage on and prioritize the needs of the Syrian people, whose situation is
not improving despite the Council having deliberated over Syria for a decade.
We note with concern the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs’ estimate that 13 million people remain in need of humanitarian
assistance within Syria, excluding the millions of refugees in the region. This calls
for more rigorous and urgent action to alleviate suffering.
Kenya’s firm belief is that there should be no limitation to the delivery of
aid. Indeed, it is critical that all the opposing parties cooperate in ensuring timely,
safe, sustained and unimpeded access for the United Nations and all humanitarian
partners to people in need across the Syrian Arab Republic. We therefore support the
effective distribution of cross-border humanitarian aid and the need for strengthened,
robust and unimpeded cross-line aid in order to reach more and more people and
mitigate their unnecessary suffering.
It is no secret that the dismal humanitarian situation is being exacerbated by
Syria’s deteriorating economic conditions, as well as the ongoing food insecurity.
That is evidenced by the inability of citizens to feed their families because they
cannot afford to buy standard food baskets, whose prices remain beyond their reach.
It is heartbreaking that many children are malnourished, while others are unable to
go to school, as they have to help their families by working for food.
I reaffirm Kenya’s position against the use of unilateral coercive measures,
as they continue to have an undeniable negative impact that impedes the full
realization of social and economic development, as well as the overall well-being of
the population in Syria.
Furthermore, the imperative for the protection of civilians and humanitarian
workers cannot be overstated. We are concerned that humanitarian workers are
regularly targeted in north-western and north-eastern Syria by the Islamic State of
Iraq and the Sham and local armed groups using bombs and improvised explosive
devices, resulting in fatalities and a growing fear among humanitarian workers. We
condemn those attacks, and we convey our condolences to the affected.
Kenya welcomes the Secretary-General’s announcement of the establishment
of a three-person independent senior advisory panel to strengthen the deconfliction
mechanism in order to avoid potential hazards for humanitarian personnel, thereby
lowering the incidence of attacks on schools, hospitals and camps.
Kenya’s delegation believes that sustainable peace goes hand in hand with
development. A development-oriented approach will help build the resilience of
individuals, communities and institutions, enabling them to cope better with their
situation and reduce the longer-term need for humanitarian aid.
In that regard, the Security Council should start laying emphasis on a resiliencebased humanitarian response to the crisis in Syria that includes the reconstruction
21-0299219/41

S/2021/206

of critical infrastructure, such as schools and hospitals, undertaking economic
recovery and job creation programmes targeting young people and implementing
social cohesion measures.
In conclusion, we challenge all parties to the conflict to adhere to international
humanitarian law for the protection and fulfilment of humanitarian assistance and
for the return of international norms. I reiterate Kenya’s unequivocal support for a
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political dialogue as the only approach that will lead
to a sustainable solution to the conflict in Syria.

20/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramirez
[Original: Spanish]
I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and Ms. Sonia Khush for
their briefings. We welcome the new representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
A few days after 10 years of conflict in Syria, the population continues to
suffer from the consequences of violence and a lack of stability. We could say that
the current humanitarian situation is a cumulative reflection of 10 years of war.
Its effects are profound and devastating, as evidenced by the alarming figures
reported in terms of food insecurity, the number of displaced people and damaged
infrastructure.
The civilian population continues to pay a high price for the hostilities. Since
our last meeting on the situation in Syria in January (see S/2021/75), there have been
new incidents of violence, some involving improvised explosive devices in densely
populated areas, resulting in the deaths of civilians, including at least 17 children.
Humanitarian aid workers have also suffered losses, as we heard.
Mexico condemns in the strongest terms those acts of violence, and we reiterate
our call on all parties to respect the ceasefire and comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law. A comprehensive ceasefire is a priority, and it
must be accompanied by a genuine effort to reach a comprehensive political solution.
In north-eastern Syria, in Al-Hol camp, more than 60,000 people, 94 per
cent of them women and children, live in extremely precarious conditions. In recent
months, violence has increased and at least 23 killings have been recorded. We join
the call for the prompt repatriation of those families in accordance with international
law and to pay particular attention to their reintegration in their countries of origin.
Meanwhile, as we heard, malnutrition rates have also increased. Their shortand long-term effects on the physical and mental development of those affected are
another compelling reason to maintain and improve all channels for humanitarian
access, which have been insufficient to date. Keeping the Bab Al-Hawa crossing
open is vital to getting humanitarian assistance into north-western Syria and cannot
be replaced by cross-line crossings. That is confirmed by information provided by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other humanitarian
agencies on the ground.
We therefore call for the streamlining of procedures regarding the flow of
humanitarian assistance from Damascus, starting by reducing project approval
times. The effectiveness of both those channels is critical in the current pandemic
context, as the need for medical supplies has predictably increased. Timely and
unimpeded humanitarian access will also be indispensable for the implementation
of the coronavirus disease vaccination plans.
We call on all States that have imposed unilateral sanctions on Syria to
continuously and rigorously verify that they do not affect the civilian population.
Finally, we urge all members of the Security Council to focus their discussions
on the humanitarian situation in Syria, leaving aside political considerations. The
lives of countless people depend on that.

21-0299221/41

S/2021/206

Annex X
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Niger to
the United Nations, Niandou Aougi
[Original: English and French]
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock and Ms. Sonia Khush
for their very edifying presentations on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
The Niger salutes the daily efforts of humanitarian organizations that
continue, without respite, to help people in need throughout Syria. The information
that those organizations bring to our attention portrays a humanitarian situation that
is becoming increasingly worrisome, with many women and children as victims.
The deterioration of the Syrian economy due to the war and the devaluation
of the Syrian pound further complicates the already precarious living conditions of
the population. Consequently, that led to shortages and soaring prices of some basic
necessities, including food, which many Syrian families are struggling to procure.
In that regard, let me emphasize a few points.
First, the Niger reiterates that the cessation of hostilities remains an essential
condition for achieving tangible progress in resolving the crisis in Syria. The
continued fighting, bombings and use of improvised explosive devices remain a
real source of concern for us. We support the calls of the Secretary-General and
his Special Envoy for an immediate national ceasefire in Syria in order to create
conditions for a successful political process and help make effective the fight
against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, whose spread is increasing
exponentially in the country.
Nevertheless, my delegation wishes to stress that the call for a ceasefire and
the need for a common and collective effort to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic
should not distract us from the fight against terrorism, especially since many facts
show that terrorist groups are trying to take advantage of the current situation in
order to reconstitute themselves and regain lost ground. However, that fight must be
carried out in accordance with international humanitarian law and with due regard
for the protection of innocent civilians and their access to humanitarian assistance.
Secondly, we commend the efforts of the Syrian Government with regard
to its continued collaboration with the United Nations and other organizations, as
well as in the fight against the spread of the pandemic and in ensuring the delivery
of humanitarian assistance throughout Syria. In that regard, we call for better
coordination between humanitarians and the Syrian Government in the distribution
of that aid.
We also welcome the authorizations given by the Syrian authorities to
organizations to enable them to deliver humanitarian aid. That must continue and
even be stepped up, especially when it comes to food and medical equipment. My
delegation echoes the Secretary-General’s appeal to the belligerents to allow and
facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian assistance to all civilians
in need, wherever they may be.
Thirdly, we deplore the destruction of many internally displaced persons
camps and schools by high winds and floods. That deteriorating situation resulted
in the displacement of thousands of displaced persons, some of whom are already
internally displaced persons. We call on the Syrian authorities and humanitarian
organizations to show a greater commitment in that regard.
In the same vein, we deplore the deterioration of the security and living
conditions at the Al-Hol camp. We call on the opposing forces and the United
22/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

Nations to enhance the security of the residents of the Al-Hol camp and to ensure
that security is provided in a manner that does not further endanger the residents or
limit the provision of humanitarian assistance.
Fourthly, the Niger remains concerned about the fate of many civilians, notably
humanitarian workers and media professionals, as well as women and children, who
are arbitrarily detained in both camps. We call on the parties to the conflict to respect
human rights, share information on the fate of the detainees, report on the fate and
whereabouts of those detained and allow humanitarian and human rights agencies
access to the places of detention.
Finally, my delegation urges the belligerents to comply with the calls made by
the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for a massive and unilateral release of
detainees, as well as for meaningful action on the case of missing persons.
In conclusion, the dire consequences of the collapse of Syria’s economy will
affect Syrians in both Government-controlled and non-Government-controlled areas
without discrimination. My delegation therefore urges the countries concerned to
actively respond to the appeal made by the Secretary-General last March for the
removal, or easing, of the sanctions imposed on countries in crisis in order to ensure
access to food and essential medical supplies to combat the pandemic.

21-0299223/41

S/2021/206

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
We thank Mark Lowcock for his briefing and for presenting his perspective
of the humanitarian situation in Syria. We also thank Ms. Sonia Khush for her
briefing. We would like to welcome the newly arrived Permanent Representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations, Ambassador Bassam Sabbagh, to
today’s meeting.
Unfortunately, in his briefing the humanitarian coordinator did not address
all the factors that affect the humanitarian situation in Syria. In particular, when
speaking of reasons for the deteriorating economic situation, we did not hear him
refer to the illegal unilateral restrictions imposed by our Western colleagues,
whereas it is precisely those restrictions that are preventing the Syrian economy
from recovering despite all the efforts of the authorities. Above all, that affects
ordinary Syrians, who urgently need access to adequate social services in the areas
of health care and education and the restoration of war-torn civil infrastructure. The
humanitarian assistance coming into the country can neither solve those problems
nor bring life in Syria back to normal. The humanitarian exemptions are also not
working, which is confirmed by the humanitarian agencies on the ground. We have
repeatedly mentioned the conclusions of the United Nations Special Rapporteur, Ms.
Douhan, regarding the impact of sanctions on the enjoyment of human rights. Her
findings provided the basis for collective letters addressed to President Biden and
Prime Minister Johnson, which contained a request to lift sanctions against Syria.
The letters, signed by more than 90 people, were sent at the end of January this year.
Among the signatories were not only representatives of academia and the clergy,
journalists and humanitarian workers, but also former Ambassadors of the United
Kingdom, Germany, Tunisia and France to Syria, as well as an incumbent member of
the United Kingdom House of Lords. Regarding sanctions, the letter says that there
is “a growing consensus among the human rights and humanitarian communities
that this form of collective punishment of the civilian population is driving Syria
into an unprecedented humanitarian catastrophe”.
Due to the indirect influence of sanctions, Damascus cannot conduct the
foreign exchange transactions that are needed to ensure that the economy works
and purchase raw materials and construction materials on foreign markets, not to
mention the medications and medical equipment that are so badly needed amid a
pandemic. We hope that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is
aware of that.
As the Council knows, the Gavi Alliance has endorsed two bids for supplying
vaccines against the coronavirus disease to Syria. One of the applications was
submitted by the Government. We are sure that Damascus will dispatch a portion
of the vaccines to the non-Government-controlled territories in the north-east, as
was the case with medical supplies last year. I should recall that since May 2020, six
ground convoys with medical supplies have been sent to the Euphrates region with
the consent of Damascus and a further 13 shipments were delivered to Qamishli
by air. More than 90 per cent of those deliveries were sent to medical facilities in
non-Government-controlled areas that had previously been supplied through the AlYarubiyah border crossing. There are more than 100 of them.
However, we have never heard our Western partners in the Security Council
welcome those efforts by Damascus. Nor have we heard words condemning the
24/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

terrorists who control Idlib and have prevented a humanitarian convoy of the United
Nations, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the International Committee of the Red
Cross from entering the enclave for almost a year now despite the fact that, according
to United Nations estimates, Idlib has the largest number of starving people in Syria,
one in three of whom is a child, and food prices there are 26 per cent higher than the
country’s average.
We should in fact be asking the question: what is going on in Idlib? With
record deliveries through the cross-border mechanism, why does north-western
Syria have one of the highest starvation rates? Where does all the assistance on
which donors spend millions go to? It is common knowledge that the terrorists in
Idlib are getting rich. At the same time, we have never heard and are not likely to
hear donor States request ask the United Nations to give an account of the results of
its work. It appears that Idlib is the place where the cross-border mechanism shows
its false bottom. There is little doubt that to preserve the cross-border mechanism
would mean to preserve a channel of financial support for terrorists who feed off
extortion money and smuggling. That means that ordinary Syrians have to get by
on the plunderers’ crumbs, with no opportunity to make a living or ensure even a
remotely decent future for their children.
When it comes to delivering vaccines from Gavi Alliance stocks, as the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Gaziantep has arranged, we would
therefore be interested to learn how equitable the distribution of vaccines is going
to be in the north-west. The Permanent Representative of France and the Deputy
Permanent Representative of the United States have suggested that we exert pressure
on the Syrian authorities to have vaccination start in Syria — as if Damascus were
against it. In that regard, we cannot ignore the issue of sanctions, which could
seriously hamper Syria’s efforts to arrange vaccine deliveries to Governmentcontrolled areas and ensure its subsequent storage. What logistics company will
risk getting involved in the sanctions machinery? How is the Government supposed
to restore uninterrupted electric power supply to ensure, among other things, that
cooling equipment for vaccine storage works 24/7 if the required equipment and
spare parts cannot be purchased abroad?
We still have reservations about the United States occupying Syria’s northeast and appropriating its oil resources. Deliberate general neglect of this toxic
episode casts a shadow on the authority of our Security Council partners and calls
into question Syria’s territorial integrity, which is affirmed in resolution 2254 (2015).
It was the Russian military that cleared a corridor for humanitarian deliveries
to Al-Hasakah. What have the United States occupying forces, the champions of
humanism, done?
In conclusion, we must say in all seriousness that if we were to decide
tomorrow on renewing the cross-border mechanism, we are afraid that we would have
no compelling reasons to preserve it. Those interested in extending the mechanism
should understand that there is little time left and a lot to do by July. Half-measures
will not work; it is vital to begin domestic Syrian deliveries of humanitarian
assistance to Idlib and to ensure that they are carried out on a regular basis.
I would now like to return to Mr. Lowcock’s answers to our questions. But
before I do that, I must say that we were surprised to hear our colleague from the
United States assert that we prevented a briefer from participating in this videoteleconference. We have nothing against the briefer in question; we simply thought
that it would be enough to have just one civil society representative. The briefer we
proposed for this meeting would have been much more relevant. I also note that, not
long ago, several of our colleagues — including from the United States — prevented
our proposed briefers from appearing before the Council.
21-0299225/41

S/2021/206

Mr. Lowcock only partially answered the questions we had submitted in
advance. Here are the ones he left unanswered. Are there any obstacles to carrying
out the work in Syria that would fall under the development-humanitarian action
nexus? If so, then what are they and what needs to be done to overcome them?
What is the difference between the Inter-Agency Task Force and the United
Nations country team? What is the composition and what are the functions of said
Task Force?

26/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

Annex XII
Statement by the Counsellor of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to
the United Nations, Diani Jimesha Prince
I thank Under Secretary-General Lowcock and Ms. Khush for their briefings.
After a decade of conflict, Syria’s humanitarian situation remains a cause
for considerable alarm, as humanitarian needs are rising steeply across the country.
Regrettably, the crisis has been exacerbated by severe weather conditions and the
country’s continued economic downturn, which has left millions food insecure
and facing malnutrition. Unquestionably, the provision of timely, safe, sustained
and unimpeded humanitarian assistance, in line with humanitarian principles,
must remain a top priority and should be scaled up, where possible, by utilizing all
available modalities.
The global pandemic has further compounded the country’s complex
humanitarian emergency and necessitates urgent action. We note that Syria’s request
to secure coronavirus disease vaccines from the Coronavirus Disease Vaccine Global
Access Facility has been accepted. It is our hope that the vaccine roll-out will begin
shortly and that they will be administered efficiently. We echo the appeal for the
lifting of all unilateral coercive measures, which are incompatible with international
law, thwart socioeconomic recovery and hinder the country’s efforts to combat
the pandemic.
The continuation of hostilities serves as yet another factor that intensifies
the humanitarian crisis. It is crucial that the parties to the conflict exercise
maximum restraint and immediately end the violence in order to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure, prevent further displacement and allow humanitarian
actors to effectively carry out their work. Indeed, a sustained nationwide ceasefire
will also cultivate the necessary conditions for much-needed reconstruction. In that
regard, we continue to encourage the international community to contribute to the
restoration of schools, medical facilities and other essential services in order to
help alleviate the humanitarian situation by reducing vulnerabilities and promoting
overall development.
We are becoming increasingly concerned about the deteriorating security
situation in displacement camps, particularly Al-Hol. Those residing and working in
such camps must be afforded protection and access to basic necessities.
We recognize that counter-terrorism operations are required to protect Syria’s
people, sovereignty and territorial integrity. However, we remind parties of their
obligation to comply with international law. Military objectives should never take
precedence over the protection of civilians, and all activities must respect the
principles of distinction, proportionality and precaution. Impunity for violations of
international law should not be tolerated.
The political and humanitarian situations are undoubtedly interwoven and
the only resolution to the conflict and protracted humanitarian crisis is through
the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). Peace, prosperity and stability
can return to Syria with the positive engagement and support of the entire
international community.

21-0299227/41

S/2021/206

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
[Original: Arabic]
I should like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for his comprehensive
briefing. I also thank Ms. Sonia Khush, representative of civil society, for her
briefing. I welcome His Excellency Ambassador Bassam Sabbagh, the new
Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as the participation
of the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran and Turkey at this meeting.
At the outset, I would like to reiterate my country’s position that there is no
alternative to reaching a political settlement in Syria in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015) and that efforts must be made to hasten a settlement in order to end
the human suffering of Syrians and place the country on a path to stability and
sustainable peace. In the meantime, the scope of humanitarian assistance must
continue to be expanded throughout Syria in order to meet the growing needs and
mitigate the impact of the threats that have been exacerbated by a decade of conflict,
the deteriorating economic situation and the repercussions of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
We are deeply concerned about the unprecedented deterioration in
humanitarian crisis indicators in Syria, as noted in the report (S/2021/160) of the
Secretary-General. The crisis has affected the nutritional, health-related and
educational welfare of Syrians, especially the most vulnerable among them, women
and children in particular.
Overall calm remains a distant goal, in view of the increase in violence,
tensions and terrorism in several parts of Syria. Persistent ceasefire violations,
especially during the recent period, continue to claim the lives of innocent civilians
and medical and humanitarian workers, thereby undermining efforts to alleviate the
humanitarian crisis.
We reiterate that it is vital to establish a sustainable ceasefire throughout the
country, in line with the call made by the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy.
We urge all the parties to adhere to international law and international humanitarian
law and strive to ensure that civilians, civilian and medical facilities and medical
and humanitarian workers are protected.
We reiterate that it is incumbent upon all parties to commit to facilitating the
safe, prompt and unhindered delivery of humanitarian and medical assistance to
those in need through the various available access routes. Given that the humanitarian
situation is delicate, all parties on the ground must work constructively to facilitate
humanitarian access and prioritize humanitarian relief over any other considerations.
We commend the improved system for the granting of permits by Damascus to United
Nations missions inside Syria over the past year, and we urge the Syrian Government
to maintain that approach and further support it.
We welcome the progress made in containing the pandemic by taking steps
to vaccinate approximately one fifth of the Syrian population against COVID-19
by the second quarter through the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility. That
initiative provides a glimmer of hope for curbing the death toll and restoring some
semblance of normalcy to life in Syria. In that connection, we stress that access to
vaccines must be fair and non-discriminatory and that it must be extended to the
most vulnerable areas in Syria.
28/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

Lastly, we reiterate that it would be useful if early recovery efforts could be
promoted and if humanitarian and development projects and programmes could be
more thoroughly integrated to include the maintenance of hospitals, schools, roads,
the water supply, electricity and sanitation, while providing decent and sustainable
livelihoods for the affected and most vulnerable groups, thereby improving the
prospects of a better life for Syrians.

21-0299229/41

S/2021/206

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Barbara Woodward
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his
briefing. I also thank Sonia Khush for her first-hand analysis and, through her, Save
the Children for its life-saving work. I would like to register the United Kingdom’s
disappointment that Su’ad Jarbawi, of the International Rescue Committee, was not
able to brief the Council today on the realities of aid delivery in the north-west, due
to an objection from another Council member.
As the Secretary-General sets out in his latest report (S/2021/160), the Syrian
population has entered 2021 amid some of the most challenging humanitarian
conditions experienced over the past 10 years of conflict. An unprecedented 12.4
million people are food insecure — an increase of 4.5 million people in just one year.
As we heard today, children are bearing the brunt of this crisis, with one in eight
children now stunted as a result of malnutrition.
Millions of people in north-western Syria depend on cross-border assistance;
cross-line access is no substitute. The situation is now more acute due to torrential
rains and flooding in the north-west. Aid running through Bab Al-Hawa has never
been more important.
In north-eastern Syria, cross-line aid delivery from Damascus has failed
to fill the gaps left by the closure of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing. The prevention
of humanitarian food distribution by bureaucratic impediments or due to tensions
between armed actors in the north-east shows that we cannot rely on cross-line
modalities alone. The Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs has told
the Council, on at least five occasions since June 2020, that cross-line assistance is
not delivering at the scale or frequency needed to meet humanitarian needs.
The claim put forth by the Syrian authorities and the Russian Federation —
that cross-line access is enough to meet the humanitarian needs of three-quarters of
the population — is untenable, as is the claim that the West is somehow to blame.
As a first step, we urge the United Nations to provide comprehensive details of
what types of assistance are being delivered and where the greatest gaps lie.
The rationale for renewing the cross-border mandate in July has not
diminished. To quote the Secretary-General, “[m]ore access is needed”, not less. We
heard the clear message this morning from the representative of Save the Children
that “there is no other way to sustainably program for millions of people without the
cross-border resolution”. The Council must do everything in its power to ensure that
this vital assistance continues.

30/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

Annex XV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations, Richard Mills
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing. I also want to
offer my sincere appreciation for the powerful report from our civil society briefer,
Sonia Khush. The dedication of the thousands of humanitarians working in Syria is
quite laudable, and I wish to thank them, and you, Sonia, for your service.
I had also hoped to be able to thank Su’ad Jarbawi, from the International
Rescue Committee. Su’ad is an extraordinary civil society leader who was invited to
speak to the Council today. Sadly, our Russian colleagues silenced her and blocked
her from appearing today. Had she been here, I expect she would have delivered a
simple message to all of us: New York must act. The Council needs to ensure that
civilians in Syria have access to humanitarian aid, including through cross-border
operations. In future, I do hope our Russian colleagues will accord greater respect to
women, like Su’ad, who lead civil society organizations.
It is important that we continue to have these difficult and honest conversations
about the suffering endured by the Syrian people because of the actions of the AlAssad regime and its enablers.
Today I want to focus on three main points: why humanitarian access must
reach all in need, why cross-border access must continue and why, especially as
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) plagues Syrians and the rest of the world, the
Council has to stand up to its obligations to help the most vulnerable.
Every Syrian deserves assistance. That is why the United States has given
more than $12.2 billion in humanitarian assistance since 2012 to help any Syrian
who requires aid, solely based on their needs.
For close to one and half years, people in the Rukban camp have been without
medical aid because the Al-Assad regime and Russia will not allow the United
Nations to make deliveries to that informal encampment. We urge the Al-Assad
regime and Russia to allow unhindered humanitarian access to the camp in Rukban,
including to United Nations humanitarian delivery convoys. This kind of politicizing
and weaponizing of aid should outrage us all.
And while we have talked about it a lot, we need to keep repeating it as
others have: the cross-border mechanism is vital to ensuring that humanitarian aid
continues to reach people in need. It is our responsibility as the Council to expand
humanitarian access this July when the cross-border mandate is up for renewal, not
to further restrict it. Further limiting access would have additional catastrophic
consequences for the 3.5 million Syrians in the north-west, many of whom have been
internally displaced multiple times and whose lives depend on aid.
Reauthorization for the United Nations to use Bab Al-Hawa remains the only
way to ensure the consistent delivery of food, shelter and medical supplies. All of us
here know full well, however, that one crossing point does not meet the vast needs of
the Syrian people. We know that in the past six months, our increased dependence
on this one point — owing to the loss of Bab Al-Salam last July — has led, as we
have heard, to shortages of food and access to sanitation and shelter. That in turn
has led to higher rates of malnutrition and sickness, with deaths on the rise. We are
hearing this not just from the United States but from our briefers, from experts in
the United Nations and from the Secretary-General. The United Nations must be
allowed unhindered access to all areas of Syria in order to meet the life-sustaining
needs of millions of Syrians.
21-0299231/41

S/2021/206

Of course, we are deeply concerned about the continued risk of COVID-19, as
it poses a grave threat to internally displaced persons and other vulnerable groups
across Syria. Given the limited testing capacity, the poor access to health care and
the short supply of resources to take preventive steps nationwide, we encourage
all actors to work together to develop an equitable and efficient vaccination plan
that covers all Syrians. We must also acknowledge the critical role that increased
cross-border access would play in delivering the vaccine in both north-west and
north-east Syria.
Sustained, meaningful access to all those affected by the COVID-19 crisis is
required to build trust and vaccine acceptance for all Syrians and to deliver vaccines
efficiently. As we have said, that is just one more reason why the United Nations
cross-border authorization remains vital. We are gravely concerned that those left
behind in north-east Syria without a cross-border entry point will continue to be
unjustly denied vaccines by the Al-Assad regime. We also remain deeply concerned
about the tens of thousands of Syrians trapped in squalid conditions in regime
detention facilities, who must also benefit from an efficient vaccination plan.
Cross-line assistance shipments — as they have for years now — continue to
be regularly blocked, delayed or rerouted to regime-controlled areas. The Al-Assad
regime and its enablers must permit life-saving cross-line assistance to proceed
without interference. And we as the Council need to ensure that other avenues are
open when and where cross-line deliveries are not working.
In conclusion, it is also critical that all United Nations agencies in Syria act
consistently with the United Nations parameters and principles for assistance, as
the humanitarian needs in Syria have not been met and corruption in that regime
continues and cannot be rewarded. Syria remains, sadly, a country at war.
As Secretary Blinken underscored earlier this month, the United States
remains committed to the international community’s long-standing, comprehensive
and sustained efforts to bring a political solution to the conflict in Syria.
We want, again, to condemn all attacks that have killed or injured aid workers
and destroyed their facilities, and we call on all parties to the conflict to respect
international humanitarian law.
The Security Council should do everything possible to ensure that all Syrians
receive the humanitarian assistance they need to survive.

32/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his
informative briefing. I also thank Ms. Sonia Khush for sharing her views.
I would also like to welcome the participation of the representatives of Syria,
Turkey and Iran in today’s meeting.
My delegation takes note with concern of the humanitarian situation in Syria
as set out in the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/160) and the further
updates by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs today.
The predicament of millions of Syrian people continues without a sustainable
exit in sight. Aggravated by the economic crisis and the impact of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19), the situation could deteriorate even further.
According to the World Food Programme, 12.4 million people, that is, about
60 per cent of the population, lack access to adequate food. There has also been
a massive increase in the number of people facing severe food insecurity, which
has doubled to 1.3 million in just one year. The cost of food continues to rise and
shortages of basic goods to increase. We have recently seen acute food crises in
many countries, and the combined effect can put a great deal of stress on supplies and
relief efforts. If that issue cannot be addressed effectively, the authorities and relief
agencies might end up having to choose whom to save and whom to leave behind.
In addition, instability continued in various parts of Syria, claiming innocent
lives and hampering humanitarian and health-care services. It has also impacted
educational and health-care facilities in the north-east, as reported.
The multifaceted impact of the current crisis on the plight of vulnerable
groups all over Syria, especially children, is tremendous and distressing to witness.
With respect to humanitarian access, our delegation notes with encouragement
that various obstacles due to COVID-19-related restrictions have been tackled and that
humanitarian assistance continues to reach people in need across all 14 governorates.
We are nevertheless concerned over the lack of agreement among parties,
which has led to limited access to some parts of the country. We therefore call on
all parties to the conflict and the United Nations to enhance their cooperation in
order to ensure the unhindered passage of humanitarian relief for people in need. We
encourage the parties to continue their efforts to establish access to the north-west
from inside Syria, with a view to scaling up the humanitarian response in that area.
Regarding the humanitarian response, Viet Nam warmly welcomes the
effort of the various United Nations agencies, international partners and donors in
providing support for the Syrian people throughout the country. We would like to
pay special tribute to all humanitarian workers for their important contributions
given the serious challenges on the ground. We call on the relevant United Nations
agencies, donors and humanitarian organizations to address the food crises around
the world in a holistic manner in order to help the hungry and prevent further crises.
In the light of the second wave of COVID-19 infections, we reiterate the
importance of assisting the enhancement of Syria’s COVID-19 preparedness and
response capability. We support the appeal made by the Secretary-General for the
waiving of sanctions that are hindering the humanitarian response to the pandemic.
We take positive note of the fact that a plan for COVID-19 vaccination in
Syria is now being developed and look forward to its realization in the near future.
21-0299233/41

S/2021/206

Our delegation would also like to call on all parties concerned to find timely
and sustained solutions to the issues reported regarding the dire situation in various
camps for internally displaced persons, including the water shortage caused by the
disruption of the Allouk station.
To conclude, we call on the international community to continue its important
support for the Syrian people during this critical moment.
In the long run, the greater the magnitude of the humanitarian crisis, the more
vitally important it is to find a sustainable settlement of the situation in Syria. It is our
strong belief that the only way to achieve that is through facilitating a comprehensive
and inclusive political solution, led and owned by the Syrians, in line with resolution
2254 (2015) and in full accordance with international law.

34/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

Annex XVII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to the United Nations, Eshagh Al Habib
For 10 years, the Syrian people have suffered terribly from the brutal attacks
by foreign-backed terrorists and an illegal occupation, and, in recent years, from
inhumane sanctions.
The international community has a responsibility to help the Syrian people
and Government to overcome the crisis and to ensure Syria’s unity, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence.
In that context, we call for the immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces that
are present in Syria without the permission of its Government.
These and other aspects of the Syrian crisis have been extensively discussed
at the Astana format meeting held recently in Sochi, Russia, following which a joint
statement was issued by Iran, Russia and Turkey. The three countries condemned
the increasing terrorist activities in Syria and agreed to continue cooperation to
ultimately eliminate Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and all other Security Councildesignated terrorist groups and their affiliates.
They also expressed serious concern over the increased presence and terrorist
activity of Hayat Tahrir Al‑Sham and other affiliated terrorist groups and the threat
that they pose to civilians inside and outside the Idlib de-escalation area. In that
context, we express serious concern over the attempts to exonerate certain terrorist
groups with the ultimate goal of their delisting.
Likewise, they rejected all attempts to create new realities on the ground,
including illegitimate self-rule initiatives, under the pretext of combating terrorism,
and also reaffirmed their opposition to the illegal seizure and transfer of oil revenues
that should belong to the Syrian Arab Republic.
They also condemned the continued Israeli military attacks in Syria in violation
of international law, which undermine the sovereignty of Syria and neighbouring
countries as well as endanger stability and security in the region, and they called for
the cessation of such attacks. The international community must halt the military
adventurism of the Israeli regime before it reaches to an uncontrollable level.
On the political process, they emphasized the important role of the
Constitutional Committee, reaffirmed their support for its work, emphasized the
importance of ensuring respect for its terms of reference and rules of procedure,
and stressed that the Committee’s work should be governed by a sense of
compromise and constructive engagement without foreign interference or externally
imposed timelines.
The Astana guarantors also expressed grave concern at the humanitarian
situation in Syria, rejected all unilateral sanctions, and, recognizing the coronavirus
disease pandemic as a profound challenge to Syria’s socioeconomic and humanitarian
situations, called upon the wider United Nations system to prioritize vaccination
inside Syria.
The application of unilateral sanctions against the Syrian people only further
exacerbates the situation and prolongs both the crisis and the suffering of the people.
Such sanctions are unlawful, inhumane and unjustifiable and must therefore come
to an immediate end.
Given the important role that the improvement of the humanitarian situation
can play in advancing the political settlement, they called upon the international
21-0299235/41

S/2021/206

community to enhance assistance to Syria, including for the restoration of basic
infrastructure assets such as hospitals and water and power-supply facilities.
They also highlighted the need to facilitate the safe and voluntary return of
refugees and internally displaced persons to their original places of residence in Syria
and called upon the international community to provide appropriate contributions to
that end.
The mounting political and economic pressure on Syria and the setting
of multiple preconditions for the peaceful settlement of the crisis have proved
counterproductive. The reconstruction of the country and the return of refugees
and displaced persons must go hand in hand with the political process. They are
interlinked, mutually inclusive and mutually reinforcing.
Finally, Iran reiterates its commitment to the political resolution of the crisis
and will continue to support the people and the Government of Syria in their efforts
to restore the unity and territorial integrity of their country.

36/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Syria to the United
Nations, Bassam Sabbagh
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, as this is the first meeting in which I take the floor in my
capacity as the new Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, let me
say that I look forward to engaging in constructive and objective discussions on the
issues related to Syria being considered by the Security Council, in particular, and
the United Nations, in general.
My delegation listened attentively to the briefing given by Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General, on the implementation of resolutions relating
to the humanitarian situation. My delegation has also reviewed the seventyfirst report (S/2021/160) prepared by the Secretariat on the subject. However, we
were disappointed to find that many of the facts pertaining to the humanitarian
situation in Syria continue to be systematically and deliberately ignored. We had
hoped that Mr. Lowcock’s briefing, which might be his last, would have dispelled
our disappointment.
In the years since the crisis began, the Syrian Government has cooperated
earnestly and constructively with the United Nations, friendly countries and
humanitarian partners, foremost among them the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and
the International Committee of the Red Cross, as well as with the more than 50
foreign non-governmental organizations originally licensed to operate in Syria. That
cooperation and the significant facilitation efforts made by the Syrian Government
have contributed to tangible, undeniable gains in spite of the serious challenges
imposed on it, chief among them the fight against terrorism, the negative impact
of unilateral coercive measures and acts of aggression and occupation. The reality
that will remain before us, however much some would try to obscure it, is that the
United Nations and its various agencies would not have achieved any humanitarian
achievements in Syria without the support and considerable facilitation efforts made
by the Syrian Government.
The second fact is that the extreme politicization of humanitarian issues in
Syria has effectively increased the scale of human suffering. Reports submitted to the
Council that do not meet United Nations standards have made it possible for certain
Member States to use those reports as a tool to politicize humanitarian affairs and
divert attention from the need to tackle, in a serious and objective manner, the factors
that are causing the humanitarian situation in Syria to deteriorate. Any briefings
delivered or reports submitted to the Council will remain inadequate and seriously
flawed as long as they continue to ignore the following fundamental challenges.
First, the crimes committed by terrorist organizations, foremost among them
the terrorist organizations of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the Levant
Liberation Organization/Al-Nusra Front and associated entities, have been ignored,
as has the manner in which they exploit humanitarian assistance — especially crossborder assistance — to finance their terrorist activities, their recruitment of new
members and their use of civilians in their custody as human shields in areas under
their control.
For several days now, the armed terrorist groups that control Idlib governorate
have been preventing residents from heading to the Saraqib-Trunbah humanitarian
crossing, which the Syrian Government had opened in order to make it easier for
civilians to leave Idlib and to alleviate the human suffering they have been enduring
as a result of the siege imposed on them by the terrorist groups I mentioned. Those
21-0299237/41

S/2021/206

groups fired several rounds of shells from their positions in the town of Nayrab
towards the town of Saraqib in order to intimidate civilians and prevent them from
heading to the humanitarian crossing. Moreover, they continue to detain more than
3,000 secondary school students and approximately 3,300 primary school students
in areas under their control and to prevent the students from sitting their general
examinations at official Syrian Ministry of Education examination centres.
Secondly, the disastrous effects of the unilateral coercive measures imposed
on the Syrian people — measures that constitute a gross violation of international
law and an act of collective punishment, as recognized by the United Nations itself
— prevent Syrians from meeting their basic needs, including for food, medicine,
medical supplies, electricity and fuel, limit the capacity of Syrian State institutions
to respond to the additional challenges created by the coronavirus disease pandemic
and impede the efforts of international organizations operating in Syria.
Thirdly, the Turkish military is occupying vast areas of Syrian territory in the
north and north-west of the country and implementing a policy of Turkification by
changing the names of towns and villages, altering educational curricula, mandating
the use of Turkish lira in commercial transactions and confiscating the land of
Syrian farmers to build the so-called separation wall. That is in addition to providing
cover for terrorist organizations, including those on the Security Council’s lists of
terrorist organizations, to expropriate public and private property, plunder oil fields,
cultural property and crops and use access to drinking water as a weapon against
civilians by cutting off the supply of water 18 times from the Allouk station and
depriving our people in and around Hasakah. Those grave violations should be met
with condemnation, not praise.
Fourthly, American forces have occupied parts of north-east Syria. Along with
their separatist militia proxies, the occupying forces have systematically plundered
cultural property and oil and agricultural crops and smuggled them abroad through
illegal crossings that are under their control, in addition to the recent imposition
by those separatist militias of a siege strangling the city of Hasakah, resulting in a
severe food and fuel shortages. The militias have even shot at civilians who were
protesting against the siege and demanding the full return of State institutions to
north-east Syria. In addition, the occupying American forces in the Tanf area of
south-east Syria, where the Rukban camp is located, have obstructed humanitarian
access to the camp and prevented its residents from returning home and ending their
suffering.
Fifthly, because of the delay in addressing detainee conditions in the Al-Hol
camp, pressure must be brought to bear on the Governments of certain Western
States that refuse to repatriate their foreign terrorist nationals and their families.
Those Governments’ attempts to evade their legal responsibilities and obligations
must be stopped.
In order to improve the humanitarian situation in my country, a firm
commitment must be made to respect the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic, principles underscored by all the relevant Council
resolutions. Such a commitment includes refraining from illegally dispatching
delegations across the border to hold meetings with terrorist organizations and
separatist militias and illegal entities.
The Syrian Arab Republic once again stresses that the politicization of
humanitarian work must be brought to an end, as must any attempt to impose dictates
and blanket rejections intended to prevent the humanitarian and development efforts
of Syrian State institutions from receiving support. Such action would allow for the
voluntary return of internally and externally displaced persons.
38/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that the centre of humanitarian action
in Syria is the Syrian capital, Damascus, and not any other capital or city. Events that
might be held here or there, including the so-called Brussels Donors Conference, are
ineffective spectacles put on merely for show.

21-0299239/41

S/2021/206

Annex XIX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United
Nations, Feridun Sinirlioğlu
I wish to thank you, Madam President, for having organized this meeting.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Ms. Sonia Khush for
their briefings.
As we approach the tenth anniversary of the Syrian conflict, the Al-Assad
regime’s brutal response to the legitimate demands of the Syrian people continues.
Starvation and targeted attacks by the regime and its backers have claimed countless
lives. Millions of innocent people have been displaced. Tens of thousands have
disappeared or have been tortured to death in the prisons of the regime.
The crisis is getting worse, with ongoing attacks and displacement combined
with the economic crisis, the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and
harsh winter conditions.
In its tenth year, the crisis in Syria requires more attention and action from the
international community, in particular from the Security Council.
Last week, The New York Times correspondent who visited north-western
Syria recently shared testimony depicting Turkey’s pivotal role in ensuring the
security and protection of the Syrian people. Turkey remains the only international
force on the ground taking care of 5 million displaced and vulnerable civilians. Our
presence gives hope to millions. We will never let them down.
We resolutely continue our efforts to preserve the Idlib ceasefire. That is
essential to prevent another humanitarian catastrophe and a fresh migration flux
with repercussions for the region as well as for Europe. We reiterate our call on the
Council and the entire international community to support our efforts.
Recent images from Idlib show the destruction of thousands of tents by floods
and by warplanes — warplanes commissioned to kill civilians. That is unacceptable.
The world cannot turn its back on that massive humanitarian crisis. In the face of
that man-made disaster of massive proportions, the Council does not have the option
of inaction.
The failure of the Council last July to sustain the existing United Nations
cross-border mechanism has exacerbated the already dire situation faced by 1.3
million people in northern Aleppo, as the most direct route for humanitarian aid is
blocked. It would be inconceivable to add 4 million people to the number of those
already deprived of basic humanitarian assistance. Stopping the humanitarian
mechanism would be a deadly blow to innocent people in need, leaving them at the
mercy of the Al-Assad regime.
The Council has the responsibility to protect the Syrian people. It
cannot abandon them. The Council must respond to the strong call made by
the General Assembly for the continuation of United Nations cross-border
humanitarian assistance.
The United Nations cross-border mechanism is also the only tool for the
transfer of COVID-19 vaccines to people in the north-west. It is estimated that only
one fifth of the population will have received vaccines by next year.
In the joint statement following the Astana format meeting held in Sochi last
week, together with Russia and Iran we called upon the United Nations to prioritize
vaccination inside Syria and emphasized the need to increase humanitarian assistance
throughout the country.
40/41

21-02992

S/2021/206

We will be following up on those commitments to make sure that the United
Nations is not deprived of its most critical tools amid the global health crisis.
While the regime bombs its own people and starves them to death, the terrorist
organization Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s Protection Units (PKK/YPG)
pursues the same evil agenda by committing war crimes in northern Syria. More
than 20 civilians, including children, lost their lives in attacks in Tel Abyad, I’zaz,
Afrin and Al-Bab over the past weeks. In a little more than a year, PKK/YPG carried
out more than 350 attacks and 70 car bombings, indiscriminately targeting civilians.
We regret the fact that some Member States continue to refrain from
condemning those terrorist attacks. Those who think that they can reason and have a
common agenda with terrorism are making a grave mistake. That must stop. I want
to remind those Member States that there are no good terrorists. The very same
terrorist organization can knock on others’ doors one day. It has happened before,
and it will happen again. So stop supporting PKK/YPG.
The situation in the north-east and the untenable security environment in AlHol camp in particular, under the de facto control of the so-called Syrian Democratic
Forces (SDF), reveal the failure of those narrow agendas.
The Secretary-General, in his latest report, underlines the tactics of the socalled SDF, which include blocking humanitarian aid, imposing arbitrary school
curricula based on its terrorist ideology and arresting teachers.
Turkey is resolved to fight against all terrorist groups that threaten its national
security and Syria’s unity. We will continue without hesitation, just as we have done
as an active member of the Global Coalition against Da’esh since its inception and
as the only NATO country that engaged in chest-to-chest combat against Da’esh.
Those who ignore the atrocities committed by the PKK/YPG under the pretext of
countering Da’esh, on the other hand, undermine their own credibility in the fight
against terrorism.
Every month, on several occasions we listen to numerous misrepresentations
and lies by the representative of the regime. It continues in full swing, as we have
just heard, but to no avail. Those lies will not stop us from telling the truth, and we
will continue to support the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and their
right to unhindered humanitarian assistance.
As to the statement made by the regime representative, I do not consider him
as my legitimate counterpart and therefore will not honour him with a response.

21-0299241/41
