S/2017/964

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 November 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
Reporting period from 22 June to 6 November 2017

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides a comprehensive assessment of the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) since my report of 11 July 2017
(S/2017/591), including on specific provisions of Council resolution 2373 (2017).
During the reporting period, the situation in the area of operations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) remained generally calm. However,
there was no progress with regard to the outstanding obligations of the parties under
resolution 1701 (2006) or towards a permanent ceasefire.

II. Implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
A.

Situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon
2.
Israeli and Lebanese authorities continued to reaffirm their commitment to
resolution 1701 (2006) and the cessation of hostilities. Despite the relative calm
along the Blue Line, the level of tensions between Lebanon and Israel remained
high, with rhetoric on both sides that resulted in increased anxiety, including among
the local population. The United Nations continued to urge both parties to refrain
from potentially inflammatory comments and to utilize established liaison channels
to address concerns.
3.
On two occasions, tensions rose across the Blue Line and required UNIFIL
intervention and liaison with the two sides to avert escalation. On 9 September, th e
Lebanese Armed Forces informed UNIFIL of the presence of suspicious equipment
near Kfar Shuba (Sector East), in the Shabʻa Farms area. When UNIFIL arrived at
the location, the device, a fragmentation explosive, had been partially dismantled
and moved. The UNIFIL investigation found that the Lebanese Armed Forces had
violated the Blue Line when removing the device from south of the Blue Line. The
incident led the Secretary-General of Hizbullah, Hassan Nasrallah, to warn during a
speech delivered on the occasion of Ashura that such actions, which he attributed to
Israel, were not acceptable and to voice Hizbullah’s determination to look for ways
to address the issue if it was not resolved by political means.

17-20415 (E)

211117

*1720415*

S/2017/964

4.
On 19 September, the Israel Defense Forces alerted UNIFIL that a Lebanese
soldier had thrown stones at the Israeli technical fence close to one of their positions
south-west of Ayta al-Sha‘b (Sector West). The soldier had taken up an armed alert
position in anticipation of a reaction by the Israel Defense Forces. UNIFIL quickly
intervened to prevent escalation. The Lebanese Armed Forces redeployed and
disciplined the soldier.
5.
During a visit to UNIFIL headquarters on 11 September, the Minister of
Defence of Lebanon, Yacoub Riad Sarraf, voiced his Government’s support for
UNIFIL in the implementation of its mandate and commitment to close cooperation
and coordination between the Mission and the Lebanese Armed Forces. The
Minister also informed UNIFIL that the Fifth Intervention Regiment of the
Lebanese Armed Forces would deploy to southern Lebanon imminently. During the
visit of the Commander of the Lebanese Armed Forces, General Joseph Aoun, to
UNIFIL on 22 September, the Lebanese Armed Forces formally announced the
deployment of the Regiment, in line with assurances by the Lebanese authorities
that the Lebanese Armed Forces would increase its presence in the south as soon as
security conditions along the eastern border allowed. The UNIFIL Head of Mission
and Force Commander and the Commander of the Lebanese Armed Forces also
agreed to establish a coordination committee to explore ways to further enhance the
implementation of mandated tasks. A more visible Lebanese Armed Forces
presence, coordinated with UNIFIL, south of the Litani River, particularly along
potential areas of tension near the Blue Line, will contribute to mitigating the risk of
serious incidents.
6.
From 1 July to 30 October, UNIFIL recorded 420 ground violations of the
Blue Line, similar to levels observed during the same period in 2 016.
7.
More than 90 per cent of the observed ground violations were committed by
shepherds with their flocks or farmers cultivating their fields; the majority near the
Shab‘a Farms and Bastrah (Sector East) and Rumaysh (Sector West). Nine per cent
of violations involved crossings to access the Shoeib well (Sector East) near Blida.
8.
UNIFIL completed its investigations into the firing incident across the Blue
Line in the Kfar Kila area (Sector East) on 26 October 2016 (see S/2017/201,
para. 12), the crossing by a Lebanese man into Israel near Kfar Kila on 27 April
2017 (see S/2017/591, para. 10), and the suspicious device found in the area of Kfar
Shuba on 9 September. In the conclusions and recommendations of the
investigations, the need for close and timely liaison and cooperation by the parties
with UNIFIL was emphasized.
9.
Israel continued to violate Lebanese airspace on a daily basis, in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006) and Lebanese sovereignty. From 1 July to 30 October,
UNIFIL recorded 758 air violations, totalling 3,188 overflight hours, an increase of
80 per cent compared with the same period in 2016. Unmanned aerial vehicles were
involved in over 93 per cent (707) of those violations; the remainder involved
fighter or unidentified aircraft.
10. UNIFIL protested all air violations to the Israel Defense Forces and urged their
immediate cessation. The Government of Lebanon also protested the airspace
violations to UNIFIL. Such violations of Lebanese sovereignty undermine the
cessation of hostilities and efforts to reach a permanent ceasefire.
11. The Israeli occupation of northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the
Blue Line continued, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and Lebanese
sovereignty. To date, Israel has not responded to the proposal that UNIFIL
submitted to both parties in 2011 aimed at facilitating the withdrawal of the Israel

2/22

17-20415

S/2017/964

Defense Forces from the occupied area. The Lebanese Armed Forces informed
UNIFIL in July 2011 of the agreement of Lebanon to the proposal.
12. Lebanon also protested alleged violations of its sovereignty by I sraeli vessels
operating near the Israeli line of buoys. The delineation of the maritime boundary
between the two countries is still disputed; Lebanon considers that the line of buoys,
installed unilaterally by Israel, runs through its territorial waters a nd does not
recognize it. The United Nations also does not recognize the line of buoys. The
UNIFIL Maritime Task Force, which is mandated to assist the Government of
Lebanon in securing its borders and other entry points, maintained a visible
presence in the southern part of the area of maritime operations to prevent tensions
between Israel and Lebanon.
13. Lebanon also asserted that Israel continued to violate its sovereignty by
conducting electronic surveillance, both across the Blue Line and through devi ces
placed on Lebanese territory.
14. In accordance with resolution 1701 (2006), UNIFIL continued to assist the
Lebanese Armed Forces in establishing an area between the Blue Line and the
Litani River free of unauthorized armed personnel, assets and weapons other than
those of the Government of Lebanon and of UNIFIL. The Force stands ready to act
within the full scope of its mandate and capabilities should there be credible
evidence or information supporting the presence of unauthorized weapons or the
imminent threat of hostile activity emanating from the area of operations. The
Lebanese Armed Forces regularly reiterated its strong commitment to act
immediately upon receipt of evidence of unauthorized arme d personnel or weapons
in the area in contravention of resolution 1701 (2006).
15. UNIFIL observed 251 instances of individuals carrying unauthorized arms in
the area of operations, comparable to the number in the same period in 2016. The
majority (240) involved civilians carrying hunting weapons near the Blue Line in
the areas of Mays al-Jabal, Blida and Bastrah (Sector East). On 25 September, the
Lebanese Armed Forces reissued a public statement prohibiting hunting and the
presence of weapons south of the Litani River. An association of local hunters,
supported by local politicians, protested the ban, disputing its legality under
resolution 1701 (2006).
16. The remaining incidents involved other weapons, mostly assault rifles,
observed in the area of operations (see annex I). In each instance, UNIFIL alerted
the Lebanese Armed Forces and requested that they take appropriate measures to
prevent the presence of unauthorized weapons. The Lebanese Armed Forces
continues to follow up on such incidents to prevent their recurrence.
17. In addition, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNIFIL about the alleged
presence of Hizbullah weapons and infrastructure in three specified locations in the
UNIFIL area of operations. On 9 August, the Permanent Representative of Israel to
the United Nations, in a letter addressed to me, referred to the same “three
Hizbullah installments” and requested an update on follow-up actions by UNIFIL.
The locations include an area on the northern boundary of the UNIFIL area of
operations, a privately-owned house and an open compound in a village. UNIFIL
shared the information with the Lebanese Armed Forces command. Within the
parameters of its mandate, UNIFIL closely monitored the three locations, including
through air reconnaissance, satellite imagery and patrols. UNIFIL shared the
information with the Lebanese Armed Forces command and cross-checked its
findings with the Lebanese Armed Forces. Subsequently, the findings were shared
with the Israel Defense Forces. No evidence to confirm the allegations was
established. UNIFIL continues to regularly monitor those areas.

17-20415

3/22

S/2017/964

18. On 24 August, UNIFIL discovered an abandoned underground struc ture near
the Blue Line in the vicinity of Yarun (Sector West). The structure was not in an
operationally viable condition. An excavation of the site by UNIFIL and the
Lebanese Armed Forces confirmed no evidence of weapons at the scene. The
Lebanese Armed Forces determined that it had been long disused, and destroyed the
structure.
19. Through tripartite forum discussions and bilateral engagement with UNIFIL,
Israel raised the issue of “suspicious” individuals in civilian attire, alleged to be
Hizbullah operatives, conducting “reconnaissance” of areas south of the Blue Line.
UNIFIL observed and closely monitored individuals taking photographs of areas
south of the Blue Line and the work of an environmental non -governmental
organization (NGO), “Green without Borders”, operating in the area. On 20 June,
the Permanent Representative of Israel referred to that organization as conducting
illicit activities and violations on behalf of Hizbullah (see S/2017/526). UNIFIL
verified the credentials of the NGO with the Lebanese authorities and received
official confirmation of the organization’s proper accreditation and environmental
purpose. On 29 August, UNIFIL observed that members of the NGO had tampered
with barbed wire near a Blue Line marker and referred the issue to the Lebanese
authorities to prevent such incidents from reoccurring. In the conduct of its
operations, UNIFIL observed no unauthorized weapons or other violations in
relation to the organization, including with reference to the above-mentioned
incident. UNIFIL continues to monitor concerned areas regularly.
20. The freedom of movement of UNIFIL was generally respected, except on eight
occasions (see annex II). In each case, UNIFIL responded within its manda te, in
close coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces and local authorities, and
subsequently ensured its freedom of movement in the incident locations.
21. In a number of villages, for instance, Ayta al-Sha‘b (Sector West), narrow
roadways and community sensitivities necessitated that patrols be conducted on
foot. In other instances, for example in Blida, community leaders have requested
that patrols conducted with heavy armoured vehicles pass through main roads only,
owing to road safety concerns. In some areas, the potential presence of unexploded
ordnance poses a security risk. Private property or difficult and rugged terrain also
limit access by UNIFIL patrols. Where the conduct of patrols in heavy vehicles is
not feasible, officers from the liaison branch and unarmed military observers from
Observer Group Lebanon or the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, as
well as UNIFIL personnel on light vehicle and foot patrols, are deployed to achieve
unimpeded access throughout the area of operations. In addition, such areas are
monitored by regular helicopter patrols. UNIFIL maintains close contact with the
leadership of local communities and the Lebanese Armed Forces to enhance
situational awareness and address any local sensitivities without compr omising its
mandated tasks. UNIFIL has no access to the northern part of the village of Ghajar
and the adjacent area, which remain occupied by the Israel Defense Forces.
22. Pursuant to paragraph 15 of resolution 2373 (2017), UNIFIL increased its
visible presence and activities, with a focus on preserving the cessation of
hostilities. UNIFIL closely monitored the situation from fixed positions along the
Blue Line and maintained a high operational tempo; more than 22,686 mobile
vehicular and foot patrols were completed from 1 July to 26 October across the area
of operations. UNIFIL adjusted its operational priorities, increasing the percentage
of patrols, including by foot and during night-time, conducted along the Blue Line,
from 27.5 per cent in July to 33.5 per cent in October. UNIFIL also conducted over
141 hours of helicopter patrols from July to October, including over rugged and
difficult terrain. Those operational adjustments contributed to improved Mission
visibility, in particular close to the Blue Line and in sensitive areas.
4/22

17-20415

S/2017/964

23. The Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL regularly review their modus
operandi to further improve their close coordination. UNIFIL conducts 19 per cent
of its operations with the Lebanese Armed Forces. The Lebanese Armed Forces also
increased their participation in patrols along the Blue Line.
24. The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force carried out maritime interdiction operations
on a 24-hour basis and capacity-building for the Lebanese Armed Forces Navy.
During the reporting period, the Maritime Task Force hailed 2,908 vessels, of which
708 were inspected and cleared by the Lebanese authorities.
25. Relations between UNIFIL and the local population remained largely positive;
UNIFIL continued its outreach and engagement with local communities. The
Mission continued to identify and implement quick -impact projects to address
pressing needs of local communities, support the extension of State authority and
contribute to acceptance of the Force. In addition to the UNIFIL-funded quickimpact projects, individual contingents carried out 30 projects focused on
electricity, education, water, the environment, social assistance, the local economy
and health.
26. The Mission continued to engage with a range of stakeholders to build the
capacity of State institutions, such as the civil-military cooperation capacity of the
Lebanese Armed Forces, civil defence volunteers, the Internal Security Forces and
the municipal police, including in the implementation of the Mission’s strategy for
the protection of civilians.
27. In line with the priorities identified by the Lebanese Armed Forces during the
strategic review of UNIFIL (see S/2017/202), UNIFIL is working closely with the
Lebanese Armed Forces to establish a Lebanese Armed Forces civil -military
cooperation centre in Marj’yun (Sector East).

B.

Security and liaison arrangements
28. UNIFIL chaired two tripartite meetings, on 31 July and 19 September. While
acknowledging a sustained period of stability along the Blue Line, the Israel
Defense Forces expressed concern about the aforementioned suspicious Hizbullah
activity, involving individuals in civilian clothes taking photographs along the Blue
Line and the activities of “Green without Borders.” The Lebanese Armed Forces
protested the continued Israeli air violations and the occupation of northern Ghajar
by Israel. During both meetings, the parties underscored their continued
commitment to the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), including respect for
the Blue Line, and to maintain stability, as well as voicing their willingness t o
explore paths towards a permanent ceasefire.
29. UNIFIL and the parties made extensive use of other established liaison and
coordination arrangements to exchange information and facilitate conflict
prevention. The liaison and coordination provided by UNI FIL enabled the quick
de-escalation of tensions across the Blue Line. UNIFIL continued to explore with
the parties ways to further enhance the effectiveness of liaison and coordination.
The establishment of a UNIFIL liaison office in Tel Aviv, Israel, was discussed with
the Israeli authorities. The agreement of Israel to the UNIFIL proposal remains
pending.
30. UNIFIL continued its efforts to advance progress in the visible marking of the
Blue Line. With the majority of points agreed upon by the parties ha ving been
marked, UNIFIL continued to encourage progress in marking the remaining points.
Now in its tenth year, the Blue Line marking process remains an important
confidence-building activity with significant strategic value.

17-20415

5/22

S/2017/964

31. As mentioned above, the Lebanese Armed Forces reinforced its presence in the
South Litani Sector with the deployment of the Fifth Intervention Regiment. The
950–1,000-strong unit joined the two brigades already operating south of the Litani
River. It is deployed centrally in an area straddling Sectors East and West of the
UNIFIL area of operations. With the Regiment’s arrival, UNIFIL and the Lebanese
Armed Forces are in the process of adjusting their operational coordination to
incorporate the strengthened Lebanese Armed Forces presence.
32. UNIFIL continues to work closely with the Lebanese Armed Forces Navy in
maritime interdiction operations inside Lebanese territorial waters in an effort to
build up Lebanese Armed Forces Navy capabilities. The Lebanese Armed Forces
Navy has limited capacity to deploy units in Lebanese territorial waters. Small units
with limited crew capabilities able to operate in calm weather can be deployed for
up to 24 hours. The Lebanese Armed Forces Navy maintains a current maritime
picture of its waters through the coastal radar system. To ensure that at least one
Lebanese vessel is at sea operating together with the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force
at all times, the Lebanese Armed Forces Navy requires at least three vessels and
trained crews, which are not currently available. As highlighted in the 2017 strategic
review of UNIFIL and concomitant with the planned reduction of the Maritime Task
Force from seven ships to six in January 2018, the Lebanese authorities are seeking
to acquire a suitable offshore patrol vessel.
33. UNIFIL conducted 194 training activities on maritime operational issues,
contributing to improved common operational standards between UNIFIL and the
Lebanese Armed Forces.
34. The Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL continued to engage in the strategic
dialogue process, which seeks to support the development of the capabilities and
presence of the Lebanese Armed Forces in southern Lebanon and Lebanese
territorial waters and constitutes an integral part of the capabilities development
plan for the Lebanese Armed Forces. In cooperation with the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, UNIFIL continued efforts to promote
international assistance with donor countries in support of the Lebanese Armed
Forces deployment in the UNIFIL area of operations, including at the eleventh
coordination meeting of the Executive Military Commission, held on 29 June.
35. In line with the recommendations of the strategic review of UNIFIL and
through the strategic dialogue, UNIFIL intensified cons ultations with the
Government of Lebanon and the Lebanese Armed Forces on the elaboration of a
“model Lebanese Armed Forces regiment”. On 22 September, during his visit to
UNIFIL headquarters, the Commander of the Lebanese Armed Forces expressed his
full commitment to establishing the model regiment, which will cooperate closely
with UNIFIL, in particular along the Blue Line. This model regiment is distinct
from the aforementioned Fifth Intervention Regiment.
36. Building on the identified priorities and recommendations of the strategic
review of UNIFIL and with a view to implementing resolutions 1701 (2006) and
2373 (2017), UNIFIL, in close coordination with the Special Coordinator for
Lebanon, enhanced its engagement with the Lebanese authorities towards the
extension of State authority and presence and building the capacity of the Lebanese
Armed Forces in southern Lebanon and Lebanese territorial waters, including
through the International Support Group for Lebanon. In that regard, consultations
continued with Member States and the Government of Lebanon to galvanize
international support for Lebanese security institutions, especially in relation to
priority land and maritime capabilities.
37. In line with its strategic priority to ensure that it is prepared to deliver on its
mandate to protect civilians under imminent threat of physical violence, UNIFIL
6/22

17-20415

S/2017/964

completed contingency planning at the tactical level and commenced targeted
training on the protection of civilians for all Mission personnel. UNIFIL focused on
a range of preventive actions to maintain calm along the Blue Line and in the area
of operations. An update on the implementation of the recommend ations of the
strategic review is provided in annex III.

C.

Disarming armed groups
38. The maintenance of arms outside the control of the State by Hizbullah and
other groups continues to restrict the ability of the Government of Lebanon to
exercise full sovereignty and authority over its territory. Hizbullah demonstrated its
possession of weapons and military equipment through military operations,
including its battle against militants from Jabhat Fath al-Sham on the outskirts of
Arsal between 21 and 27 July, during which 28 Hizbullah fighters and
approximately 150 militants were killed, as well as in statements.
39. Illustrating the heightened rhetoric during the reporting period, in a speech on
23 June, the Secretary-General of Hizbullah, Hassan Nasrallah, stated that “the door
would open for tens of thousands of mujahidin from the Arab and Muslim worlds to
be partners in this battle”, should Israel attack Lebanon. On 13 July, the Head of the
Executive Council of Hizbullah, Sayyed Hashem Safieddine, reportedly stated that
“Hizbullah has significant ability to show many new capabilities ” in the context of a
potential future confrontation with Israel. On 13 August, Mr. Nasrallah expressed a
veiled threat against the Israeli nuclear reactor at Dimona. On 1 October, Mr. Nasrallah
threatened that there would be “not a safe place in occupied Palestine” in the event
of Israeli aggression.
40. On 23 September, in an interview with the French media, the President of
Lebanon, Michel Aoun, reportedly stated that “one cannot deprive Hizbullah of its
weapons as long as Israel does not respect the resolutions of the UN Security
Council”, and that Hizbullah’s weapons “serve to ensure our resistance to the State
of Israel”.
41. The media reported statements by Israeli officials pertaining to the use of force
against targets in Lebanon, the relationship between Lebanon, the Lebanese Armed
Forces and Hizbullah, and alleged Iranian weapons facilities in Lebanon. On
28 August, the Minister of Defence of Israel, Avigdor Lieberman, reportedly said
that “Israel will act with great force during a confrontation” in which Israeli citizens
were attacked. On 24 September, the media quoted the Minister of Education and of
Diaspora Affairs, Naftali Bennett, as having stated that Israel would “use full force
on the Lebanese Government and infrastructure” if attacked. Mr. Bennett also made
statements equating Lebanon with Hizbullah. On 10 October, Mr. Lieberman
reportedly alleged that “the Lebanese army has turned into an integral part of
Hizbullah’s command structure”.
42. Mutual accusations of violations of resolution 1701 (2006) continued. In
identical letters addressed to me and the President of the Security Council dated
9 August 2017 (A/71/1031-S/2017/705), the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Lebanon to the United Nations rejected allegations made by the
Permanent Representative of Israel in his letter of 20 June 2017 ( S/2017/526) with
respect to the environmental NGO “Green without borders”, noting that the
association was licensed by the Lebanese State and was not in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). In a letter dated 31 August, the Permanent Representative of
Israel alleged “continued involvement with Hezbollah” by a major in the Lebanese
Armed Forces, which the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations refuted in a letter dated 9 October 2017. In letters addressed to the President

17-20415

7/22

S/2017/964

of the Security Council dated 8 September and 30 October 2017 (S/2017/772 and
A/72/553-S/2017/915), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon denounced Israeli
violations of Lebanese airspace on 7 September “to strike targets in the Syrian Arab
Republic”. In identical letters addressed to me and the President of the Security
Council dated 11 September 2017 (A/72/499-S/2017/773), the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon denounced an Israeli overflight on 10 September over
the city of Sidon, in which Israeli aircraft flew at low altitude and broke the sound
barrier. The Israel Defense Forces characterized a flight of their aircraf t in Lebanese
airspace on 16 October as “routine”.
43. The Lebanese Armed Forces and security forces intensified arrests of
individuals suspected of affiliation with extremist groups or of involvement in
terrorist activities throughout Lebanon. From July to the end of October, 226
terrorism-related arrests were reported, including of suspected affiliates of Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Jabhat Fath al-Sham. Several weapons
caches were also uncovered.
44. There was no progress in dismantling the military bases maintained by the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah
al-Intifada, which continue to compromise Lebanese sovereignty and impede the
ability of the State to monitor and effectively control p arts of the border.
45. While the security situation in the majority of Palestine refugee camps in
Lebanon remained generally stable, violence in the Ein El Helweh camp between
extremist groups and the joint Palestinian security forces remains of serious
concern. Between 17 and 23 August, 8 people were killed and 86 injured and around
400 families were displaced following intense clashes. Heavy weapons were
reportedly used, including mortars and rocket-propelled grenades. Extensive
damage to infrastructure, particularly shelters, created a precarious humanitarian
situation. Basic service delivery in the camp by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) had to be
suspended temporarily. The Special Coordinator for Lebanon stressed the need to
work collectively for the stability of the camp during her meeting with the camp’s
political factions in Ein El Helweh on 25 July.
46. Intermittent incidents of violence, often linked to criminal activity, occurred in
other camps, including Beddawi, Burj Barajneh and Shatila. In the Nahr el -Bared
camp, in northern Lebanon, there have been recurrent protests since mid -August in
which UNRWA has been called upon to resume rental subsidies discontinued owing
to a lack of funding in October 2015 for the families displaced by the 2007 clashes.

D.

Arms embargo and border control
47. Allegations of arms transfers to Hizbullah continued on a regular basis. The
United Nations takes such allegations seriously, but is not in a posit ion to
substantiate them independently.
48. During my visit to Israel, on 28 July, the Prime Minister of Israel, Benjamin
Netanyahu, raised the issue of alleged “intentions to build factories for the
production of precision-guided missiles in Syria and Lebanon” of the Islamic
Republic of Iran. The Prime Minister accused the Islamic Republic of Iran and
Hizbullah of “breaking international law by using civilians as human shields and
shooting at civilians”.
49. On 30 June, the Lebanese Armed Forces raided informal Syrian refugee
settlements at Arsal. During the operation, five suicide bombings and a hand
grenade explosion lightly injured seven Lebanese Armed Forces soldiers. One

8/22

17-20415

S/2017/964

Syrian child was reportedly killed. Of the 356 individuals arrested for interrog ation
during the operation, 4 died while in the custody of the Lebanese Armed Forces. In
line with the obligations of Lebanon under the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the Prime Minister of
Lebanon, Saad Hariri, ordered an investigation on 5 July. On 24 July, the Military
Prosecutor concluded that the detainees had died of “natural causes” and that there
was “no evidence of violence”. Pictures of corpses attributed to the four Syrians
circulating on social media showed extensive gashes and bruising. Neither the
report nor the details of the investigation have been made public.
50. In the context of the military operations against militants along the north eastern border, incidents of cross-border fire from the Syrian Arab Republic into
Lebanon temporarily spiked. After protecting the town of Arsal from militant
infiltration, the Lebanese Armed Forces launched a military operation against ISIL
militants on the outskirts of Ra‘s Baalbeck and Qa‘ on 19 August. At the same time,
the Syrian Arab Armed Forces and Hizbullah attacked ISIL militants on the Syrian
side of the border. The operation ended with a ceasefire announced by the Lebanese
Armed Forces on 28 August. The remains of nine Lebanese soldiers ab ducted in
August 2014 were recovered by the Lebanese Armed Forces between 27 and
29 August. Following the departure of the militants, the Lebanese Armed Forces
deployed along the border with the Syrian Arab Republic. Lebanese security
agencies assess that consequently the security situation along the border has
improved.
51. Agreements between non-State armed groups resulted in the departure of
Syrian fighters and their families from border areas in Lebanon to the Syrian Arab
Republic, totalling between 6,000 and 7,000 persons according to media reports. On
2 August, fighters affiliated with Jabhat Fath al-Sham and their families reportedly
left for Idlib, Syrian Arab Republic. Following the surrender without fighting of
Saraya Ahl al-Sham on 22 July, hundreds of fighters and their families reportedly
departed on 14 August. Moreover, hundreds of ISIL-affiliated fighters and their
families reportedly departed on 28 August towards Dayr al -Zawr, Syrian Arab
Republic. The United Nations was not involved in the r eturns and could not confirm
the intentions or the numbers of those who left for the Syrian Arab Republic. Two
movements of people affiliated with Saraya Ahl al-Sham totalling 235 persons in
June and July 2017 were partially monitored by the United Nations .
52. Hizbullah remained engaged in the fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic. It
was reported in the media that a number of Lebanese nationals also continued to
fight with non-State armed groups in the Syrian Arab Republic.
53. On 25 September, the Prime Minister of Lebanon launched an initiative to
limit the risk posed by the hazardous use of firearms, including for commemorative
or celebratory shooting.

E.

Landmines and cluster bombs
54. Areas on the outskirts of Arsal are contaminated with landmine s following the
militant presence. Seven Lebanese Armed Forces soldiers were killed by mines
during the military operation in August, and one civilian was reported to have been
killed and another to have been wounded on 28 September. Mine clearance
continues as part of the plan of the Lebanese Armed Forces to fully redeploy to the
area.
55. Six UNIFIL mine clearance teams cleared 779.3 m2 of land in the UNIFIL
area of operations. The Mine Action Service of the United Nations conducted 22
quality assurance visits and 25 training and safety monitoring visits to UNIFIL

17-20415

9/22

S/2017/964

demining teams. Safety training and awareness briefings with respect to landmines
and other explosive remnants of war were provided to 61 United Nations civilian
and military personnel. The Lebanon Mine Action Centre, in coordination with
UNIFIL, held two mine risk education events that benefited over 400 children.
56. Two incidents involving landmines and unexploded ordnance were recorded in
the UNIFIL area of operations: on 2 July, in Ramiyah (Sector West), the explosion
of a cluster munition killed a farmer; on 6 September, a cluster bomb explosion
injured the employee of an NGO clearing munitions near Tayr Harfa (Sector West).

F.

Delineation of borders
57. No progress was made towards the delineation or demarcation of the border
between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic, including in uncertain or disputed
areas, such as the outskirts of Arsal, that recently witnessed fighting. There was no
progress in addressing the matter of the Shabʻa Farms. The Syrian Arab Republic
and Israel have yet to respond to the provisional definition of the Shabʻa Farms area
proposed in my report of 30 October 2007 on the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) (S/2007/641).

G.

Political and institutional stability
58. On 4 November, in Riyadh, the Prime Minister of Lebanon announced his
resignation. The President of Lebanon subsequently issued a statement that he
would await the return of the Prime Minister to Lebanon to determine next steps,
while underlining the importance of national unity. On 5 November, I issued a
statement to express my concern about this development, urge all sides to support
the stability of Lebanon and the continuity of State institutions, and reiterate the
commitment of the United Nations to the security, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon.
59. Preparations for parliamentary elections scheduled for May 2018 continue. In
line with the electoral calendar, the supervisory commission for elections was
formed on 14 September and its budget was approved on 6 October. Parliamentary
approval is pending for the decision by the Cabinet of 17 September to introduce a
biometric card system, “voter megacentres” to allow voters to vote in their area of
residence rather than registration, and out-of-country voting. On 2 October, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs launched online voter registration for the Lebanese
diaspora. On 12 October, the Cabinet approved an electoral budget of $46.5 million.
With regard to municipal elections, a bill was passed on 19 September that could
boost married women’s participation by allowing them to run in their own, not only
their spouses’, districts of origin.
60. On 20 October, Parliament passed the State budget for 2017. Other Cabinet
and parliamentary decisions included raising the salary scale for civil servants, in
conjunction with increased taxes. Tax legislation pertaining to petroleum -related
activities was also passed.
61. The Higher Defence Council met regularly, including on 8 August to endorse
the Lebanese Armed Forces operation against ISIL militants on the outskirts of
Ra‘s Baalbeck and Qa‘, and on 8 September to endorse the deployment of the
Lebanese Armed Forces on the eastern border. Both the Prime Minister and the
President have underlined the need for continued vigilance with regard to the
terrorist threat.

10/22

17-20415

S/2017/964

62. The Government of Lebanon, with the support of the United Nations,
continues efforts to develop a national strategy for the prevention of violent
extremism, in line with the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism, presented in 2016. Following extensive interministerial dialogue, the
strategy is being drafted, in parallel with preparations for inclusive consultations
with national stakeholders.
63. On 19 September, as recommended by the Committee against Torture,
established under the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment, Lebanon adopted a new law criminalizing
torture. Some civil society actors criticized the law for not fully meeting
international standards. In the fight against gender -based violence, on 16 August the
Parliament abolished article 522 of the Criminal Code, which allowe d rapists to be
discharged from prosecution if they married their victims.
64. Lebanon continued to be affected by the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic;
as at 30 June 2017, 1,001,051 Syrian refugees were registered with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). The economic
vulnerability of Syrian refugees in Lebanon continued to rise. Preliminary results of
a socioeconomic survey conducted by UNHCR, the World Food Programme and the
United Nations Children’s Fund in 2017 show that 58 per cent of the refugees live in
extreme poverty (an increase of more than 5 per cent from 2016) and 74 per cent
live below the poverty line. As at 3 October, the Lebanon Crisis Response Plan was
only 33 per cent funded (compared with 43 per cent at the same point in 2016). The
current underfunding puts critical programmes in the health, education and water
and sanitation sectors at risk.
65. Despite over $5.8 billion in donor contributions since the beginning of the
Syrian crisis, most Lebanese feel that vulnerable Lebanese have been neglected by
the international assistance. The United Nations inter -agency stability monitoring
survey, however, shows that international assistance has reduced tensions in
municipalities benefiting from direct assistance.
66. Anti-Syrian refugee sentiment is on the rise in the media and in the political
discourse. In 2014, 40 per cent of respondents to a survey among refugees and host
communities reported no tension between these communities; in 2017, only 2 per c ent
reported no tension. A marked increase in protests over Syrian labour competition
was reported across Lebanon, leading to a wave of shop closures and municipal
curfews. The United Nations and different Lebanese ministries have been working on
messages to reduce tensions between Lebanese host communities and Syrian refugees .
67. In a letter addressed to me dated 16 October, the President of Lebanon warned
of the “existential challenge” that Syrian refugees posed for Lebanon and called
upon the United Nations and the international community to “exert all possible
efforts and provide the appropriate conditions for the safe return ” of Syrian
refugees, and requested that such return not be “correlated to any political solution”.
The Government is expressing a sense of saturation and the need to prepare the
gradual return of refugees, in coordination with the international community and
with respect for international law, including the principle of non -refoulement.
Frequent surveys conducted by UNHCR in Lebanon reflect that Syrian refugees in
Lebanon overwhelmingly wish to return once it is safe for them to do so.
68. According to World Bank projections, the medium-term economic prospects
for Lebanon remain stagnant owing to the ongoing impact of the Syrian co nflict,
coupled with limited progress on reforms. The Government has highlighted the
capital investment plan as a vehicle for the creation of jobs, thus addressing a main
driver of tensions in the country. Announced as part of the Government’s vision at
the Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region, held in
17-20415

11/22

S/2017/964

April 2017, the plan identifies projects relating to infrastructure and service
improvement worth $13 billion, which it seeks to fund through public -private
partnerships, concessional loans and bilateral assistance. Donors have called for the
plan to be complemented by structural reforms.
69. An estimated 65 per cent of Palestine refugees registered and living in
Lebanon and 90 per cent of Palestine refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic live
below the poverty line. All are heavily dependent on UNRWA assistance, given
significant restrictions on their employment and property rights and their access to
public services in Lebanon. Findings of an official census of Palestine refugee s in
Lebanon are expected to be released by December. On 20 July, the Lebanese Palestinian Dialogue Committee launched a strategy paper entitled “A unified
Lebanese vision for the Palestinian refugees affairs in Lebanon ”.

III. Security and safety of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
70. UNIFIL continually reviewed its security plans and risk mitigation measures,
taking into account security threat warnings, and closely coordinated with the
Lebanese authorities. In the Arqub area (Sector East), strict security measures,
including the use of armed escorts, remained in place for movements by United
Nations personnel. Meanwhile, commemorative and celebratory shooting continue
to pose a threat, both to the local population and to UNIFIL personnel. Furthermore,
owing to armed clashes between 17 and 23 August in the Ein El Helweh camp for
Palestine refugees in Sidon, situated along the main supply route connecting the
UNIFIL area of operations with Beirut, UNIFIL had to adjust its movements and
utilize alternative routes.
71. UNIFIL continued to monitor proceedings in the Lebanese military courts
against individuals suspected of planning or perpetrating serious attacks against
UNIFIL. With regard to the attack against UNIFIL peacekeepers serving with t he
Spanish contingent in 2007, a hearing at the Permanent Military Court was
rescheduled from 5 July to 27 November. In the case of terror intent, opened in
January 2014, the Court held a hearing on 5 July; the next hearing is scheduled for
27 November. In the case of an attempted serious attack against UNIFIL in 2008, in
which one of the four sentenced perpetrators filed an appeal, hearing s scheduled for
9 May and 2 November 2017 before the Military Court of Appeal were adjourned; a
new hearing is scheduled for 6 February 2018. In three investigations launched into
the serious attacks perpetrated against UNIFIL on 27 May, 26 July and 9 December
2011, additional judicial instructions were issued. In the case of a homicide
committed in 1980, when three UNIFIL peacekeepers from Ireland were shot dead,
a hearing at the Permanent Military Court was held on 26 July; the next hearing is
scheduled for 2 February 2018.

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
72. As at 30 October, UNIFIL comprised 10,693 military personnel, including 457
women, or 4 per cent of the Force, from 41 troop -contributing countries; 246
international staff, including 82 women; and 585 national civilian staff, including
150 women. The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force comprised five corvettes, one fast
patrol boat, one offshore patrol vessel, two helicopters and 756 of the Force’s total
military personnel, including 2 women. In addition, 51 military observers from the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, including 5 women, serve with
Observer Group Lebanon, under the operational control of UNIFIL.
12/22

17-20415

S/2017/964

V. Conduct and discipline
73. UNIFIL and the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon
did not receive any allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse during the period
under review. Both continued to enforce existing measures to prevent sexual
exploitation and abuse. In accordance with the UNIFIL internal and external
communications strategy, all UNIFIL personnel and the local communities were
informed of the expected standards of conduct for United Nations personnel and of
how to report misconduct, in particular in relation to sexual exploitation and abuse.
The United Nations country team network to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse
in Lebanon continued to further develop information-sharing protocols and share
best practices.

VI. Observations
74. I remain concerned about the lack of full implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) and the unfulfilled obligations of Lebanon and Israel. Non -compliance
increases the risk of tensions and possibly of hostilities. I call upon both parties to
redouble efforts towards full adherence to resolution 1701 (2006) to bolster stability
and prevent conflict. The continued commitment of Lebanon and Israel to resolution
1701 (2006) in word and in deed is of paramount importance.
75. The presence of unauthorized weapons in the hands of Hizbullah remains of
serious concern. Hizbullah operations in the eastern border areas illustrate the extent
of weaponry outside the authority of the State, and I note with concern the self acknowledged use and display of that weaponry by Hizbullah. The presence of those
weapons, together with threatening rhetoric from both sides, heightens risks of
miscalculation and escalation into conflict. I call upon the parties to exercise
restraint at all times.
76. UNIFIL continues to fulfil its mandate to assist the Lebanese authorities in
establishing an area between the Litani River and the Blue Line free of any armed
personnel, assets and weapons other than those of the Government of Lebanon and
UNIFIL. I welcome the immediate and proactive steps that UNIFIL has taken to
operationalize resolution 2373 (2017), including by maintaining a high operational
tempo and adapting its posture and modus operandi to enhance the visibil ity and
effectiveness of its operations. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the
Secretariat and UNIFIL have also undertaken steps to ensure that the Security
Council is provided with prompt, concrete and detailed reporting on violations of
resolution 1701 (2006). The Secretariat will maintain close contact with the parties,
Council members and troop-contributing countries in the implementation of
resolution 2373 (2017).
77. As stipulated in resolution 1701 (2006), I call upon the Government of
Lebanon to take all actions necessary to ensure the full implementation of the
relevant provisions of the Taif Accords and of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680
(2006), which require the disarmament of all armed groups in Lebanon so that,
pursuant to the Lebanese Cabinet decision of 27 July 2006, there will be no
weapons or authority in Lebanon other than those of the Lebanese State. I reiterate
my request to the Lebanese authorities for the resumption of the national dialogue,
with the objective of formulating a national defence strategy that would address the
presence of armed individuals and groups outside of State control. The Lebanese
Armed Forces are the sole legitimate defender of the security, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon. Earlier decisions of the national dialogue should be
implemented, specifically those relating to the disarmament of non -Lebanese groups
17-20415

13/22

S/2017/964

and the dismantling of the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada.
78. I am equally concerned about continued Israeli overflights of Lebanese
territory. The Israel Defense Forces continue to occupy northern Ghajar and an
adjacent area north of the Blue Line. These are clear violations of resolution 1701
(2006). I reiterate my condemnation of all violations of Lebanese sovereignty and
reiterate my call for Israel to cease its violations of Lebanese airspace and to
withdraw its forces from northern Ghajar and the adjacent area north of the Blue
Line.
79. UNIFIL liaison and coordination arrangements are key to mitigating and
de-escalating incidents, violations and tensions along the Blue Line. The calm along
the Blue Line should not be taken for granted, especially aga inst a backdrop of
regional uncertainty. I call upon both parties to continue their active engagement
with UNIFIL, to manage sensitive situations and to maintain stability and security
for the communities living on either side of the Blue Line. The open an d
constructive exchanges in the tripartite forum, including on long -standing violations
of resolution 1701 (2006), are testament to the commitment of the parties, as well as
to their confidence in UNIFIL and the liaison and coordination arrangements.
80. Reinforcing the national institutions and army of Lebanon remains the best
preventive measure against the risk of conflict. The Lebanese Armed Forces have
proven to be a credible security actor. I commend their achievements and enduring
commitment to the service of the security and stability of Lebanon. I pay tribute to
the military personnel who have made the ultimate sacrifice in the fight against
terrorism, and their families.
81. I am encouraged by the consolidation of the Lebanese Armed Forces
deployment along the border with the Syrian Arab Republic and the Government’s
decision to deploy additional troops in the area south of the Litani River in the
implementation of resolutions 1701 (2006) and 2373 (2017).
82. The deployment of the Fifth Intervention Regiment to southern Lebanon will
enable more coordinated activities between the Lebanese Armed For ces and UNIFIL
and will help to expand the authority of the State throughout Lebanese territory. I
look forward to tangible progress in the establishment of the model regiment and an
increase in the capabilities of the Lebanese Armed Forces in southern Le banon, as
specified during the strategic review of UNIFIL. Investing in the Lebanese Armed
Forces is investing in the stability of Lebanon.
83. The United Nations, including through the International Support Group for
Lebanon, will continue advocating for international support for the Lebanese army
and security institutions. The United Nations will, in connection, continue
encouraging the Government and the Lebanese Armed Forces to advance additional
deployments south of the Litani River and update the capa bilities development plan,
while adhering to the principles of accountability, independence and international
human rights.
84. I condemn the movement of fighters and war materiel across the Lebanese Syrian border in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and the shelling and shooting
into Lebanese border areas from the Syrian Arab Republic. The lack of a delineated,
demarcated Lebanese-Syrian border does not justify violations of Lebanese
sovereignty by any party. I call upon all concerned to cease violations of the border
and to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
85. The stability of Lebanon remains a regional public good that must be shielded.
The turmoil in the region continues to pose grave risks in this regard. Despite the
efforts of the Lebanese Armed Forces to secure the border with the Syrian Arab
14/22

17-20415

S/2017/964

Republic, Lebanese nationals continue to participate in the Syrian conflict. The
participation of any Lebanese national in the S yrian conflict constitutes a breach of
the policy of disassociation, pursuant to the Baabda Declaration agreed by all
Lebanese political parties. I reiterate my call upon all Lebanese parties to cease their
involvement in the Syrian conflict.
86. The uncertain regional environment underscores the importance of the parties
actively pursuing progress towards a permanent ceasefire. The United Nations
remains ready to support efforts in this regard, and I encourage the parties to
explore confidence-building measures with the United Nations Special Coordinator
for Lebanon and the UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander.
87. I again encourage both parties to proceed with steps that would allow for the
resolution of the dispute over the exclusive economic zone. I re-emphasize that the
United Nations remains available to assist with the delineation of the exclusive
economic zone between Lebanon and Israel, if both parties so request. I continue to
urge the parties to adopt a constructive approach that would pave the way to the
mutually beneficial exploitation of maritime oil and gas resources, which can serve
as a much-needed confidence-building measure.
88. Progress towards the genuine reactivation of all Lebanese State institutions
must be safeguarded. In the context of uncertainty following the offer of resignation
by the Prime Minister, Saad Hariri, I count on all sides to focus their efforts on
supporting the continuity of Lebanese State institutions in accordance with the
Constitution and safeguarding the country’s security and stability. In this regard, I
appeal to all political stakeholders to sustain the positive momentum in preparations
for the parliamentary elections. The new electoral law, agreed by the country’s
political parties in a spirit of compromise and in the national interest, is a notable
achievement. Adherence to timely parliamentary elections is a matter of political
stability, democratic tradition, and accountability to the citizens of Lebanon. I trust
that any technical electoral matters will be addressed in a way that does not
jeopardize adherence to the electoral date in May 2018. United Nations technical
assistance to the electoral process remains available.
89. The meaningful participation of women in the electoral process is imperativ e.
In the absence of mandated gender quotas in the electoral law, this hinges on the
commitment of political parties to voluntary gender quotas and incentives. The
support expressed in this regard by several political leaders is reassuring. I urge
relevant decision makers to ensure the adequate representation of women in the
upcoming elections, in line with commitments of Lebanon to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
90. I hope that the steps necessary to ensure the national human rights institut ion
of Lebanon is fully staffed and functioning can soon be taken. While I welcome the
newly adopted legislation on both torture and women’s rights, I encourage more
work to address outstanding legal gaps.
91. There is a risk that violent tensions will recur in Ein El Helweh so long as the
underlying drivers of socioeconomic hardship, extremism and weapons proliferation
are not addressed. I encourage efforts, including through greater donor support, to
preserve stability in the camps and their environs and to ensure dignified conditions
for Palestine refugees in Lebanon.
92. The conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic and the resulting refugee presence
remains an important challenge for Lebanon. I extend my appreciation to Lebanon
and its Government for their hospitality and generosity in shouldering this presence.
I am concerned about an increase in rhetoric that could incite a climate of hostility

17-20415

15/22

S/2017/964

and violence against refugees. I call upon the people and leadership of Lebanon to
preserve their spirit of tolerance and coexistence that is characteristic of Lebanon.
93. The protection and dignity of refugees in Lebanon must be ensured until they
can find durable solutions outside of Lebanon. Continued international assistance to
refugees and host communities will be key in this regard. It is important to increase
support to the Lebanon Crisis Response Plan and the predictability of its funding for
2018 and beyond and to mobilize longer-term development resources, especially in
a context of social tensions and growing host community fatigue.
94. Returns organized between armed groups for fighters and accompanying
civilians did not involve the United Nations and do not set the standard for future
refugee returns. While some improvements in the security situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic are noted, the situation remains unpredictable, with 1 million newly
internally displaced in 2017. The resumption of registration by UNHCR would be
important to appropriately prepare for voluntary, safe and dignified return and
sustainable reintegration.
95. I encourage discussions on international conferences in support of the stability
of Lebanon, to provide the opportunity for the Government to share concrete details
of its vision for the country’s economic growth and sustainable development, and to
secure further support from the international community.
96. I welcome the continued progress by the Government of Lebanon in the
development of a national strategy for the prevention of violent extremism. I
encourage more sustained efforts for its finalization in close collaboration with the
United Nations and national and international partners.
97. The prevention of conflict, instability and socioeconomic crisis remains the
imperative underpinning all United Nations efforts in Lebanon. The Special
Coordinator will continue to exercise good offices on my behalf, with the dual goals
of defusing tensions and identifying opportunities for confidence -building measures
and progress towards stability. The parties carry a central responsibility in this
regard. I call upon them to intensify efforts in pursuit of prevention and stability and
to avail themselves of United Nations support in this regard.
98. I extend my appreciation to all countries contributing troops and equipment t o
UNIFIL and Observer Group Lebanon. I thank the former Special Coordinator for
Lebanon, Sigrid Kaag, upon the completion of her assignment, for her leadership
and dedication in carrying out the important work of the United Nations in Lebanon.
I commend the UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander, Major General
Michael Beary, and the civilian and military personnel of UNIFIL, as well as the
staff of the Office of the Special Coordinator, for their continued efforts.

16/22

17-20415

S/2017/964

Annex I
Unauthorized weapons in the area of operations not involving
hunting weapons observed by the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon from 22 June to 6 November 2017
1.
On 23 July, a UNIFIL patrol observed a group of civilians near Majdal Silm
(Sector West), one of whom was carrying a pistol.
2.
On 9 August, UNIFIL reported two civilians near Qulay‘ah (Sector East)
traveling in a vehicle with an assault rifle.
3.
On 13 August, UNIFIL reported a civilian in a vehicle travelling near Burj
Qallawiyah (Sector East) with an assault rifle.
4.
On 13 August, live television broadcasts showed the display of unauthorized
weapons during a commemoration of the 2006 conflict in Khiyam (Sector East),
including several assault rifles and a launcher. UNIFIL formally protested the
incident to Lebanese Armed Forces.
5.
On 19 August, UNIFIL observed an individual travelling near Sarda (Sector
East) with a pistol in the vehicle.
6.
On 29 August, UNIFIL observed a convoy of approximately 60 vehicles near
Haris (Sector West). One civilian fired in the air using an assault rifle.
7.
On 1 September, UNIFIL observed two individuals near Shama‘ (Sector West)
firing an unidentified weapon.
8.
On 2 September, UNIFIL observed two individuals carrying an unidentified
automatic weapon and a short rifle in a vehicle near Ain al-Arab (Sector East).
9.
On 1 October, UNIFIL observed an individual carrying an automatic assault
rifle near Dibbin (Sector East).
10. On 9 October, UNIFIL observed two individuals carrying an automatic assault
rifle in a civilian vehicle near Arab al-Wazzani (Sector East).
11. On 16 October, UNIFIL observed an individual with a handgun in the vicinity
of Blida (Sector East). The municipal police confirmed the same day that the
individual had been detained in connection with a robbery.

17-20415

17/22

S/2017/964

Annex II
Restrictions on the freedom of movement of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon from 22 June to 6 November 2017
1.
On 6 July, civilians confronted a UNIFIL patrol dispatched to investigate
activities by civilians observed near Yarun (Sector West). A Lebanese Armed Forces
patrol intervened after the civilians took the UNIFIL patrol’s camera. The Lebanese
Armed Forces investigated the incident and retrieved the camera the following day.
Village patrols resumed on a weekly basis without incident.
2.
On 17 July, after taking photographs of a UNIFIL patrol, civilians attempted to
forcibly enter a stationary Mission vehicle near Udaysah (Sector East). Following
the incident, operational activities resumed without interruption and UNIFIL
enhanced its civil-military cooperation and outreach activities with the local
communities and authorities.
3.
On 24 July, in the vicinity of Khiyam (Sector East), civilians seized a camera
from a UNIFIL civilian staff member who had accompanied a foot patrol . The
Lebanese Armed Forces was informed about the incident, and the equipment was
returned. UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces met with local leaders after the
incident and weekly joint village patrols resumed on 31 August, without further
incident.
4.
On 3 August, a motorcycle and a truck blocked a UNIFIL vehicle patrol near
Blida (Sector East). Civilians reacted aggressively towards the patrol, taking some
electronic equipment from UNIFIL personnel. Upon arrival at the location, the
Lebanese Armed Forces restored calm. Since then, the equipment has been returned
and UNIFIL activities have continued without incident, with UNIFIL enhancing its
civil-military and outreach activities in the area.
5.
On 5 August, civilian vehicles attempted to block a UNIFIL patrol near Kfar
Kila (Sector East). A UNIFIL quick reaction team escorted the patrol back to its
position. Foot patrols in the village have continued without incident. UNIFIL
continues to liaise with local authorities on a range of issues, including on projects
to assist a local medical facility.
6.
On 19 August, around 100 civilians near Ayta al-Sha‘b (Sector West)
surrounded a UNIFIL convoy, taking several items of equipment. The convoy left
the area after the Lebanese Armed Forces intervened. Followi ng the incident,
UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces met with the local authorities to
de-escalate tensions. Most of the equipment taken was recovered. A few days later, a
UNIFIL foot patrol was received positively by the community, and joint Lebanese
Armed Forces-UNIFIL patrols have been conducted since without incident.
7.
On 12 September, a group of individuals stopped a UNIFIL patrol dispatched
to Sribbin (Sector West) to investigate possible gunshots. After negotiating with the
group, UNIFIL departed the area. The Lebanese Armed Forces were informed. It
was also clarified that the sounds were fireworks used during a community
celebration. UNIFIL continues to follow up with local authorities to discuss steps to
avoid similar incidents.
8.
On 23 September, near Jumayjmah (Sector West), a group of individuals
demanded that UNIFIL troops leave the village after a resident had invited them
into his home. Before the UNIFIL troops departed, the group took cameras from
them. The Lebanese Armed Forces arrived a few minutes later to escort the patrol
out of the village. The seized equipment was returned the next day. UNIFIL has
resumed regular operational activities in the village without incident.
18/22

17-20415

S/2017/964

9.
On 19 October, two individuals in a vehicle approached an Ob server Group
Lebanon patrol as it was reversing back to the main road in the vicinity of Ayta
al-Sha‘b (Sector West). The Observer Group Lebanon team opened the door of their
armoured vehicle to speak to the individuals, who briefly questioned them before
taking telecommunications equipment from the interior of the vehicle. After the
team had explained their activities, the equipment was returned and the patrol
continued along the planned route. The Lebanese Armed Forces were informed.
Observer Group Lebanon and UNIFIL have continued patrols in Ayta al-Sha‘b on a
routine basis in subsequent weeks without any incident.

17-20415

19/22

S/2017/964

Annex III
Update on the implementation of the recommendations of the 2017
strategic review of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
1.
Further to the letter dated 8 March 2017 from the Secretary -General addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/2017/202) communicating the strategic
priorities and key recommendations of the strategic review of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), the present overview provides an update on
progress in the implementation of those recommendations.
Protection of civilians
2.
UNIFIL intensified its liaison with interlocutors from the Government of
Lebanon on the protection of civilians and continues close coordination with the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon. UNIFIL and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat have also
agreed on guidelines for coordination between the Mission and the humanitarian
country team.
3.
UNIFIL reviewed its contingency plans, assessed the preparedness of civilian
and military personnel in response to protection of civilians crisis situatio ns in a
series of “command post” and “table-top” exercises in June and November 2017,
systematically briefed contingent commanders on protection of civilians
requirements and ensured that contingents had no national restrictions on carrying
out the protection of civilians mandate. As part of ensuring the overall Mission
preparedness, UNIFIL designed and began rolling out one -day training modules on
the implementation of the protection of civilians mandate for all personnel at
headquarters and in sectors. The Mission support logistics plan was finalized and all
relevant documents were updated.
Strategic dialogue mechanism
4.
UNIFIL engagement with the Lebanese Armed Forces on all core aspects of
Lebanese Armed Forces capacity-building continued. The UNIFIL Deputy Force
Commander and the Deputy Head of Mission engaged jointly with the Lebanese
Armed Forces on a range of coordination and capacity-building issues.
5.
A concept of operations for the model regiment, including an initial set of
benchmarks and timelines to measure progress, is under preparation.
6.
Using its Coastal Radar Organization stations, the Lebanese Armed Forces
Navy assumes the command of maritime interdiction operations in Lebanese
territorial waters, including through a continuous presence at sea for a period of
72 hours each week. In addition, since early 2017, the Lebanese Armed Forces Navy
regularly deploys one vessel during a 24-hour period each week in close
coordination with the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force in proximity to Lebanese ports
to conduct maritime interdiction operations. The presence of the Lebanese Armed
Forces Navy at sea is constrained owing to the unavailability of additional suitable
vessels.
7.
The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force onshore and offshore training led to the
establishment of a Lebanese Armed Forces Navy pool of instructors who, in turn,
provide training to Lebanese Armed Forces Navy units on six core courses.
Engineering courses aimed at enhancing maintenance capabilities will be added to
the core curriculum in the next phase.

20/22

17-20415

S/2017/964

8.
It was confirmed that the location of the Lebanese Armed Forces civil -military
cooperation centre in the south would be in Marj’yun (Sector East), and technical
work for the establishment of the centre is ongoing. UNIFIL facilitated the securing
of funding from a troop-contributing country, complemented by quick-impact
project funding for the refurbishment of the premises.
9.
Discussions are under way, in close coordination with the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, to hold a meeting of the International
Support Group for Lebanon dedicated to enhancing the capability of the Lebanese
Armed Forces. The acquisition of an offshore patrol vessel by the Lebanese Armed
Forces Navy remains a critical priority for the Lebanese Armed Forces Navy to
gradually assume control of Lebanese territorial waters.
Liaison and coordination with the parties
10. The updating of all UNIFIL internal guidance is ongoing to ensure the optimal
synchronization of actions by the Mission’s assets in a crisis or in case of an
incident in the area of operations.
11. As of August 2017, UNIFIL had strengthened its Liaison Branch, deploying a
second Liaison Team permanently south of the Blue Line. UNIFIL continues
advocating with Israeli authorities for the necessity of establishing a Liaison Office
in Tel Aviv.
Structure of the uniformed and civilian components of the Force
Land forces
12. In the context of the deployment of the Fifth Intervention Regiment of the
Lebanese Armed Forces to the UNIFIL area of operations in late September 2017,
the UNIFIL Force Commander and Head of Mission and the Commander of the
Lebanese Armed Forces agreed to establish a coordination committee to enhance
joint activities, follow up on incidents in the area of operations and address other
operational matters between the two forces.
13. A review of all memorandums of understanding for UNIFIL contingent -owned
equipment identified efficiencies amounting to $5 million. Work is ongoing between
UNIFIL and United Nations Headquarters to ensure that all memorandums of
understanding are adjusted to effect the projected savings.
14. On the basis of the 2017 military capability study, UNFIL is conducting troop to-task reviews in an effort to ensure that UNIFIL fulfils its mandated tasks
optimally.
Maritime task force
15. Preparations are ongoing to reconfigure the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force into
a six-vessel all-corvette fleet as of January 2018. Helicopter flight hours were
reduced to 25 hours per month within the current budget cycle. The reduction of
maritime personnel is expected to come into effect with the reconfiguration of the
Maritime Task Force in January 2018.
Community outreach activities
16. UNIFIL made progress on all recommendations pertaining to community
outreach activities. The community outreach board was established and held its first
meetings, chaired by the Deputy Head of Mission, to address the Mission’s outreach
priorities at the strategic level. Terms of reference for the outreach board and the
subcommittees on strategic communications and programmatic activities/projects were
17-20415

21/22

S/2017/964

finalized. Both subcommittees have taken up their regular work, supported by a
secretariat. The concept of the local perception survey is undergoing review.
17. Work is ongoing to ensure that community outreach activities are planned and
implemented Mission-wide in a coordinated and synchronized manner. To that end,
the coordination mechanism between the Mission’s civil-military cooperation branch
(J9 branch) and the Force Commander’s Civil-Military Cooperation Unit has been
enhanced, and the Chief of the J9 branch briefs the military Chief of Staff daily.
18. The identification of suitable UNIFIL quick-impact projects, within the
planning framework for the 2018–2019 budget cycle, is progressing. The aim of the
process is also to ensure, to the extent possible, an equitable distribution of funds
between the communities in the UNIFIL area of operations.
19. In June, UNIFIL established the Mission Strategic Communications Unit/Public
Information Office to strengthen the coherence and delivery of UNIFIL strategic
communications, headed by a Senior Officer (P -5), who reports to the Deputy Head
of Mission. The Military Community Outreach Unit was reduced in strength from
55 to 25 personnel and merged into the Mission Strategic Communications Unit/
Public Information Office.
Budget and staffing
20. To further optimize its staffing, UNIFIL identified three posts (two National
Professional Officer posts in the Civil Affairs Section and one P-2 post in the
HIV/AIDS Unit) to be abolished.
Mission integration and coordination
21. UNIFIL established, within existing resources, a position of Mission Chief of
Staff in the Office of the Head of Mission and Force Commander at the D-1 level.
The temporary arrangement will be regularized in the 2018/19 budget.

22/22

17-20415
