S/PV.8291

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8291st meeting

Thursday, 21 June 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Polyanskiy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Almunayekh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Tenya
Mr. Lewicki
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic (S/2018/611)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-19060 (E)
*1819060*

S/PV.8291

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic (S/2018/611)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic and
Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic;
Mr. Bédializoun Moussa Nébié, Special Representative
of the African Union to the Central African Republic;
and Brigadier General Hermínio Teodoro Maio, Force
Commander of the European Union Military Training
Mission in the Central African Republic.
Mr. Nébié and Brigadier General Maio are joining
this meeting via video tele-conference from Bangui.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/611, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga.

21/06/2018

briefing of my sister, the Permanent Representative of
the Central African Republic; the Special Representative
of the African Union to the Central African Republic,
my brother Moussa Nébié; and of my friend Brigadier
General Hermínio Teodoro Maio, Force Commander
of the European Union Military Training Mission in
the Central African Republic, sends a strong message
of the international community’s commitment to
supporting the Central African Republic. It is indeed
essential that, in addition to the voices of the Central
African authorities themselves, the Council hear those
of all who are working together for the restoration of
lasting peace in the Central African Republic.
The most recent developments in the Central
African Republic since I last addressed the Security
Council in February this year (see S/PV.8187) and
again on 23 May, during a meeting on various items,
demonstrate the extent to which the Central African
Republic still needs the full commitment of the Security
Council. Since late February, the Central African
Republic has faced several outbreaks of violence, both
in Bangui and in the interior. However, while the capital
was the scene of violent clashes in April and early May,
there have recently been encouraging signs of calm.
The threat of attacks on Bangui by some radical
elements of the Front populaire pour la renaissance
de la Centrafrique (FPRC) have rekindled fears
among the population of the capital. Although the
robust stance of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) has prevented such threats
from materializing, this disturbing rhetoric has
unfortunately been exploited by shady political actors
who have sought to exploit instability and to fuel ethnic
and religious tensions.

Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (spoke in French): Allow
me first and foremost to congratulate you, Sir, on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and for the excellent way in which Russia
has organized the FIFA World Cup. This being the era
of the selfie, I should have liked to take one with you
behind the ball on your desk.

Armed groups and factions continue to exert
a negative influence on large parts of the country,
particularly in the east, centre and north-west of the
country. Violent clashes among armed groups, such
as those that regrettably took place between the FPRC
and the Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique
yesterday in Ndélé, also continue to endanger the lives
of civilians.

I welcome the Security Council’s unity with respect
to the prevailing situation in the Central African
Republic and the importance that the international
community continues to attach to that country, its
Government and its people. The participation in this

In that highly volatile context, MINUSCA
continues to implement its mandate to protect civilians.
In fact, our daily work literally consists, in the words
of Dag Hammarskjöld, in building bridges against the
breaking waves of violence and disintegration. This is

2/22

18-19060

21/06/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

obviously no easy task. The Mission is overwhelmed
and its military, police and civilian personnel are the
targets of armed groups and criminal gangs, both in
the capital and in the countryside. The threats against
peacekeeping personnel continue to grow, as Council
members have read in the report before them today
(S/2018/611).
I therefore appeal for the Council’s ongoing
support to ensure that MINUSCA has the capacity to
respond to the considerable challenges it faces daily.
The quality of its investment will be the best guarantee
for strengthening constitutional legitimacy and the
performance of MINUSCA in the effort to restore
the authority of the State. It will also be the best way
to prevent future disasters. To that end, every effort
has been made to reach the maximum level of force
authorized by the Council in resolution 2387 (2017).
These additional troops will strengthen our capacity to
protect civilians, in the spirit of the recommendations
of the report of the independent investigation by
Brigadier General (retired) Fernand Marcel Amoussou.
Their performance and good behaviour will remain
paramount for the Mission.
The current volatile security situation and
recurrent clashes among armed groups continue to
negatively affect the political process. Nevertheless, the
international partners remain committed to stabilizing
the country, particularly through the efforts of the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic. My brother and friend,
Special Representative Moussa Nébié, will provide
comprehensive insights on that issue shortly. I, for one,
wish to reaffirm the full support of the United Nations
and MINUSCA for that vital initiative for the return
of peace and reconciliation in the Central African
Republic
I would like to commend the strategic role of the
Peacebuilding Fund in supporting the implementation
of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and
the African Initiative. In addition, the first meeting of
the International Support Group on the Central African
Republic was held in Bangui on 11 April. The meeting
sent a strong signal to the people of the Central African
Republic by demonstrating that the international
community has not forgotten their fate and remains
committed to supporting the country’s stabilization
and development efforts. The meeting of 11 April also
highlighted the importance of increased cooperation

S/PV. 8291

among the countries of the subregion to ensure the
long-term stability of the Central African Republic.
I am also encouraged by the support of President
Touadera and of the authorities on the panel of facilitators,
including in meetings with armed groups, and by the
increased national ownership of the process. If it is to be
successful, the process must be inclusive and in keeping
with the spirit of the Constitution. It is therefore crucial
that other segments of the Central African society be
involved in the peace process and participate fully
in the ongoing stabilization efforts. What is at stake
is the search for the necessary consensus around the
social contract between the sons and daughters of the
Central African Republic so that the co-existence to
which they are deeply attached can become a reality in
a plural, united and reconciled nation. It will be equally
important to support the commitment of the African
Initiative panel to neighbouring countries to promote
coherent and sustainable subregional and regional
commitment to the stabilization and development of the
Central African Republic.
In that context, MINUSCA continues to work closely
working with the Government to launch local peace and
reconciliation initiatives in many prefectures, aimed at
reducing security threats and facilitating humanitarian
access. Religious, community, women and youth
representatives have played a ket role in the success of
these processes. These local peace plans also served
as the foundation for local disarmament programmes.
In Bangassou and Bria — cities that endured heavy
violence in 2017 — the local peace process has
encouraged the handover of over 1,000 weapons by
armed groups and the participation of these groups in
socioeconomic reintegration programmes. These local
peace initiatives and the results they have achieved
help create conditions conducive to the comprehensive
peace process led by the African Initiative.
(spoke in English)
The restoration of State authority throughout the
entire territory of the Central African Republic remains
key to stabilizing the situation and setting the country
on a path to long-term stability. The report before the
Council today spells out the substantial progress made
by the national authorities, including the deployment of
prefects and sub-prefects, as well as other sectors of civil
administration, with the support of the peacekeeping
mission, the United Nations system and the country’s
other bilateral and institutional strategic partners. It is

18-190603/22

S/PV.8291

The situation in the Central African Republic

important and essential that the State administration be
increasingly visible and effective in the interior of the
country. MINUSCA will continue to stand in support
of these Government efforts.
I am particularly encouraged by the progressive
deployment of magistrates in new areas of the country
and the opening of tribunals outside of Bangui.
Everywhere I have traveled in the Central African
Republic, I have heard a constant demand for justice to
help communities address criminality and to counter
the country’s long, sad history of impunity. The
National Assembly recently adopted a law establishing
the rules of procedure and evidence for the Special
Criminal Court, as well as an amended law on the
Court’s establishment, organization and functioning.
The judicial police officers attached to the Court have
been hired and started their work. Those steps should
allow the Court to commence investigations in the
near future.
Despite the slow but steady progress to rebuild
national courts, Central Africans have new hope that
the perpetrators of the gravest crimes will finally
face justice. Meanwhile, steps initiated by the Head
of State to advance transitional justice are also
encouraging. Justice and reconciliation must indeed
progress simultaneously.
The gradual deployments of the Forces armées
centrafricaines (FACA) and the gendarmerie and police
outside Bangui have also contributed to increasing the
State’s capacity across the country. FACA units trained
by the European Union Training Mission are slowly
taking up positions in the interior of the country. In joint
operations with MINUSCA in Paoua, Obo and Sibut,
FACA has helped secure new areas, reduce violence by
armed groups and address criminal activity. We will
continue to work with the Government to ensure that
newly reformed units of the Central African Armed
Forces are professional and continue to reflect the
ethnic diversity of the country, as well as to ensure that
their deployments are coordinated with MINUSCA and
other partners, within the framework of planned reform
of the security sector. It is in that context that the
Secretary-General wrote to the Security Council, on
15 May, to ensure that MINUSCA’s joint deployment
with FACA forms the core of both a successful security
response and an effective exit strategy.
I must once more bring to the Security Council’s
attention the persistently dire humanitarian situation
4/22

21/06/2018

in the Central African Republic. One in four Central
Africans has had to abandon his or her home. Nearly
700,000 people remain internally displaced, while
another 568,000 are refugees in neighbouring countries.
In the meantime, attacks against humanitarian workers
make the Central African Republic the deadliest
humanitarian context in the world. During the latest
outbreak of violence in Bambari, armed groups looted
the offices of several humanitarian agencies, forcing
them to suspend operations. The continuing attacks
on humanitarians severely undermine their ability to
provide vital assistance, with awful consequences for
the Central African population and the functioning of
essential social services in health and education.
The Central African people urgently need
the assistance of international partners to fill the
humanitarian funding gap. Only 4 per cent of the 2018
humanitarian response plan has been funded, leaving
many priority regions without assistance. That needs
to be addressed, and we are grateful for the continued
support of the Security Council.
The risk of escalating violence in the Central African
Republic and the unnecessary suffering inflicted on
the population demand our continued full attention
and support. The country cannot afford more clashes
among armed groups seeking opportunity to pillage
and exploit natural resources. It is not too late to stop
that predatory behavior from eroding progress towards
building an effective, accountable and inclusive Central
African State. It is not too late to prevent religion and
ethnicity from becoming the driving factor of conflict.
At present, that is still the result of manipulation for
political gains, which finds echo among vulnerable
groups. It is by no means the general feeling among
Central Africans.
As long as the hands of the State — the bedrock
of legitimate force — are not stronger than the
illegitimate groups and criminal organizations, our
efforts to establish lasting peace and stability in the
Central African Republic will continue to be seriously
challenged. Central Africans remain desperate to see a
functioning State and an end to the criminal activities
of armed groups. While there are many positive steps,
the progress has still been too slow, for understandable
reasons, and remains under threat from those who seek
private gains through violence.
Together with the African Initiative and other
partners, MINUSCA will continue to support the
18-19060

21/06/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

Central African Government to fulfil the legitimate
aspirations of the majority of Central Africans, from
all parts of the country and all communities, who hold
the hope for the country’s future. Our resolve remains
strong, heeding the Secretary-General’s call to all of us
to remain engaged with a considerable dose of patience
and dedication and in a spirit of sacrifice. With the
support of a united Security Council and region, we will
ensure that the vision and hopes of Central Africans for
lasting peace, stability and shared prosperity become
a reality.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Nébié.
Mr. Nébié (spoke in French): I can see,
Mr. President, from the ball on the table, which we can
see even from here in Bangui, that you are also in the
football spirit. I wish good luck to your national team,
and may the best team win.
I would like to thank all the members of the Security
Council for the invitation today, and especially for their
continued support with regard to the situation in the
Central African Republic.
My briefing will touch on five points: first, the
activities of the panel of facilitators for the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic; secondly, the outcome of the
second round; thirdly, the steps taken by the panel
following the recent incidents; fourthly, the agenda
for the preparations for the dialogue; and, fifthly,
financing needs.
With regard to the panel’s work, from 19 February
to 1 April, the panel undertook a second visit to armed
groups. Members will recall that I provided a partial
report on 21 March while the panel was in the midst
of its mission. The 14 armed groups all renewed their
grievances, which can be summarized in 70 points that
cover issues of defence, security, political matters,
justice, reconciliation, humanitarian concerns and
socioeconomic recovery. Following the mission, a
report was presented to the country’s President, Prime
Minister and National Assembly, as well as to the
diplomatic corps, the political parties, the victims’
group and civil society. Recommendations were made
to the Government for speeding up the implementation
of various programmes, including on disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation (DDRR);

S/PV. 8291

the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan; and the
deployment of State authority throughout the country.
Secondly, on the results of the second round, as I
mentioned, we received 70 written, detailed grievances
from 14 armed groups, which serve as a working
paper for the Government. There was relative calm
and acceptance of State authority in several parts of
the country, including Kaga Bandoro, Birao, Kouki,
Bria and Mobaye. Certain groups that initially did not
endorse it also accepted the DDRR programme. In
addition, it is important to note the commitment of the
country’s President to carefully consider the grievances.
Thirdly, with regard to the steps taken by the
panel following the incidents in April and May, the
unfortunate events in April in the PK5 neighbourhood
resulted in fatalities and a number of injuries. Those
incidents had consequences for the central part of the
country, in Ndélé and Kaga Bandoro, where armed
groups hoped for a coalition in order to approach
Bangui. Given the gravity of the situation, from 15 May
to 1 June, the panel engaged in intensive consultations
with armed groups both in the centre of the country
and in Bangui in order to remobilize them towards the
African Initiative and to urge them not to succumb
to escalation and confrontation. The panel also made
contact with stakeholders, leaders and those with
influence on the PK5 criminal group to dissuade
them from conflation, rumours and chaos, with a
view to restoring calm in the country and to provide
an opportunity for dialogue as a way out the crisis.
Such action, together with goodwill, including on the
part of the diplomatic corps and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), resulted in
the return to relative calm since mid-May. Since then,
the panel has been working to step up the process, since
the incidents that I mentioned, as well as the issue of
the international agenda, has somewhat delayed our
provisional timetable for convening the dialogue.
Fourthly, with regard to the timetable for preparing
the dialogue, the panel is taking time to reflect on
the preparation, in particular the convening and
handling, of the dialogue. Preparing the armed groups
for dialogue is taking place in terms of workshops to
teach them basic negotiation skills, particularly on
how to resolve the crisis peacefully. That has started
and continues as I speak. In the context of preparing
the Government delegation to the dialogue, tomorrow I
will meet the Government delegation appointed to take

18-190605/22

S/PV.8291

The situation in the Central African Republic

part in the dialogue. There is also the preparation of
civil society actors to monitor the implementation of
the agreement resulting from the dialogue. With regard
to visits to former Presidents, the visit to President
Djotodia took place in Cotonou on 8 June, while the
one to President Bozizé is still to take place. There are
also plans to organize visits to some countries of the
Economic Community of Central African States. A
little earlier, my brother Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga
told the Security Council a bit about the subregional
repercussions of the crisis.
Following all that, the holding of the dialogue
should therefore be successful and, in principle, the
negotiations should lead to a consensus-based agreement
that will cover the responsibilities of all parties,
both Government and armed groups, the budgetary
implications, the related timetable and activities and
the follow-up mechanisms. The preparatory activities
seek to create an atmosphere conducive to preparing
the parties’ minds for calm, tolerance and consideration
of one another with a view to a peaceful, fruitful and
high-quality dialogue. It is pointless to hurry today
while minds are still not ready for dialogue. If we
launch it immediately, we risk reaching an impasse.
However, I believe that, with the preparation of the
armed groups, it is already falling into place. I think
that we are on the right track. By then, we will have
visited the armed groups and, when our preparations
with the Government are ready, we will be in a position
to convene the dialogue.
Fifthly, on financing needs, the panel is determined
to complete its work in the coming weeks, that is, as
soon as possible, with the convening and the holding of
the dialogue. However, despite the efforts to mobilize
funds, we sorely lack financial resources. A sum of
$3 million is needed for the remaining activities. I
would like to take this opportunity to thank the United
States of America, which has just disbursed $500,000
to the panel’s funds. Participants will well understand
that I am looking at the other members of the Security
Council. I also thank the European Union, which is
organizing the preparation workshops on behalf of the
panel. I thank MINUSCA and Special Representative
Onanga-Anyanga, who has worked tirelessly to support
us. I would also like to thank the Peacebuilding Fund
and the United Nations Development Programme for
also supporting us.
In conclusion, in order not to take long — I have five
minutes — I would like to underscore to the Security
6/22

21/06/2018

Council that failure is not an option. The only option
is the success of the dialogue and a return to peace for
the Central African people. To that end, a significant
part of the peacekeeping and re-establishment of
international peace and security falls to the members of
the Security Council. It is up to them to take specific,
concrete and robust measures and actions in support
of the stakeholders of the international community on
the ground so as to promote and accelerate a return
to peace for the Central African people, who, I would
emphasize, implore the Council to do its utmost to quite
simply ensure them peace and freedom of movement in
their country.
If the Security Council members step up their
efforts and provide concrete support to the panel, at
the next meeting on the Central African Republic I will
be very happy to tell them that the dialogue has been
held, a consensus-based agreement has been reached,
a follow-up mechanism is in place, peace is no longer
an empty word and the time frame for implementing
activities under the agreement is in place. I thank
the Security Council for its attention. I would like
to reiterate my gratitude to my brother Mr. OnangaAnyanga and the European Union for all the goodwill
that we have seen on a daily basis. We work together
with all the diplomatic missions represented here daily
because we know that we are all bound by the same fate
to the Central African Republic. Our common goal is
to ensure that the Central African people emerge from
the crisis, which has lasted too long. I assuure members
that when we are in the field, the only demand made of
us is that they want peace, to move freely in their own
territory and for us to do our utmost for the Government
and the armed groups to reach an understanding and
give them peace. I thank the members of the Council
and wish them all good luck and success in the meeting.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Nébié
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Brigadier General Maio.
Brigadier General Maio: I am grateful and very
honoured to have this opportunity to address the
members of the Security Council on the redeployment
of the Forces armées centrafricaines (FACA) and the
operational and logistical support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). The
European Union Military Training Mission in the
Central African Republic (EUTM RCA) contributes
18-19060

21/06/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

to defence sector reform as part of the security sector
reform coordinated by MINUSCA. Our Mission
mandate includes providing strategic advice, education
and training to the Ministry of Defence and the Forces
armées centrafricaines and supporting the Central
African authorities in modernizing FACA as an selfsustainable, credible, accountable and ethnically
balanced armed force that is under democratic control.
The EUTM RCA is now completing its first twoyear mandate. We have completed the training, or the
validation, of nearly 3,000 soldiers, including three
infantry battalions. Our future two-year mandate,
which depends on the decision of Member States,
will allow us to continue that training, enlarging our
Mission area to a new training centre in Bouar, and to
support the internal security forces. The EUTM RCA
mandate establishes the need for close coordination
with MINUSCA, including our role as an advisory
body on defence issues for the redeployment of FACA
countrywide. All political actors and international
partners agree on the necessity to restore State
authority quickly throughout the country as a key
factor in resolving the crisis. Therefore, the progressive
redeployment of the armed forces, as well as the internal
security forces, is recognized as an urgent key element
that would enable public institutions and services to be
restored to the entire territory, deter armed groups and
foster conditions for reconciliation and peace.
The Council may be aware that armed forces trained
by EUTM have already started to deploy operations
with the support of MINUSCA in Obo, Paoua, Sibut,
and recently, in Bangassou. Despite considerable
logistical and tactical capabilities constraints, all
operations are ongoing. Last week, the number of FACA
personnel deployed out of Bangui reached 638. Reports
on their performance in the joint operations have been
favourable, both from the operational perspective and
on the part of non-governmental organizations and
public opinion.
FACA troops trained or validated by EUTM are
now being armed and equipped by third States. We
should not lose momentum in their redeployment and
operationalization. To that end, MINUSCA remains a
critical element. Continued support to FACA in joint
deployments in limited military operations is essential.
As the letter of the Secretary-General states,
“It is important to note that, should the operational
and logistical support outlined not be provided by

S/PV. 8291

MINUSCA or through bilateral agreements, the
ability of these Central African armed forces and
accompanying police and gendarmerie to perform
critical security tasks entrusted to them, and
progress in the political process and stabilization
of the country, may be significantly undermined.”
(S/2018/463, para. 38)
Therefore, we stand by the recommendations on
operational and logistical support outlined in paragraph
32 of the same letter.
However, it is important to bear in mind the limits
of FACA’s immediate deployment, resulting from
logistical and command-and-control difficulties to
manage a multiplicity of operations across the vast
territory of the Central African Republic. Therefore,
immediate deployments must be considered a transition
phase, complemented by the garrison deployment, which
is the base model for the new FACA, as established in
the national defence plan. Garrison-model deployment
will allow FACA to sustain operations if needed in the
designated areas, thereby reassuring the population
and contributing to a safe and secure environment.
Nevertheless, garrison deployment will represent a
major effort, especially with regard to infrastructure
and sustained capabilities.
The first step should be taken in Bouar, as an entry
point for subsequent operations in western Central
African Republic, thereby allowing control in a region
that is critical to the country’s economy. Bouar will
be established in accordance with the garrison model,
where the authorities of the Central African Republic
plan to deploy a battalion-size unit and create a
non-commissioned officer school and training centre
in close coordination with EUTM. The European
Union is firmly committed to that plan and will be
responsible for essential infrastructure projects. Other
countries or international organizations could support
similar projects in other regions of the Central African
Republic, in accordance with the national defence plan
signed by President Touadera.
Last by not least, I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to the importance of the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. Despite the progress made in the FACA
build-up, the crisis in the Central African Republic will
not be resolved by military force. The increase of FACA
capabilities and its operational deployment contribute
to the creation of conditions conducive to the political

18-190607/22

S/PV.8291

The situation in the Central African Republic

negotiations process, leading to national reconciliation.
In that context, the commitment of the countries of the
region and the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation process
are absolutely essential if peace is to be achieved in the
Central African Republic.
In conclusion, MINUSCA support for the FACA
redeployment is of the utmost importance. In that way
the Government’s plans for its armed forces, based on
the garrisoning of forces already trained or validated
by EUTM, will perhaps be made possible and enable
the authority of the State to be extended and exercised.
National reconciliation is the ultimate goal in order
to create the conditions for a MINUSCA exit strategy
from the Central African Republic.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Brigadier
General Maio for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make a statement.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to sincerely thank our three briefers for their very
insightful statements, which highlight the attention
that the Security Council must continue paying to the
situation in the Central African Republic.
France is concerned about the ongoing acts of
violence committed by armed groups in Bangui and
in surrounding areas against civilian populations,
humanitarian workers and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). We are also
concerned about efforts to incite hatred and violence and
to use religion for criminal purposes. We will continue
to closely monitor developments in the situation. In that
regard, we believe that it is essential that the Security
Council continue to show its full support for President
Touadera and the Central African authorities in their
efforts to foster national reconciliation and restore
State authority, which are both key to the success of
the process under way. It is also vital to continue to
encourage the Central African authorities to work
to restore justice, disarm armed groups and rebuild
the country’s economy. As worrisome as the current
situation is, we should not disregard the fact that
progress has been made and that a solution to the crisis
is possible.
Violence perpetrated by armed groups continues
to destabilize the country. It is accompanied by
8/22

21/06/2018

unacceptable human rights violations and causes the
humanitarian situation to continue to deteriorate. It is
therefore essential that all armed groups in Bangui and
in the rest of the country stop all efforts to destabilize the
country, as they are at variance with the commitments
made before the panel of facilitators of the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic.
The Council’s message to armed groups must be
extremely strong. They must lay down their weapons
and make an immediate and unconditional commitment
to the peace process. They should know that they will not
go unpunished for the violence they perpetrate. I recall
that the Security Council has tools to impose sanctions
on those who seek to undermine the stability of the
Central African Republic and are responsible for inciting
violence and attacks against civilians, humanitarian
workers or MINUSCA. In that regard, I would also
like to underscore the urgency of implementing the farreaching African Initiative road map in order to reach a
comprehensive political agreement.
Following the two field missions to meet with the
armed groups, it is now vital to move towards direct
discussions with the Central African Government and
the armed groups within a framework of an inclusive
dialogue with other segments of Central African society,
in particular women, whose participation in the peace
process is crucial. To that end, we call upon the African
Union and all States of the region to continue providing
support at the highest level so as to ensure that the next
steps to implement the road map will be successful.
All efforts to bring about peace and stability
in the Central African Republic also depend on the
restoration of State authority in all administrative,
security or judicial areas. It is therefore more vital
than ever to continue to provide support to rebuild the
Central African defence and security forces. We call on
our Security Council partners to support the option for
MINUSCA to assist the Central African forces trained
by the European Union Military Training Mission in
the Central African Republic (EUTM-RCA) in their
gradual and managed redeployment. That is an essential
point to restore the authority of the State, on which
all else hinges. Last November, in resolution 2387
(2017), the Council requested the Secretary-General to
prepare recommendations on the subject, and they were
provided on 15 May. It is now up to us to study those
recommendations in detail to then implement them. I
18-19060

21/06/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

take this opportunity to commend the excellent work
carried out by EUTM-RCA.
I would like to conclude my statement by
reaffirming France’s full support for MINUSCA and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Мr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for their exemplary
efforts. МINUSCA operates in a difficult environment
but plays an indispensable role, whether in protecting
civilians, supporting the peace and reconciliation
process, facilitating the delivery of humanitarian
aid or supporting the Central African Republic’s
recovery. Unfortunately, the Blue Helmets pay a
heavy price for their commitment; five have been
killed since the beginning of the year. I would like to
once again pay tribute to them and to all troop- and
police-contributing countries.
In that context, while new contingents have
arrived in the Central African Republic, and others
will soon follow, to strengthen MINUSCA, France
stresses the importance of using those additional
reinforcements, as authorized by resolution 2387 (2017),
to give MINUSCA greater mobility and manoeuvring
capabilities, particularly in the protection of civilians.
In that sense, with regard to the protection of civilians,
France welcomes the efforts undertaken by MINUSCA
to improve its performance and continue the work
already under way with troop-contributing countries
to prevent cases of sexual exploitation and abuse and
ensure that they do not go unpunished. Those efforts
must continue.
Lastly, France remains very attentive to the issue
of children in armed conflict in the Central African
Republic, and welcomes the progress achieved by
MINUSCA, especially with the signing of an action
plan by 1 of the 14 armed groups to put an end to grave
violations against children, including their recruitment
and sexual violence, and the release of several thousand
child soldiers since 2014.
I would like to conclude my statement by reiterating
the importance for the Council and the international
community to remain mobilized and united with a
view to achieving lasting peace in the Central African
Republic. Maintaining our mobilization and unity is a
precondition to a lasting solution to the crisis, which is
within our collective reach.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation
welcomes the convening of this meeting and thanks
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative

S/PV. 8291

of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
for his briefing. We also welcome the participation of
Mr. Bédializoun Moussa Nébié and Brigadier General
Hermínio Teodoro Maio.
Peru notes with concern that the efforts to restore the
presence of the State and promote internal reconciliation
have not yet succeeded in consolidating adequate
responses to the serious deterioration of security in
much of the country and to the dramatic humanitarian
situation of its population. Most of the country is living
in a state of permanent conflict as a result of an increase
in inter-ethnic violence, access to weapons and the
struggle for control of natural resources waged among
armed groups, as well as the promotion of messages
inciting religious violence, hatred and stigmatization.
That has led to the continued attacks on the civilian
population, MINUSCA personnel and humanitarian
workers, which have spread to the country’s capital.
The Central African Republic is today one of the most
dangerous and difficult environments.
In that context, we highlight the vital joint efforts
that MINUSCA and the European Union are carrying out
in training Central African military and police forces,
such as projects on the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants and security sector
reform. It is essential to provide those forces with the
necessary operational and logistical support.
The difficult socioeconomic reality also
contributes to the country’s instability. That is why it
is critical that the international community back the
Government’s efforts as embodied in the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and the Mutual
Engagement Framework. We especially believe that
it is crucial to generate employment, particularly for
young people, in order to prevent their recruitment
into violent groups. In that regard, we highlight the
role of the panel of facilitators of the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic in promoting dialogue between armed groups
and civil society.
It is also essential to create synergies between the
United Nations and relevant regional organizations and
neighbouring countries with a view to coordinating
efforts in favour of political processes and border crime
control. In that regard, we welcome the joint visit of
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Mr. Smail Chergui to the

18-190609/22

S/PV.8291

The situation in the Central African Republic

Central African Republic in April, and we agree with
the Secretary-General on the need to revive the bilateral
joint commissions of the Central African Republic,
Cameroon, Chad and the Sudan.
Those efforts should be complemented by a robust
judicial system, which is why we recognize the efforts
of the Central African authorities to operationalize their
judicial institutions, especially the Special Criminal
Court and the national human rights commission, with
a view to generating strong action against various types
of abuse, including cases of sexual violence and the
involvement of children in the conflict.
Peru wishes to highlight MINUSCA’s sensitive
functions in an adverse and complex environment. We
believe that its operational capabilities — as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
MINUSCA mentioned earlier — must be strengthened,
and we therefore stress the need to ensure the safety of
the Blue Helmets on the ground. In that regard, we look
forward to the results of the Mission’s strategic review.
To conclude, I stress the importance of undertaking
an inclusive political process by the Central African
authorities involving men and women of different
social, economic, ethnic and religious backgrounds. The
solution to the crisis in the Central African Republic
can be found only through dialogue and national
reconciliation among the Central Africans themselves.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, our delegation thanks
and commends Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General;
Mr. Bédializoun Moussa Nébié, Special Representative
of the African Union to the Central African Republic;
and Brigadier General Hermínio Teodoro Maio, Force
Commander of the European Union Military Training
Mission in the Central African Republic, for their
detailed briefings on the reality of recent events in the
Central African Republic and the overall situation in
the country.
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is concerned about the resurgence of violence
and virulence with which ex-Séléka and anti-balaka
armed groups control much of the country and attack
civilian and military targets, resulting in hundreds
of deaths and many injuries, through their operations
in the PK5 neighbourhood and other parts of the
country. The armed groups continue to focus their
attacks on humanitarian workers and peacekeepers
10/22

21/06/2018

of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) in Tagbara, north-east of Bambari, which
we strongly condemn, while expressing our deepest and
most heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families,
peacekeepers and MINUSCA. These constant acts are
aimed at trying to prevent MINUSCA from fulfilling
its mandate and commitments to the international
community. We believe that these deliberate attacks
on the United Nations peacekeeping forces are totally
unacceptable, must be condemned and constitute a war
crime, and the perpetrators must be held accountable to
international justice.
We also believe that the Government and national
authorities of our sister Central African Republic must
enjoy the strong support of the international community
so that it can promote and pursue the priorities, strategies
and activities aimed at achieving, strengthening and
promoting peace. We underscore that this process must
include the full and effective participation of all political
and social stakeholders and of the civilian population,
irrespective of ethnic background, gender, language,
religion, politics or other opinions. It is essential to
advance this process, achieve the desired objectives
and ensure that the socioeconomic and cultural needs
of all sectors of society are taken into account.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reiterates its
call on all armed groups to lay down their weapons,
abandon all forms of violence and destabilizing
activities, and commit themselves to the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, whose adopted road map is the result
of the coordinated efforts of the authorities of the Central
African Republic, the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Community of Sant’Egidio, together with the
support of several countries of the region, as well as the
direct and indirect support provided by the international
community, which makes the road map the principle
framework for achieving a political solution to the
crisis in the Central African Republic.
We welcome with optimism and commend the
decision agreed by the Economic Community of
Central African States and the Economic Community
of West African States during their meeting in Lomé
to hold a joint summit, in July, on peace, security
and combating radicalization and violent extremism.
We also appreciate the joint visit to the Central
18-19060

21/06/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

African Republic by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Central Africa and the
Secretary-General of ECCAS, during which they
reiterated the support of the United Nations and ECCAS
for the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation.
During the meeting between the two senior officials
and President Touadera, they welcomed the decision of
the Central African Government to reactivate the joint
commissions among the Central African Republic,
Cameroon, Chad and the Sudan to address regional
security issues.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea supported
in its time the renewal of MINUSCA’s mandate until
15 November, and we closely followed and praised the
work of Special Representative of the United Nations,
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, with various groups
and with national authorities, MINUSCA and other
stakeholders. Those efforts are vital in order to focus
increasingly on developing synergies and common
ground among the various actors operating in the
territory to better coordinate of their activities.
We commend the training provided to the units of
the Forces armées centrafricaines, which could support
the efforts of MINUSCA, thereby contributing to
strengthening the authority of the State. We therefore
call for the lifting of the obstacles to the rearmament of
the Forces armées centrafricaines.
It would be remiss of me to end this statement
without underscoring the deteriorating humanitarian
and human rights situation, which directly affects
vulnerable people, in particular women and children,
and has resulted in an increase in the number of Central
Africans seeking refuge in neighbouring countries,
including Chad, Cameroon and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
We conclude this statement by emphasizing
once again that, among the myriad tasks set forth in
MINUSCA’s mandate, the protection of civilians and
support for the central Government and its armed
forces must be prioritized so that the Government can
exercise its authority over the entire national territory.
To that end and to reiterate a point made by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, it is vital that broad and resolute
support be lent to MINUSCA so that it can carry out the
huge and very complex mission that has been conferred
upon it by our Council.

S/PV. 8291

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reiterates its
full support for our sister Central African Republic
in its efforts to address violence and in its genuine
desire to achieve sustainable peace through inclusive
dialogue and national reconciliation. We congratulate
the Government of the Central African Republic for the
slow but steady progress it is making towards restoring
its authority throughout the entire country.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): At the outset, allow
me to thank our briefers, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Representative Nébié and Brigadier General Maio,
for their briefings and their and their teams continued
efforts in the Central African Republic. We know how
difficult and challenging their missions are, as is the
context they are operating in.
Let me also take this opportunity to offer my
condolences on behalf of the British Government to the
family of the peacekeeper who lost his life in Bambari
last week. That senseless death, one of three in the
past five weeks, serves to illustrate the deteriorating
security situation in the Central African Republic,
which concerns the United Kingdom, like other
Security Council members, very deeply.
Security in areas that were once considered
relatively stable — for example, Bambari and
Bangui — has deteriorated. We commend the efforts
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) to respond to and quell the violence and
uphold their mandate to protect civilians.
Today, as the report of the Secretary-General’s
(S/2018/611) states, a quarter of the population have
been driven from their homes as they seek safety.
There are now more internally displaced people in the
Central African Republic than at any other point in the
country’s history. Over half of the population is in need
of humanitarian assistance. Seventy per cent of families
do not have access to clean water and 80 per cent of
families do not have access to latrines. Despite that,
only 20 per cent of the humanitarian response plan has
been funded. The United Kingdom has given $9 million
so far in 2018, and we encourage all Member States to
respond to that appeal.
We call on all armed groups in Bangui and
throughout the country to immediately cease all forms
of violence, but we also urge political, religious and
community leaders to stop incitement to violence on

18-1906011/22

S/PV.8291

The situation in the Central African Republic

religious and ethnic grounds. We have seen the tragic
consequences of such calls to violence over the past
few months. Those in positions of leadership have
particular responsibility for their words. The authorities
and the international community must hold accountable
those involved in attacks, violations of international
humanitarian law and abuses and violations of human
rights. We must send a clear message that this behaviour
is not acceptable and that there will be consequences,
as the national justice system continues to develop and
the Special Criminal Court makes progress towards
operationalization through the enactment of a new
legal framework and the appointment of judicial
police officers.
We welcome the progress made in extending States’
authority to all areas of the country, including through
the recent redeployment of civil servants and justice
representatives, and we recognize the real challenge
of doing so. The deployment of the Forces armées
centrafricaines units trained by the European Union
Military Training Mission (EUTM) in the Central
African Republic is an important step. We commend
the EUTM’s efforts to support the re-establishment
of a cohesive and well-trained national security force.
That is not only essential for peace and security in the
short term; a well-trained force that respects human
rights will help to build trust between civilians and
the Government of the Central African Republic, and
thereby help to mend the social fabric, which has been
deeply damaged by the conflict.
As we have discussed in the Council many times,
an inclusive political peace process is the best way to
address the grievances of all parties to ensure longterm peace and security. We very much welcome and
support the African Union’s (AU) leadership on that
issue through the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation. The visit to take stock of armed groups’
grievances was a good step. The regional credibility
of the African Union allows it to positively engage
with all groups, and we strongly encourage the AU to
continue its good work. We should reflect on how we
the Security Council and the international community
can best support the African Union and enhance and
support the peace initiative. The United Kingdom is
open to the African Union’s suggestions on how the
Council and the international community can play
a more supportive role, and we look forward to the
interactive dialogue later.
12/22

21/06/2018

Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Let me also thank
our three briefers for their informative and useful
briefings today.
Let me start by reiterating our full support for United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
which is carrying out its work in increasingly difficult
circumstances. Since February, security incidents have
resulted in the deaths of four peacekeepers. We express
our profound condolences to their families for their
loss. It is essential that attacks against peacekeepers
be investigated and those responsible be brought to
justice. In that regard, we appreciate the cooperation
of the Central African Republic authorities to ensure
accountability for those attacks.
In the light of the fragile advances made over the past
two years, we are deeply worried about the deterioration
in the security situation in recent months. That has
been marked by persistent violence by armed groups,
including in Bangui, and we strongly condemn attacks
carried out against civilians, humanitarian personnel
and peacekeepers. We are also deeply concerned about
the erosion of trust among communities, as well as the
sectarian rhetoric that seeks to divide societies and
incite religious and ethnic hatred. Attempts by armed
groups — not least of which the Front populaire pour
la renaissance de la Centrafrique — and political
actors to fan division and discord for political ends
is reckless and worrisome. We are also concerned
about the high number of documented incidents of
human rights violations and abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law. Impunity for acts of
violence against civilians, including sexual and genderbased violence, cannot be tolerated. Strong national
leadership and communication are imperative at this
juncture. The efforts of the Government to ensure
national unity continue to have our support. It is
essential that the Government, Parliament and armed
groups all demonstrate their commitment to national
reconciliation and engage in dialogue.
We strongly support the African Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic
and welcome the conclusion of the second round of
consultations. We hope that the African Union will
continue to prioritize advancing the initiative. As it
does so, it should fully use its mediation capacity, with
the active support from the United Nations, and ensure
the implementation of the Libreville road map.
18-19060

21/06/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

We encourage countries in the region to step up
coordinated efforts in support for the endeavours
of the Government of the Central African Republic
towards peace and stability. Those includes support
for the African Initiative as well as efforts to address
cross-border challenges, such as transhumance-related
violence. The Government’s steps to reactivate bilateral
joint commissions with a number of neighbouring
countries is a welcome step in that direction. An
inclusive peace is a credible and sustainable peace. It is
crucial that all segments of society — not least women
and youth — be engaged in the political process, and
that key stakeholders, in addition to armed groups,
be included. In parallel to the political process, it
is necessary to enhance national reconciliation and
transitional justice efforts so as to lay the ground for
sustainable peace and stability. The dire humanitarian
situation in the country has been further exacerbated
by clashes among armed groups and attacks against
civilians. We urge all armed groups to fully commit
to dialogue and cease all forms of violence. Efforts to
respond to the needs of more than half the population
now in need of humanitarian assistance must be
stepped up.
We welcome the letter of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/463) in May on recommendations on the
type of support MINUSCA could provide for the
progressive deployment of units of the Central African
armed forces — trained or certified by the European
Union (EU) Training Mission. It is important to ensure
cooperation between the United Nations and the EU
Training Mission, in particular if MINUSCA is to
provide enhanced planning and technical assistance to
the Central African armed forces. The Central African
authorities must ensure that the members of the Central
African Armed Forces are ethnically representative,
geographically balance and financially supported and
that they adhere to the rule of law and human rights
standards. Furthermore, the deployment of armed
forces is merely one part of the re-establishment of State
authority throughout the country. It must be quickly
followed by the provision of basic services in line
with the National Strategy for the Restoration of State
Authority. That requires not only sustained support
from the international community but, crucially,
political will and a sense of national ownership from
the Central African authorities.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke
in French): I thank the three briefers for the clarity

S/PV. 8291

of their statements this morning. I believe that they
demonstrated how the United Nations, the African
Union and the European Union are working together
in close cooperation for peace in the Central African
Republic. I also thank their teams, which are made up
of people who devote all their efforts and energy in the
service of achieving lasting peace.
I join other delegations in conveying our
condolences to the families and Governments of the
Blue Helmets of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) who lost their lives. I would like
to say that today their work is more necessary than
ever. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is concerned
about and condemns the escalation of intercommunal
violence and attacks against civilians, MINUSCA and
humanitarian workers. Today I will focus on three
aspects of how to respond to the crisis: first, the need
to strengthen our support for the African Initiative for
Peace and Reconciliation; secondly, the need to protect
civilians and prevent incitement to violence; and,
thirdly, the imperative redeployment of the Central
African Armed Forces.
My first point concerns the peace process conducted
under the African Initiative. The Netherlands welcomes
the work of Mr. Nebié and the panel of facilitators. In
particular, we welcome the holding of consultations
with armed groups. However, the increase in violence
is undermining the peace process. We firmly condemn
such acts and call on armed groups to lay down their
weapons. The security of the people in Central Africa
must improve so that an inclusive dialogue to achieve
peace can begin. We encourage the African Union and
MINUSCA to continue working in close cooperation in
complementarity. We welcome MINUSCA’s efforts to
arrive at local agreements and support local initiatives
to promote peace. Moreover, the Netherlands welcomes
the initiative of President Touadera to reactivate the
three bilateral joint commissions between the Central
African Republic and Cameroon, Chad and the Sudan.
We call on the countries of the region to constructively
commit to aggressively confronting the crossborder roots underlying the conflict in the Central
African Republic.
Secondly, I underscore the urgent need to protect
civilians. They continue to be the first targets in the
relentless violence. The protection of civilians must
remain MINUSCA’s priority. We encourage the Mission
to further strengthen its early-warning mechanisms,

18-1906013/22

S/PV.8291

The situation in the Central African Republic

but it alone cannot stop the threat of hateful rhetoric,
which is toxic to peace in the Central African Republic.
The Government of the Netherlands calls on the Central
African Government, as well as political and religious
leaders, to act to end incitement to violence. We welcome
the recent declaration issued by the High Council for
Communication and encourage the operationalization
of its Office. There can be no peace without justice. In
that regard, the progress of the Special Criminal Court
is commendable, in particular the adoption of the rules
of procedure and evidence.
My third point concerns the importance of
strengthening State authority, which is necessary
for achieving a lasting solution. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands welcomes the contribution of the
European Union Military Training Mission (EUTM)
to the training of the Central African Armed Forces.
We recognize, however, that more support is needed
to redeploy the EUTM-trained forces. We welcome the
recent letter from the Secretary-General describing
the conditions under which MINUSCA could play
a role in that regard (S/2018/463). We believe that in
the current circumstances it is crucial that the Council
take a decision on this matter as soon as possible. We
call on all international partners contributing to the
redeployment of security forces to strengthen their
coordination efforts.
We are alarmed, as is the Secretary-General, by
the increase in intercommunal violence. A few weeks
ago, a young Central African woman working for peace
showed us the threats she receives every day on social
networks. No one should fear for their lives because
of their ethnic origin or religion. We must prevent this
conflict from escalating.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my thanks to
the Special Representative, Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, for
his considerable efforts and leadership.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga
for his excellent briefing, and Mr. Bédializoun Moussa
Nébié and Brigadier General Herminio Teodoro Maio
for the quality of theirs.
My delegation welcomes the progress made in
restoring State authority throughout the country, in
particular through the deployment of the majority of
the prefectural corps, of judges and of over 50 per
cent of civil servants, as well as the improvement
in the provision of basic social services. However,
14/22

21/06/2018

the security and humanitarian situation remains
worrisome, despite commendable efforts by the
Government and the international community. The
resurgence of inflammatory rhetoric, the persistence
of intercommunal conflicts and attacks by armed
groups against the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) and humanitarian workers
remain of concern. Côte d’Ivoire condemns those acts
and, in its capacity as Chair of the Sanctions Committee
concerning the Central African Republic, recalls the
relevant provisions of resolution 2399 (2018), which
set out as criteria for the designation of sanctions the
incitement to hatred and violence as well as attacks
against civilian populations, MINUSCA soldiers
and humanitarian personnel. My country calls on the
stakeholders to strictly respect the relevant provisions
of resolution 2399 (2018) and to engage in the search for
a peaceful solution to the crisis, within the framework
of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic.
It is essential that national ownership and
inclusiveness in the political process be emphasized,
which is why, while welcoming local peace and
reconciliation initiatives, my delegation also advocates
for robust involvement by civil society organizations,
ethnic and religious communities, women and young
people in the ongoing political dialogue.
Côte d’Ivoire supports the efforts of the Central
African Government and commends the leadership
of President Touadera, who favours dialogue and
consultation both within the Central African Republic
and with neighbouring States, in order to create
the conditions for national reconciliation and a real
commitment by the parties concerned to lasting peace
in the country. In that regard, my country notes with
satisfaction the Government’s efforts to revive the
joint bilateral commissions with Chad, Cameroon and
the Sudan, with a view to addressing cross-border
security challenges.
Pooling efforts in the face of the challenges of
insecurity and instability is crucial. My delegation
therefore welcomes the joint operations by MINUSCA
and the Central African Armed Forces, which, according
to the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/611), have
significantly reduced the number of attacks against
civilians and clashes between armed groups in
several regions. In that regard, my country supports
the request addressed to the Security Council by the
18-19060

21/06/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

Secretary-General on 15 May 2018 (S/2018/463), with
a view to generating enhanced support for MINUSCA
for the gradual and controlled redeployment of the
Central African Armed Forces trained or certified
by the European Union Training Mission in the
Central African Republic (EUTM). Côte d’Ivoire also
encourages the donor community to support the efforts
of the Government of the Central African Republic
within the framework of the joint five-year concept for
the immediate and long-term deployment of the defence
and internal security forces, adopted in 2018 with the
support of MINUSCA and in coordination with EUTM.
My delegation would like to stress the importance
of accountability in the search for lasting solutions to
the Central African crisis, which is having a negative
impact on the entire subregion. It therefore welcomes
the Government’s efforts aimed at operationalizing
the truth, justice, reparations and reconciliation
commission. It also welcomes the adoption, on 29 May,
of the law enabling the Special Criminal Court to begin
its work and investigations into war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed in the Central African
Republic since 2003.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire would like to reiterate
its support for MINUSCA. We remain convinced that
ownership of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation by the Central African stakeholders,
with the support of the international community, is the
appropriate and sustainable way out of the crisis.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative Nébié
and Commander Maio for their detailed briefings
this morning.
The United States expresses its deepest condolences
for the Tanzanian peacekeeper who died on 3 June and
the Burundian peacekeeper who died on 10 June. We
also extend our hope for a speedy recovery to those
injured in the latest attacks.
The collective goal of the international community
must be to achieve a political solution for durable peace
and recovery in the Central African Republic. We need to
work together to communicate positive progress where
it is occurring and to counter narratives by spoilers who
seek to de-stabilize the country for their own benefit.
We remain committed to President Touadera and his
Government. President Touadera continues to strive
for peace, justice and accountability and the prevention

S/PV. 8291

of further atrocities, and we are pleased the Special
Criminal Court for the Central African Republic is
operational and ready to hold perpetrators accountable.
The African Union-led peace initiative offers a
reasonable starting point for the parties to discuss
and conclude a peace agreement. The United States
supports this effort and is eager for the African
Union (AU) to begin talks with and mediation among
the parties to the conflict. We want to invigorate the
process and believe the United Nations also needs to
increase its engagement in it. A conference is needed to
bring together the international community to develop
a common strategy for supporting the peace process
and the AU. We want to work to ensure that peace talks
advance. There is no way ahead in the Central African
Republic without a viable peace process backed by the
international community.
We commend the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) for its local reconciliation
efforts, and we highlight the need to harmonize those
efforts with broader and similar peace initiatives by
civil society organizations so as to ensure a coordinated
multitrack approach to peacebuilding in the Central
African Republic. We urge MINUSCA to work closely
with the AU as those processes make progress.
MINUSCA’s support to the Central African Armed
Forces is important, and we remain focused on advancing
State authority in the Central African Republic. The
extension of State authority should continue to be closely
linked with ongoing effective security sector reform
and disarmament and demobilization programmes.
MINUSCA is a model for robust and proactive
peacekeeping, but the Mission is stretched thin
and struggles to fully implement its mandate. The
environment in which MINUSCA is operating is
incredibly complex. We hope that the upcoming
strategic review will offer an honest assessment
of the challenges facing the Mission. We cannot
improve MINUSCA without a thoughtful analysis of
the political and security environment in the Central
African Republic and of how MINUSCA can achieve
its objectives there.
We again offer our thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the Special
Representative of the African Union and the Force
Commander, and to the men and women of MINUSCA
for their service.

18-1906015/22

S/PV.8291

The situation in the Central African Republic

Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to welcome our new colleague the
representative of the United States of America. We
wish him every success and look forward to working
closely with him.
At the outset, I should like to thank Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA); Mr. Bédializoun Moussa
Nébié, Special Representative of the African Union to
the Central African Republic; and Brigadier General
Hermínio Teodoro Maio, Force Commander of the
European Union Military Training Mission in the
Central African Republic for the valuable updates they
have provided the Security Council.
I will focus in my statement today on three aspects.
First, with respect to the security situation, our
meeting today is taking place in the context of an
unstable security situation in the Central African
Republic that has now entered its fifth year. Since
April, the security situation has been deteriorating
rapidly in a deeply concerning manner owing to the
escalation of violence between armed groups and the
conflicting parties. Once again there is resurgence
of inflammatory rhetoric and hate speech, as well as
religious and sectarian incitement. We are concerned at
the recurrent violence and attacks committed by those
extremist armed groups and gangs that target Muslimmajority areas as well as Muslim religious figures and
places of worship, and burn mosques. We condemn in
the strongest terms all attacks against people or their
holy places because of their religion and denounce all
acts of violence and killings as a result of radicalism.
We call on the authorities of the Central African
Republic to redouble their efforts to stop those actions
and increase awareness among all segments of the
population so as to put an end to such hate speech and
create an environment conducive to coexistence.
Against this backdrop, the security situation in
the Central African Republic is deteriorating, which
we strongly deplore. Even humanitarian personnel
and MINUSCA peacekeepers are being targeted,
resulting in a number of dead among Mission staff and
many wounded. These attacks have become a source
of concern for us and require that we all focus on the
security situation in the Central African Republic and
16/22

21/06/2018

support the efforts of President Touadera so that the
Government forces can retake control of the security
situation. We condemn in the strongest terms the
recurrent armed attacks and call for an end thereto. We
reiterate our support for all of the statements made by
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
statements to the press issued by the Security Council
in the aftermath of the attacks that took place in recent
months, as those attacks against peacekeepers could
amount to war crimes and violations of international
humanitarian law.
We call on the Government of the Central African
Republic to investigate the attacks and hold the
perpetrators accountable. We reiterate our support to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga and to MINUSCA in their efforts
to help the Government and the people of the Central
African Republic to achieve lasting peace and stability.
Secondly, with respect to the humanitarian
situation, we have followed the reports of international
organizations regarding the humanitarian situation
in the Central African Republic and taken note of
the information contained in the recent report of the
Secretary-General dated 18 June (S/2018/611), and
deplore the fact that the humanitarian situation remains
critical and that almost half of the country’s population
is in dire need of urgent humanitarian aid. The Central
African Republic has thus become one of the countries
most in need of humanitarian assistance, and half of
those who are in need are children. As a result of the
deterioration in the humanitarian situation, one of
four people in the country is now facing a very critical
situation. This is worrying and frightening.
Thirdly, cooperation is needed between the various
relevant organizations and United Nations offices,
including coordination and cooperation efforts between
the African Union, the European Union and MINUSCA,
in collaboration with the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa and the Economic Community of
Central African States, to support security and stability
in the Central African Republic. We reiterate, however,
that it is very important to intensify such cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
order to give impetus to the African Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic and
to achieve tangible results that will eventually translate
into stability in the security situation and reduction of
violence in the country.
18-19060

21/06/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
appreciation to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Parfait Onanga-Anyanga and the staff of
MINUSCA for their determined efforts to help reinstate
stability amid a precarious situation. We hope that they
will succeed, for the sake of achieving security and
stability for the people of Central African Republic.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to express
our gratitude for the briefings by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Parfait Onanga-Anyanga;
Mr. Bédializoun Moussa Nébié, Special Representative
of the African Union to the Central African Republic;
and Brigadier General Hermínio Teodoro Maio, Force
Commander of the European Union Military Training
Mission in the Central African Republic, and we assure
them of our full support in the delicate and complex
tasks that they are carrying out.
The atmosphere of violence and insecurity created
by armed groups in the Central African Republic
continues to undermine the commendable efforts made
and achievements registered by the Government in the
areas of the protection of civilians, the strengthening
of State authority, inter-institutional cooperation and
the training of the Central African Armed Forces, inter
alia. None of these achievements should be overlooked.
The Central African Republic, together with its
regional and subregional parners and with the support
of the international community, must continue to work
in a unified manner in order to find long-term solutions
that stabilize the country and achieve a lasting and
sustainable peace.
We welcome and support the round of consultations
carried out with 14 armed groups by the panel of
facilitators for the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. This
undertaking promotes dialogue and serves to address
the root causes of the instability and armed violence
in the country. We call on all armed groups to
undertake once and for all the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. We also call on them
to cease hostilities and to focus their efforts on activities
that will benefit the civilian population and promote the
stabilization of the Central African Republic.
We commend the support lent to the African
Initiative and to the Government by the International
Support Group on the Central African Republic and
urge it to continue to promote consistent and sustained

S/PV. 8291

participation in order to contribute to the stabilization
and recovery of the country as well as to ensure
greater and enhanced coordination among regional and
international partners. In a similar vein, we welcome
the decision by the Government of the Central African
Republic to reactivate the bilateral joint commissions
with Cameroon, Chad and the Sudan, which we trust
will serve to limit arms trafficking and the movement
of armed groups.
The never-ending spiral of violence fuelled by
armed groups, asymmetric attacks and the ongoing
clashes between ethnic groups and communities are
factors that day in and day out exacerbate the critical
humanitarian situation. There are 670,000 displaced
persons in the Central African Republic, and 580,000
refugees have fled to neighbouring countries. That
situation cannot be ignored. We therefore call upon
the international community to continue to provide
support through predictable and sustainable financing,
particularly to the humanitarian response plan, with a
view to confronting the growing need for humanitarian
assistance that the people require.
Bolivia
condemns
all
acts
that
incite
violence — especially those motivated by ethnic or
religious reasons — and undermine peace, stability
and security in the Central African Republic. In that
connection, we commend the religious leaders of
Bangui for having reached a preliminary agreement
with local militias, civil society and local authorities to
contain the violence in Bangassou.
We also condemn the attacks carried out by
armed groups against civilians, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and
peacekeeping forces. We appreciate and welcome the
members of the Mission, as well as the military, police
and civilian personnel, who carry out their work in a
volatile environment of great risk. We regret the loss of
life among both Mission personnel and civilians, and
we take this opportunity to express our condolences to
the family members and Governments of the fallen.
We applaud the efforts of the Mission to identify
regions that lack additional capacity to protect their
civilian population and to support the Government
through peace and reconciliation initiatives, processes
that provide frameworks to reduce violence, build
trust among communities and facilitate the return of
displaced persons. We also welcome the new civilian

18-1906017/22

S/PV.8291

The situation in the Central African Republic

protection strategy and efforts to mediate among armed
groups. We support MINUSCA in its efforts to continue
promoting the participation of women in the African
Initiative and advocating for violence-reduction
programmes, which have proved to be effective in
the implementation of local peace agreements and the
voluntary disarmament of many young people involved
in militia and armed group activities.
Moreover, we encourage the joint five-year
agreement to support the Government in the immediate
and long-term deployment of internal defence and
security forces with the support of MINUSCA and in
coordination with the European Union Military Training
Mission, with a view to restoring State authority in the
Central African Republic.
In conclusion, we welcome the ongoing and active
engagement of regional and subregional organizations,
as well as the participation of African Union, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the group of facilitators of the African Initiative,
whose political efforts towards peace and cooperation
are essential to the reconciliation process. All of that
is being carried out in full respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Central
African Republic, as it is the Central Africans
themselves who have the primary responsibility to
achieve peace and stability in their own country.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me join you,
Mr. President, in congratulating and welcoming
Ambassador Cohen. We very much look forward to
working with him closely.

21/06/2018

accountable. For Poland, as a Vice-Chair of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the safety and
security of peacekeeping personnel continues to be the
top priority.
Poland welcomes the progress made so far in the
political process under the leadership of President
Touadera. We applaud the support provided by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
and the African Union, as well as the engagement of
regional and subregional actors, in advancing the
mediation and reconciliation process. We consider the
African Initative for Peace and National Reconciliation
to be the main framework for resolving the crisis in the
Central African Republic. It is crucial that the process
include all political, social and ethnic groups, as well as
the representation of women. We commend the progress
made by the panel of facilitators on consultations with
armed groups, and remain positive that the Initiative
could enhance the peace process in the country and
lead to a lasting agreement.
Unfortunately, despite some positive developments,
the security and humanitarian situation in the country
has not improved. We strongly condemn repeated acts
of violence targeting civilians, humanitarian workers
and peacekeepers. We are also concerned about the
increase in incitement to ethnic and religious hatred and
violence. Such activities result in numerous casualties
and impede the peace process and economic recovery.

We thank all three briefers for their very thorough
and factual presentations. We wish to express our
deep appreciation to them and their teams for their
tireless efforts aimed at ensuring peace and stability
in the Central African Republic, given all of the
very challenging circumstances. Their presence and
participation here in the Chamber is the best example
of the excellent cooperation we enjoy with regard to the
Central African Republic between the United Nations
and the regional organizations. It is also an excellent
example of the cooperation that can exist between the
European Union and the African Union.

Poland welcomes the efforts made by the
Government and local communities to further enhance
security measures, curb criminality and support
reconciliation mechanisms, but much still remains to
be done. We commend the Central African Republic
authorities for the progress made in the establishment
of a Special Criminal Court that would investigate
allegations of war crimes and crimes against humanity
during more than a decade of ethnic and religious
conflict in the country. Those efforts bring hope for
the possibility of breaking the cycle of revenge and
violence in the Central African Republic and show
the determination of the Central African Republic
authorities in constituting a credible, legitimate and
reliable judicial system.

Let me also offer our most sincere condolences
over the loss of life among Blue Helmets. All attacks on
the peacekeeping personnel are unacceptable, and we
hope that the perpetrators will be identified and held

It is extremely important to stop impunity and
restore State control throughout the entire country.
With regard to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga’s briefing, we also
welcome the progress in setting up the magistrates. In

18/22

18-19060

21/06/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

our view, the return of public administration throughout
the country’s territory is crucial for ensuring the longterm stability of the Central African Republic, as
building institutions based on the principles of good
governance and the rule of law is key for economic,
social and political development.
The fragile situation in the Central African
Republic shows that comprehensive support from the
international community is essential. In that context, we
strongly believe that the active support of MINUSCA
for the progressive redeployment of the Central
African Armed Forces, trained by the European Union
Military Training Mission, is crucial. Transparent and
coordinated cooperation among all international forces
in the Central African Republic is a critical means for
ensuring a unified approach to the operationalization of
the Central African Armed Forces and its compliance
with the highest standards.
In conclusion, Poland praises the important work
carried out by MINUSCA, the European Union Military
Training Mission and other international partners in
the Central African Republic. I would like to assure
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga and his entire team of our full
support for his efforts.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to start by expressing
our appreciation to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Representative of the African Union (AU) to the Central
African Republic Moussa Nébié and Brigadier General
Herminio Teodoro Maio for their respective briefings.
Two years after the Government of President
Touadera took office, we note the progress made by the
Central African Republic towards a gradual restoration
of State authority through the deployment of district
administrations in all parts of the country, together
with the return of basic social services. That progress
should not be overlooked. However, as rightly stated
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2018/611) and
stressed by Special Representative Onanga-Anyanga,
whose work we greatly appreciate, such gains remain
slow and fragile. What worries us most is the fact that
the first half of this year has witnessed a deterioration
of the security situation despite the incremental change
that we have seen in other areas.
Today I want to take this opportunity to highlight
what emerged from the discussion at the level of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa, which we chair. Based on the

S/PV. 8291

suggestion of members of the Security Council, we
organized a series of discussions on specific conflict
situations in Africa, not so much to rework the discussion
that takes place here in the Council but to facilitate a
genuine exchange of views on how to support national
and regional efforts in the spirit of African solutions to
African problems.
In that context, we convened a meeting last month
to discuss the situation in the Central African Republic
and how to prevent a reversal of the gains made and
to sustain peace. Assistant Secretary-General Keita,
the African Union Special Representative, the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission configuration and
the Permanent Representative of the Central African
Republic, whose presence here today we very much
welcome, briefed the Ad Hoc Working Group. Unlike
at previous meetings, the discussion that followed truly
lived up to expectations, with members frankly sharing
their views in a much more interactive manner.
That is why we felt that we needed to bring that to
the attention of the Security Council so that the outcome
of the discussion at the level of the Ad Hoc Working
Group feeds into our deliberations here today. Serious
concern was expressed about the deteriorating security
and humanitarian situation and the socioeconomic
challenges, particularly over the past two months,
as well as the danger of inflammatory rhetoric and
sectarian violence. Serious concern was expressed in
that connection with regard to the role of non-citizens
fanning the conflict through the use of incendiary
language. Much of that is resource-driven and was seen
as a very serious challenge.
The illegal exploitation of minerals and other
resources, primarily as the main source of funds for
supporting the operation of the armed groups, including
with the assistance of actors near and far, was also
raised as an alarming development. Furthermore, the
growing number of attacks against the peacekeepers
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and their impact in hindering efforts
towards the gradual restoration of State authority in the
country was considered very disturbing.
In terms of the way forward, the importance
of promoting dialogue and reconciliation through
engagement with the local community, as well as
supporting the expansion of State authority, in particular
in remote areas, including by strengthening the capacity

18-1906019/22

S/PV.8291

The situation in the Central African Republic

of the Government and its reconciliation efforts, was
greatly emphasized. That is no substitute for addressing
that and other challenges, as Special Representative
Onanga-Anyanga also stressed a short while ago.
Promoting dialogue with neighbouring countries to
ensure border security was also underscored. That was
highlighted as extremely critical.
Members expressed support for the AU’s efforts
in the context of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation and stressed the need to leverage the
United Nations and AU synergy, welcoming the recent
joint visit by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
Commissioner Chergui. With regard to MINUSCA,
the fact that the Mission needs a more robust posture,
adequately resourced with the necessary financial and
logistical support, was very well recognized. We heard
Special Representative Onanga-Anyanga say that as
well in his briefing a short while ago.
In the end, what emerged very clearly during
the discussion was that the Central African Republic
requires greater attention from the Council. That
clearly appears to be self-evident given the current
situation and the need to do everything possible to
prevent a reversal of the little progress made over the
past two years.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Central African Republic,
Mr. Nébié, Special Representative of the African
Union to the Central African Republic, and Brigadier
General Herminio Teodoro Maio, Force Commander
of the European Union Military Training Mission, for
their briefings.
Under the leadership of President Touadera, the
political process in the Central African Republic has
made positive progress. Meanwhile, the security
situation in the country remains fragile, with continuing
armed clashes among armed groups. The country
therefore still faces challenges in its effort to achieve
lasting peace and stability. Recently, the second round
of consultations under the African Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation was held successfully.
China welcomes that development. We call on the
relevant parties to bear in mind the overall national and
State interests, to take concrete steps to implement a
ceasefire agreement, to promote disarmament and the
peace and reconciliation process, to stop the incitement
20/22

21/06/2018

of hatred, and to overcome differences through dialogue
and consultation.
China
commends
the
United
Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) for its
important role in maintaining stability in the Central
African Republic. We strongly condemn the attacks
against peacekeepers and express our condolences
and sympathy to the bereaved families. We support
the Government of the Central African Republic in
conducting prompt investigations in order to bring the
perpetrators to justice.
China also supports MINUSCA’s efforts to improve
its protection and early-warning capability and to take
concrete and effective steps to ensure the safety and
security of its personnel. China supports the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States and other regional and subregional organizations
in their efforts to promote a political process in the
Central African Republic. The United Nations, the
African Union and other regional and subregional
organizations should enhance their cooperation with
the Government of the Central African Republic so
as to promote national reconciliation and peace in the
country in a joint effort to help it to achieve peace and
development as soon as possible. China also calls on the
international community to continue to support to the
Government of the Central African Republic in its State
capacity-building efforts and to provide the necessary
assistance to the Government in order to maintain
security and stability, respond to the humanitarian
crisis and address the root causes of the conflict.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We would like to thank
our three briefers and welcome Ambassador Jonathan
Cohen, the new Deputy Permanent Representative
of the United States, to the Chamber today. We wish
him every success. My delegation has the following
comments to make.
First, with regard to the political front, we note the
efforts and commitment of the Government of the Central
African Republic to making progress in restoring State
authority throughout the country, despite its persistent
challenges, which include limited resources, weak
public institutions and insecurity, as other speakers,
including my Polish colleague, have pointed out.
Like Ambassador Alemu of Ethiopia, as expressed in
his inspiring and meaningful statement, we too are
concerned about the intensifying sectarian rhetoric and
18-19060

21/06/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

intercommunal disputes, which have resulted in higher
levels of armed conflict, thereby undermining every
effort to achieve national reconciliation and worsening
the country’s already fragile security situation. We
note the work of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) in supporting peace initiatives
at the local community level with the aim of building
confidence and reducing violence.
We also pay tribute to the panel of facilitators for
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
and note the importance of continuing a dialogue
with armed groups and seeking peaceful means of
disarmament. We therefore join others in urging all
armed groups to lay down their arms. We recognize
the role that President Touadera has taken in leading
and supporting peaceful political processes within the
framework of the African Initiative. The first meeting of
the International Support Group on the Central African
Republic, with the participation of the African Union
(AU), the Economic Community of Central African
States and the United Nations, is an important step
in that direction. Coordinating the actions of regional
and international partners will help the country to
consolidate its gains and move forward towards the key
goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the African Union’s Agenda 2063, as well as the
AU’s effort to silence the guns by 2020. We support
the work of MINUSCA in resolving the multifaceted
security issues in the Central African Republic using
both military and non-military methods, including
comprehensive measures to prevent young people from
participating in armed violence.
Secondly, with regard to the security front, we
stress the importance of ensuring that the Government
continues to implement its national security strategy
and joint concept for the deployment of the defence
and internal security forces, as well as its management
of weapons and ammunition, with the support of
MINUSCA and other partners. We also commend
the invaluable contribution that the European Union
Training Mission has made to training Central
African forces.
We also want to note the importance of the
initiative that other States in the region have taken
to intensify the bilateral commissions between the
Central African Republic and Cameroon, Chad and
Sudan. We hope they will enable effective cooperation
not just in addressing transnational security threats but

S/PV. 8291

also in revitalizing economic ties. It is important that
regional and international partners continue supporting
the Government’s efforts to address vital issues of
security and justice, as well as such important aspects
of development as providing basic services to the
population and creating jobs.
Thirdly, on the humanitarian front, against a
backdrop of underfunding and a reduced humanitarian
presence, the increasing numbers of internally displaced
people and refugees from the Central African Republic
in neighbouring countries demand the international
community’s immediate attention.
Lastly, in expressing our full support to
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga and his able team, we would like
to emphasize that with the Government’s clear vision of
the way to tackle the challenges it is facing, we have an
opportunity before us and we should continue to strive
to give the people of the Central African Republic the
support they deserve and expect.
The President (spoke in Russian): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Representative of the African Union Bédializoun
Moussa Nébié and Brigadier General Herminio Teodoro
Maio for their briefings.
We share the concern expressed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report on the Central African Republic
(S/2018/611) about the continuing unstable situation
in the country, especially on the security front. A
significant part of its territory is still controlled by
armed groups. Despite some positive progress on the
problem of expanding Government administrative
control, the local authorities are still not fully
functioning. The bloody inter-ethnic and interreligious
encounters continue, and the confrontations between
gangs are worsening. There are intense clashes between
armed groups over territory, resources and key trade
routes. The rhetoric of hate speech is a catalyst in this.
We want to emphasize that such behaviour should have
no place in a country whose citizens are striving for
peaceful coexistence.
We would like to express our sincere condolences
for the continuing losses among peacekeepers. The
courage of the Blue Helmets in the Central African
Republic cannot be overestimated. We fully support
the efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional

18-1906021/22

S/PV.8291

The situation in the Central African Republic

Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and of Mr. Onanga-Anyanga personally. We
realize that the Mission has a difficult job, considering
the size of the country and the presence of so many
armed groups.
We are also concerned about the further
deterioration of the socioeconomic and humanitarian
situation. We urge all the parties to the conflict to
ensure humanitarian access to the victims and the
authorities to continue to work to create conditions
conducive to the safe voluntary return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to their homes.
There can be no question that one of the key
conditions for the long-term stabilization of the situation
in the Central African Republic is the implementation
of the programme for the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation of combatants. We hope
that future progress with that initiative, and with
involving the main armed groups in it, will help to
normalize the situation. The road map for a settlement
in the Central African Republic adopted through the
mediation of the African Union in Libreville on 17 July
2017 constitutes a good foundation for launching
an inclusive political dialogue. We share positive
assessment in the Secretary-General’s report of the
progress made in implementing the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, for which the panel of facilitators conducted
two full-fledged rounds of meetings on the ground with
all the leaders of the main armed groups with the aim of
consolidating their demands for the holding of further
negotiations with the Government. In our view, it will
be crucial to ensure that all parties to the Libreville
agreements make additional efforts to implement the
relevant provisions as soon as possible.
We note the steps that Bangui is taking in the area of
security-sector reform with a view to restoring its control
throughout the country. That is needed to help normalize
the situation in the Central African Republic, including
with the support of the international community, and to
fulfil the national defence plan approved by President
Touadera in order to gradually transfer responsibility
for running the country to its lawful authorities. For
our part, we want to affirm that Russia will continue to
support the authorities of the Central African Republic
in reforming their national security sector. In 2017 our
instructors trained 200 Central Africans, and we plan
to hold similar training courses for 400 members of the
Central African armed forces in 2018. We also intend

22/22

21/06/2018

to increase our humanitarian assistance, particularly
where providing the population with medical services
is concerned.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Central
African Republic.
Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in
French): Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you
on two fronts: first, on your country’s presidency of the
Security Council for the month of June and the skill with
which you are carrying out your duties, and secondly,
on your country’s organization of the FIFA World Cup,
which is creating such excitement. I also thank you for
convening today’s very important meeting.
I had not intended to the floor after the very relevant
statements by all of the previous speakers, in particular
the briefing on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/611) by Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). What can
I add to the analysis we have heard of the security and
humanitarian situation in the country, not to mention
the area of human rights? I strongly support the Special
Representative’s anxious calls to the Council to supply
MINUSCA with the capabilities it needs to respond
to its intensely challenging area of operations and the
increasing number of hotbeds of tension. The panel
of facilitators of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic is doing
commendable work under the leadership of Mr. Nébié.
We hope that the consultations will culminate in an
understanding among all the parties to the crisis in
the Central African Republic. The ultimate goal is to
establish dialogue in a calm environment, which is a
sine qua non for a genuine return to peace.
To respond to the remarks by the representative
of France, on behalf of my Government, I would
like to reiterate our sincere gratitude to the troopcontributing countries whose citizens have given their
lives in the cause of peace. I thank all our bilateral and
international partners for their ongoing efforts and
unwavering support to the authorities of the Central
African Republic.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

18-19060
