S/PV.7319

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7319th meeting

Monday, 24 November 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Quinlan .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Sun Lei
Mr. Bertoux
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Tatham
Mr. Pressman

Agenda
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004)

14-64621 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1464621*

S/PV.7319

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
a briefing by Ambassador Oh Joon, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Korea, in his capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Oh Joon.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): In my capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), I am pleased to report to the
Council on progress made in the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) since the last meeting on 28 May
2014.
I would like to begin by noting that this month,
as an exception to the established practice of joint
briefings by the three Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004) and 1267 (1999),
it has been decided that the 1540 Committee would
brief the Council separately. This is due to the specific
circumstance in which the other two Committees have
already briefed the Council at the open debate on
counter-terrorism on 19 November (see S/PV.7316).
Today’s separate briefing will not constitute a precedent
for the future.
Looking back on the work of the 1540 Committee
this year, I would like to once again express my
appreciation for the support given by the Security
Council in the open debate on resolution 1540 (2004)
on 7 May (see S/PV.7169). The strong support for
resolution 1540 (2004) and this Committee, expressed
in presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7 and the
individual statements of more than 60 Member States,
provided an important impetus for our work. The
presidential statement also set out some of the key
areas that the Committee should focus its efforts on in
the years ahead. This provides a valuable guideline for

2/14

24/11/2014

our preparations for the comprehensive review to be
conducted by the end of 2016.
Guided by the presidential statement and the
Committee’s thirteenth programme of work, we
continued to give high priority to encouraging reporting
from those States that have not yet submitted their first
reports. With the support of our Group of Experts, the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs and its
regional offices, three special meetings were held in
Pretoria, Libreville and Lomé, respectively, to engage
the non-reporting States. Through these meetings and
other events, we have engaged directly with 18 of the 21
non-reporting States.
Since the last joint briefing in May (see S/PV.7184),
1540 Committee members and experts have continued
to participate in various outreach events, bringing
the total so far this year to 59. Seven more events are
scheduled for the remainder of this year. The value of
direct interaction with States, in particular visits to
Member States by their invitation, was demonstrated
once again. For example, as a direct result of the visit
to Malawi, that State submitted its first report to the
Committee, reducing the total number of non-reporting
States to 20. The visits to China last month and to the
United Kingdom earlier this month also provided good
opportunities to promote the Committee’s understanding
of these States’ implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and to identify effective practices.
Other direct interactions with States since our last
report have included national round tables with 1540
stakeholders in Cambodia, Colombia, Grenada, Peru
and Trinidad and Tobago. They have helped in the
identification of assistance requirements for capacitybuilding and in the development of voluntary national
implementation action plans. We have had some
valuable regional and subregional events in partnership
with relevant international organizations. For example,
our experts recently participated in three regional
events on nuclear, chemical and biological security
with INTERPOL in Thailand, Ethiopia and Tajikistan.
Last month, I participated in the Regional
Workshop on Promoting Full Implementation of
United Nations Security Council Resolution 1540
(2004) held in Seoul, organized by the Government of
the Republic of Korea in cooperation with the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs (UNODA).
That meeting engaged representatives from more than
30 countries in Asia and other regions, as well as 10

14-64621

24/11/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

relevant international and regional organizations. The
event provided a timely opportunity to discuss ways
to strengthen the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) in the Asian region, as well as to exchange views
on the future strategies ahead of the comprehensive
review to be conducted by the end of 2016.
As part of the efforts to reach out to the private
sector, I participated last week in an international
conference in support of implementing resolution
1540 (2004), hosted in Wiesbaden by the Government
of Germany with the cooperation of the European
Union and UNODA. This was the third event in what
is called the “Wiesbaden process”, led by Germany,
aimed at enhancing dialogue with industry in support
of resolution 1540 (2004). The conference provided an
excellent platform for the sharing of effective practice
among diverse sectors of industry, including nuclear,
chemical and biological security, as well as transport
and export control.
Facilitating matchmaking between assistance
requests and offers remains a priority for the Committee.
Improving the effectiveness of its matchmaking role
will be one of the key areas that the Committee will
focus on in preparing for the 2016 comprehensive
review. As of today, a total of 83 Member States and 13
international organizations have notified their points
of contact. The Committee will continue its efforts
to encourage more nominations of points of contact
and to energize their role. In addition, we also plan to
develop a broader e-mail contact list including not only
the points of contact, but also civil society, including
representatives of industry, academia and the media.
We plan to regularly update these contacts on the
Committee’s activities through quarterly newsletters.
Looking ahead, the 1540 Committee must begin its
work on the comprehensive review of implementation,
as called for in resolution 1977 (2011). We will shortly
start developing a plan for the conduct of the review,
which will be included in the Committee’s fourteenth
programme of work to be submitted to the Security
Council by 31 January 2015. Much of the work I have
outlined would not have been possible without financial
support through contributions to the United Nations
Trust Fund, such as those of Andorra, the European
Union, Kazakhstan, Norway, the Republic of Korea
and the United States. These contributions are vital to
the effort to enhance the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).

S/PV.7319

I would like to conclude by reiterating the
Committee’s commitment to seeking the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). As this will
be my last briefing to the Security Council as Chair
of the 1540 Committee, I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank the Council members, the Group
of Experts and members of the Secretariat for all their
wonderful support during the two years of my country’s
chairmanship of the Committee.
The President: I thank Ambassador Oh for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
thank Ambassador Oh for his briefing. The United
States is grateful for the extraordinary success of his
chairmanship of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). Under his leadership, the
Committee has made significant strides towards the
full and universal implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). The fact that 173 countries have submitted
national reports since the resolution came into effect in
2004 is a strong testament to the global effort to prevent
non-State actors from acquiring and using weapons of
mass destruction.
Under the chairmanship of the Republic of Korea,
the Committee has accomplished most of its ambitious
programme to mark the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004). As Ambassador Oh
has briefed the Council, it has significantly increased
country visits and regional outreach events, boosted the
collection of new and additional reports from States,
and supported the development of new tools to monitor
and promote the implementation of the resolution. In
addition, the Republic of Korea has demonstrated its
commitment to the importance of assistance efforts
by its generous contribution to the United Nations
Trust Fund for resolution 1540 (2004) activities, and
last May held a successful open debate of the Security
Council on the resolution (see S/PV.7169), at which we
adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7, aimed
at fostering the full implementation of the resolution
by 2021.
We have appreciated the Committee’s efforts on
implementation, especially its production of a draft
compendium of effective national practices on the
implementation of the resolution. For countries seeking
to create legislation in line with resolution 1540 (2004),

14-646213/14

S/PV.7319

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the compendium will be an invaluable resource for best
practices, all aimed at our shared goal of preventing
non-State actors from acquiring and using weapons
of mass destruction. But this resource is a living and
evolving document, and we urge Member States and
others to continue to add to its development.
We also appreciate that the Committee included in
the compendium information from the 29 September
United States submission on effective United States
national practices for the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), which describes over 100 concrete
examples of how we implement the resolution. Related
to that, the United States considers monitoring the status
of implementation to be among the most important
tasks of the Committee, as it creates a solid foundation
on which the rest of the work of the Committee can
build.
Despite the good progress, we also note that
the Committee failed to meet its goal, set out in the
thirteenth programme of work, to complete updates
to all national implementation matrices by 31 August,
after having failed to meet a similar goal for 31 May
in the twelfth programme of work. We fully recognize
that the Committee and the Group of Experts pursue
ambitious agendas and that, at times, it has not been
at full force, but we ask that the Committee prioritize
this aspect of its work so that it can acquire and work
from a more comprehensive understanding of the status
of implementation. Doing so is important because the
results will help establish an important baseline for the
comprehensive review in 2016, which will be carried
out by the Committee and the experts. Following
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7 in May, we
believe that the Committee must develop a plan in
the coming months for the conduct of the review. The
Committee can start to develop its plan as we discuss
the next programme of work in January. We hope that
the Committee will find ways to incorporate ideas
from a full range of stakeholders, including Member
States as well as international, regional and subregional
organizations, civil society and industry.
Again, allow me to congratulate Ambassador Oh
Joon and the Republic of Korea for their truly impressive
leadership. Their efforts helped move us forward
on goals we share with respect to strengthening our
non-proliferation work. We also thank the Committee
as a whole and the Group of Experts for their important
work. We look forward to working with the new Chair
starting on 1 January.

4/14

24/11/2014

Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would also like to thank Ambassador Oh Joon and
the entire Mission of the Republic of Korea for all the
work done over the past two years at the head of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). During its chairmanship of the
Committee, South Korea has resolutely advanced the
agenda set out by resolution 1540 (2004).
Today, the overwhelming majority of Member
States have taken steps to translate the provisions of the
resolution into their domestic law, and the Committee
and its Group of Experts continue their outreach efforts
to identify the rare countries that have not yet submitted
reports to the Committee on the implementation of the
resolution with regard to their national legislation. Also
today, most regional and international organizations
have adopted strategies to implement resolution 1540
(2004). We are proud that, since 2004, the European
Union has been among the first to provide support in
that regard.
Finally, the high-level meeting of the Security
Council held on 7 May (see S/PV.7169), which was
presided over by Korean Minister for Foreign Affairs
Yun Byung-se, helped give new impetus to resolution
1540 (2004). The presidential statement adopted on that
occasion (S/PRST/2014/7) serves as a road map today,
especially in view of the comprehensive review of the
implementation of the resolution slated for 2016.
The proliferation of nuclear, radiological,
biological and chemical weapons and their delivery
systems, as well as the risk that they could fall into
the hands of terrorists, continues to represent very real
dangers. Resolution 1540 (2004) plays a vital role in the
prevention of those risks, but much remains to be done.
We remain concerned about the Iranian, North
Korean and Syrian proliferation crises.
With regard to Iran, new ideas were put forward
during the just-concluded negotiations in Vienna.
They must be carefully considered. Achieving a
comprehensive agreement will, in any event, still take
time. France, along with all its partners, has agreed that
the interim agreement reached in Geneva in November
2013 be extended for a limited time. That extension
opens up the possibility of a final solution, while
continuing to meet our immediate concerns on the
Iranian nuclear programme. Our commitment remains
the same: to achieve, if possible, an agreement that is
useful for the purposes of security and peace.

14-64621

24/11/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

With regard to North Korea, it is difficult to
avoid mentioning the recent threats made to conduct
a new nuclear test; whereas we are here talking about
a resolution that aims to combat proliferation. I would
therefore recall that, in the event of new provocations,
Pyongyang would be opening itself up to additional
Security Council resolutions.
These proliferation crises continue to fuel
proliferation flows to areas already marked by regional
crises. We must continue to strengthen international
coordination and operational cooperation in the fight
against such flows, including against illegal exports
of conventional weapons, which for North Korea
represent a source of funding for its nuclear and missile
programmes.
Faced with the danger that terrorists may take
possession of weapons of mass destruction, all
States have the responsibility to strengthen export
controls, mechanisms for preventing the financing
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and securing sensitive materials on their territory. To
respond to this risk, among others, which resolution
1540 (2004) seeks to prevent, France proposed at the
Nuclear Securtiy Summit held in The Hague this year
an initiative aimed at strengthening security over
highly radioactive sources. Fortunately infrequent but
nonetheless disturbing thefts show the need to better
think about safety in order to avoid the disastrous
consequences of their possible use by malicious
individuals or groups.
In that regard, we welcome the adoption in the First
Committee of a draft resolution on the prevention of the
acquisition by terrorists of radioactive sources, which
France introduced this year jointly with Germany.
The draft resolution encourages Member States to
strengthen control over these dangerous sources to
ensure safety and security, particularly with regard to
their management at the end of the life-cycle. It will also,
hopefully, lead to a heightened dialogue on radiological
safety with the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Mr. Sun Lei (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Ambassador Oh Joon for his briefing. China
appreciates the great deal of work done by Ambassador
Oh Joon and his team over the past two years at the
helm of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Currently, the international fight against proliferation
faces a new and complex situation amid the rising trend

S/PV.7319

of non-State entities engaing in proliferation activities.
Prevention efforts are entailing higher costs and
greater difficulties. In the face of the new challenges,
the international community should strengthen the
regulation and control of proliferation at its source,
tackle both the symptoms and the root causes, work
to eliminate the motivation behind proliferation and
address security and development issues in a balanced
manner.
As the first resolution of the Security Council on
the subject of non-proliferation, resolution 1540 (2004)
is of great importance in terms of denying non-State
entities access to nuclear, biological, chemical or
other weapons of mass destruction. It is essential that
all countries, while capitalizing on the opportunities
afforded by the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004), continue to dedicate themselves
to its univeral, full and balanced implemetation.
The Committee has recently done productive
work in boosting international cooperation, expanding
outreach and promoting assistance. China supports
the Committee, in accordance with its mandate, in
continuing its main work of collecting implementation
reports, compiling effective implementation practices
and promoting international assistance and cooperation.
China takes seriously the important roles played by
the 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts. We have
participated with a constructive attitude in the work of
the Committee. Not long ago, as Chair of the Committee,
Ambassador Oh Joon headed a delegation to China.
Comprehensive exchanges of views were conducted on
the implementation of the resolution and the work of
the Committee, with satisfying results. As a reflection
of China’s firm commitment to combat proliferation,
the visit helped to deepen the cooperation between
China and the Committee and its Group of Experts.
China stands ready to work with the various parties to
promote international efforts against proliferation.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to express my gratitude to the Chair
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), His Excellency Ambassador
Oh Joon, for his comprehensive briefing. We also
express our appreciation for the great efforts made by
Ambassador Oh Joon during his country’s chairmanship
of the Committee, which has experienced a great deal
of activity recently — including the open debate held in
May (see S/PV.7169), which resulted in the adoption of
a presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/7), as well as the

14-646215/14

S/PV.7319

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Committee’s participation in 59 outreach activities and
visits to Member States, most recently to the United
Kingdom. The Committee also engaged with 18 States
out of the total 20 that have not yet submitted national
reports, in an effort to achieve reporting universality,
as that continues to be a challenge for the Committee
and its work in future.
The growth in the strength and capabilities of
terrorist organizations and their sources of financing,
as well as their control over vast areas in certain States,
makes the possibility of their use of non-conventional
weapons, including nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, a real danger. That should serve once again
to draw our attention to the major responsibility that
every State has to comply fully with resolution 1540
(2004).
Jordan has taken concrete steps in compliance
with resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent relevant
resolutions, adopting a number of relevant deterrent
and preventative laws at the national level, as well as
implementing effective control measures to monitor
exports and prevent the spread of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their means of delivery.
Jordan has also acceded to a number of international
and regional conventions in that area. I would also
like to underscore that Jordan submitted its third
national implementation report last month, covering
the concrete progress made from 2006 to 2014. In that
context, we also look forward to cooperating with
international partners to prepare for the 2016 Nuclear
Security Summit.
We express our appreciation of the work of the
1540 Committee and the Expert Group in facilitating
assistance, and we look forward to an expansion of
such activities through the Committee’s fourteenth
programme of work, which is scheduled to begin soon.
We urge the Expert Group, in particular, to pay greater
attention to facilitating assistance, closing technical
gaps and building the capacity of States.
We also express our appreciation for the assistance
of States and international organizations that provide
technical and other forms of assistance. We urge donors
to continue providing such support, which benefits
donors and recipients alike in such a way that we could
even call it mutual assistance, taking into consideration
the prevailing security environment in our States. Here,
we underscore the importance of the Committee listing
the Australia Group as a provider of assistance without

6/14

24/11/2014

delay with a view to helping to promote the capacities
of States requiring such support.
As Council members will be aware, the Committee
is preparing for the comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in 2016.
Considering the importance of that review, we propose
that the Committee give serious consideration to the
possibility of creating a fifth working group devoted to
preparations for the comprehensive review.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
thanks the Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), Ambassador Oh Joon, for
his briefing to the Council today. We appreciate the
leadership shown by the Republic of Korea in chairing
the 1540 Committee over the past two years. We also
commend the work carried out by the Expert Group.
The purpose for which resolution 1540 (2004)
was adopted 10 years ago remains fully valid today.
The possibility of non-State actors acquiring weapons
of mass destruction poses a serious challenge to
international peace and security. It was in that context
that Chile handed over to the National Nuclear Security
Administration of the United States in 2010, which
provided significant support, 18 kilos of highly-enriched
uranium that had been situated in our country since the
end of the 1950s. That was the last such material on our
national territory.
Today, our fears focus less on the proliferation of
nuclear weapons and more on the possibility of chemical
or biological weapons falling into the hands of terrorist
groups. That has become clear as a result of conflict in
the Middle East. We are concerned by reports of the
use of chemical weapons by non-State actors on Syrian
and Iraqi territory and the seizure of chemical weapons
storage facilities in those countries by terrorist groups.
Any organization or individual using chemical weapons
must be held accountable for such actions.
All Member States must continue to adopt measure
to safeguard collective security. In particular, we
emphasize the need to fully implement resolution 1373
(2001) in order to prevent and curtail the financing of
terrorist groups.
Chile reiterates the need to strengthen cooperation
in the framework of the commitments pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). For our part, we have
harmonized our domestic legislation and endeavoured
to strengthen national capacities in order to meet the

14-64621

24/11/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

standards of resolution 1540 (2004). Those efforts were
a joint undertaking of our foreign and defence policies.
We have already submitted five reports in that regard.
Today, we are paying close attention to others’
experience, such as through the peer reviews, which
may assist us in clarifying our ideas regarding a
national implementation plan, about which we have
already reported to the Committee. We have repeatedly
stressed the importance of improving export controls,
highlighting the work being done by customs and border
control officers. Officials of those agencies will need
further professional development through workshops
on experiences and practices, focusing on the needs
of each State. In that context, we have participated in
more than 17 joint activities with the Export Control
and Related Border Security Program of the United
States with a view to improving export controls. We
encourage all members of civil society to participate.
Chile remains firmly committed to the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and, more broadly, to the
global non-proliferation and disarmament architecture,
as shown by our participation in the most recent Nuclear
Security Summit. It is imperative that we continue
working together to make progress in the tasks set 10
years ago. In that regard, every State must identify
its weak points and implementation gaps. We attach
particular importance to the comprehensive review of
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) that is to
take place in 2016. My country intends to work actively
over the coming year in the preparation for that review.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Like the previous speakers, I would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea,
Ambassador Oh Joon, for his presentation and for the
dedication shown by him and his team in chairing the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) over the past two years. While this time it was
not possible to hear presentations by the Chairs of all
the Sanctions Committees during a single Council
meeting, Ambassador Oh Joon’s presentation is a
useful complement to the presentations made last
week by the Chairs of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism (see S/PV.7316).
Cooperation, coordination and synergy between the
1540, 1267/1989 and 1373 Committees should continue

S/PV.7319

to be promoted in order to strengthen the fight against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and of their means of delivery continues to
threaten international peace and security. The risk
of terrorists or other non-State actors acquiring,
developing, trading or using such weapons remains
high. It is, therefore, a duty for all Member States to
join forces to minimize that risk. In that respect, the
submission of national reports on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and their regular updating are
important confidence-building measures in the fight
against all types of weapons of mass destruction.
Resolution 1540 (2004) plays a key role in preventing
proliferation, but it will be effective only if all Member
States are determined to implement its provisions.
Country visits and the participation by members of
the 1540 Committee and its Expert Group in such
events as the regional workshop held last month in the
Republic of Korea are essential for raising awareness
among Member States and promoting the universal
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Luxembourg
welcomes the fact that, at present, there remain only
20 Member States that have not yet submitted national
reports. Advocacy efforts must continue to further
reduce that number.
The 1540 Committee also continues to play an
important role as a centre for exchange connecting those
seeking and those providing assistance. The growing
number of exchanges testifies to that. We encourage the
1540 Committee and its Group of Experts to persevere
in their efforts to match requests for and offers of
assistance, and to increase the number of assistance
providers, since demand currently exceeds supply. We
believe that the topic deserves to be among the key
priorities of the 1540 Committee in the context of the
coming first comprehensive review of the status of
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which must
be conducted before December 2016.
The open debate organized by the Republic of Korea
on 7 May under its Council presidency (see S/PV.7169)
gave new impetus to the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). In that context, civil society, industry
and private sector have a key role to play. Several
initiatives have demonstrated the benefit of involving
such stakeholders with the efforts of Governments. As
examples, I will cite the recent conference organized
by Germany, with the support of the European Union,

14-646217/14

S/PV.7319

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

in the framework of the Wiesbaden process, in which
industries participated, or the legislative guide for
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) at the
national level that was published by an independent
non-governmental organization, VERTIC, with the
support of Canada and the United Kingdom. Any new
initiative in that area would be welcome.
In conclusion, I reaffirm the active support of
Luxembourg for the comprehensive implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Nationally, we are pursuing
our efforts to reform our export control system in
order to strengthen national mechanisms to combat the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and related
technologies. As of October 2015, Luxembourg, with the
Netherlands, will assume the annual co-chairmanship of
the Missile Technology Control Regime, demonstrating
our strong commitment to combating the proliferation
of delivery systems for weapons of mass destruction.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me begin by thanking Ambassador Oh Joon for
his briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). I also wish to
congratulate him on the dedicated and excellent work
that he and his predecessor, Ambassador Kim Sook,
whom we fondly recall, have done these past two
years, together with their team. Their excellent work
has been a faithful reflection of a national and personal
commitment to serving the Committee, and of those
who comply with resolution 1540 (2004), whom we
truly respect.
Argentina embraces two pillars of resolution
1540 (2004) as a State policy. The first is respect for
the sovereign right of States to the development and
peaceful use of advanced technologies; the second is
disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. In that regard, I reaffirm once
again the sovereign right to develop and use sensitive,
dual-use technologies and industries, including the
nuclear, chemical, biological, pharmaceutical, outer
space, nanotechnology and other sectors. In Argentina,
such development and use of technologies is undertaken
through State and private interaction. That is the case
INVAP, which develop and exports nuclear facilities
and equipment and control systems related to nuclear
technology. In addition, on 16 October my country
launched the first geostationary satellite produced by a
country of our region, which has already been placed in
geostationary position 81° West.

8/14

24/11/2014

At the same time, Argentina is actively participating
in the international community’s initiatives to achieve a
world free of weapons of mass destruction of all kinds.
It upholds the principle of absolute prohibition of the
development, possession, acquisition, transfer or use of
such weapons by State and non-State actors alike. In
that vein, Argentina is a party to the legal instruments
that are the pillars of disarmament and non-proliferation
as a reflection of its commitment to disarmament
and non-proliferation. It is also a member of the five
control systems for sensitive exports. I note that the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism has already been approved by the
Argentine Congress, and we are in process of ratifying
it. Similarly, as previously mentioned, Argentina has
been involved in the Nuclear Security Summit process
since the outset, and has actively participated in the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism since
2010.
As noted by the Chair of the Committee, presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/7, adopted on 7 May, highlights
the main areas in which the Committee should focus its
work in the coming years, in particular with regard to the
comprehensive review of the status of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) to be undertaken by the end of
2016, and the goal of achieving its full implementation
by 2021. The statement also recognizes that many
Member States still need assistance in implementing
the resolution, which requires skilled human resources,
infrastructure, equipment, and the creation of a culture
of security.
Argentina recognizes the effective contribution
of international cooperation, given that the only
way to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors is through a shared
effort and an equal level of implementation by all States.
In that regard, I recall that Argentina is developing
cooperation activities with countries in our region and
other interested countries in terms of training in the
identification of sensitive merchandise, with a focus
on South-South partnership, and is one of the suppliers
registered with the 1540 Committee.
On the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the
resolution, we believe it necessary to reaffirm that the
significant progress that the international community
has made in physical protection, export control and the
suppression of the illicit traffic in dual-use technologies
will have limited international success so long as

14-64621

24/11/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction continue to
exist.
We reiterate our watchword that we must prevent
weapons of mass destruction from falling into the
wrong hands. Truly, however, we do not know what
the right hands for such weapons would be. Argentina
therefore believes that no country should produce
weapons of mass destruction, and that those that posess
them should eliminate them. To be clear, Argentina is
convinced that the only way to ensure that weapons of
mass destruction do not fall into the wrong hands or
are used in any way is by eliminating them altogether.
Once again, I wish to express my delegation’s thanks to
Ambassador Oh Joon and his marvellous team.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): I wish to thank Ambassador
Oh Joon, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), for his briefing today.
Nigeria knows that not all countries have the
capacity to meet their obligations under resolution 1540
(2004). International cooperation will therefore be vital
to filling the capacity gaps. It is for that reason that
we welcome the importance the Committee attaches
to matching requests for assistance with offers. We
believe that greater effectiveness in making this match
will significantly enhance the capacity of Member
States to comply with their obligations under resolution
1540 (2004). We share the view that the Committee
must begin work on the comprehensive review of
implementation in line with resolution 1977 (2011). We
look forward to seeing the Committee’s plan for the
conduct of the review when its fourteenth programme
of work is submitted to the Council in January 2015.
Our deep appreciation goes to all contributors to
the United Nations Trust Fund that supports the work
of the Committee. We note the importance of those
contributions to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).
We should also be reminded of the vital link between
resolution 1540 (2004) and the total elimination of all
weapons of mass destruction. The continued existence
of these weapons, particularly nuclear weapons,
should lead to discussion on their non-proliferation.
In that context, my delegation wishes to encourage all
States that possess those weapons — and we reiterate,
particularly nuclear weapons — should commit
themselves to disarming and to the total elimination
of such weapons. The Council should not have two
standards — one for those possessing nuclear weapons

S/PV.7319

and other weapons of mass destruction, and another for
others. It is very important for us to have a uniform
approach to the elimination of weapons and to stopping
their proliferation.
As this is the last briefing of Ambassador Oh to
the Council in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the
Nigerian delegation would like to commend him for his
adroit leadership and for his contribution to moving the
non-proliferation agenda forward.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Oh Joon of the Republic of Korea, Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, for his briefing and congratulate him for
his leadership at the head of the Committee for the past
two years. I also thank the expert group of the 1540
Committee for its remarkable work.
Chad welcomes the 1540 Committee’s achievements,
in particular the holding of three special meetings in
Africa for countries that have not yet submitted their
first report, and the organization of 59 awarenessraising activities around the world. Further, Chad
wishes to thank the 1540 Committee and the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs for having
facilitated the participation of two of those experts at
the regional conference on the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), organized in Seoul in October.
Chad reiterates its commitment to working towards
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and calls
for heightened dialogue between the 1540 Committee
and the 20 States Members that have not yet submitted
their reports. In that regard, we ask the Committee to
focus more on those States, 16 of which are in Africa,
through awareness-raising activities and visits to the
countries concerned. Chad fully supports the activities
of the 1540 Committee and eagerly awaits the general
review of the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) requested by the Security Council in resolution
1977 (2011).
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
congratulations to Ambassador Oh Joon and his entire
team for the excellent work accomplished under the
Korean chairmanship.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to start
by thanking Ambassador Oh Joon of the Republic of
Korea, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), for his presentation of the

14-646219/14

S/PV.7319

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

progress report on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). Rwanda commends the Committee
and its Group of Experts for their continued efforts
in ensuring that non-State actors do not develop,
acquire, manufacture or use nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons. We appreciate the efforts made
by the Committee, particularly in improving outreach
programmes and its own visibility.
Recalling the Committee’s objective of achieving
universal reporting, and as underscored by the
presidential statement of 7 May 2014 (S/PRST/2014/7),
we note with satisfaction the priority given by the
Committee to encouraging States that have not yet
submitted their first reports to do so. In that regard,
we welcome the holding of the three special meetings
in Pretoria, Libreville and Lomé, as well as the visits
to Member States by their invitation, and we hope that
the remaining 20 non-reporting States will soon submit
their national implementation reports.
Rwanda is among the Member States that have
fulfilled their reporting obligations, and we did so
in 2011 thanks to the outreach of the Committee and
the Group of Experts at that time. We will continue
to ensure the implementation of the report within
our borders and in our region, and we encourage all
Member States to cooperate in identifying effective
practices, experiences and lessons learned that would
contribute to the development of a long-term vision and
strategy for the effective implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).
We are concerned about capacity gaps in the
technical, financial and legal frameworks within our
States in dealing with issues related to the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. Rwanda therefore
welcomes the commitment of the 1540 Committee to
ensuring the effectiveness of the matchmaking role
between assistance requests and offers. We also support
the Committee’s commitment to increasing the number
of focal points of contact between Member States and
international organizations, which currently stands
at 79. We are of the view that both the matchmaking
between assistance requests and the increase of points
of contact will greatly contribute to the universal
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
In that regard, I welcome the organization by the
African Union Commission, in collaboration with
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa,
of a training workshop for national points of contact,
10/14

24/11/2014

held last week on 18 and 19 November in Addis
Ababa. The objective of the training workshop was
to impart practical information, skills and guidance
on the obligations of Member States under resolution
1540 (2004), as well as the role and responsibilities
of national points of contact. During the workshop,
Member States also shared best practices on how to
draft voluntary national action plans, develop and
implement legislative and other control measures, and
prepare national reports on implementation.
Before I conclude, I would recall the strong link
that exists between terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. We therefore stress
the need for continued cooperation between the 1540
Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, as well as the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, in order to
put in place an integrated and comprehensive strategy
against those two scourges that constitute the most
dangerous threat to international peace and security. In
that regard, we reiterate our call to all Member States
for universal denuclearization.
Finally, since this is probably the last briefing
by Ambassador Oh Joon in his capacity as Chair
of the 1540 Committee, Rwanda commends his
strong leadership, as well as that of his predecessor,
Ambassador Kim Sook, over the past two years on
the issue of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. That was demonstrated by the Committee’s
extensive outreach activities under the chairmanship of
the Republic of Korea, as well as the successful highlevel open debate held in May this year (see S/PV.7169)
and presided over by Minister for Foreign Affairs Yun
Byung-se, to mark the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004) and give new impetus to its
implementation. I am convinced that with the legacy
of the Republic of Korea, including the presidential
statement of 7 May (S/PRST/2014/7), the Committee is
in a better position to conduct a well-informed strategy
aimed at achieving full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), which will be incorporated into the
Committee’s comprehensive review, to be submitted to
the Security Council before December 2016.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): The risk of weapons
of mass destruction getting into the hands of non-State
actors remains a constantly evolving threat that must
be countered by concerted international action, with

14-64621

24/11/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

greater robustness, determination and vigilance and
with every State doing its part. Nowadays, terrorist
groups and illicit networks turn to indiscriminate
violence of unthinkable magnitude, and to achieve their
heinous aims they seek to acquire nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons.
In its presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7, the
Security Council reaffirmed its continuing support for
resolution 1540 (2004) and the Committee established
pursuant to it. It set out clear guidelines for the
Committee’s future activities, including on developing
a strategy aimed at achieving the resolution’s full
implementation and enhanced assistance to Member
States. It also called for enhanced cooperation among
relevant Council committees and for coordination of
its non-proliferation work with other international,
regional and subregional organizations. Furthermore,
it encouraged the Committee to draw on relevant
expertise, including from civil society, industry and the
private sector. All those elements, geared to improved
implementation of the resolution, should be key areas
in the Committee’s focus in preparing for the 2016
comprehensive review.
Lithuania has been a constant and dedicated
supporter of resolution 1540 (2004) since its adoption.
We submitted our initial report on its implementation
in 2004 and have continued to provide comprehensive
regular updates, most recently in November 2013. In
September, in consultation with the Group of Experts,
we finalized a 1540 matrix aimed at further enhancing
national implementation. A number of workshops
were held in Lithuania with an emphasis on the main
elements of prevention and detection of and response
to illicit trafficking of chemical, biological and nuclear
materials.
As was again reaffirmed by the 2014 Nuclear
Security Summit in The Hague, strengthening nuclear
security and preventing terrorists, criminals and other
unauthorized actors from acquiring nuclear materials
will remain one of our most important challenges in
years to come. We look forward to a successful Summit
in Chicago in 2016. As part of its obligations assumed
at the Nuclear Security Summit in Seoul, Lithuania,
through its Nuclear Security Centre of Excellence,
is working to increase the capacities of national and
regional experts to counter nuclear smuggling and
improve the nuclear security culture. Nearly 700 experts
have been trained so far, including officials from
Georgia, Ukraine, Armenia and Moldova. Lithuania is

S/PV.7319

committed to expanding its international cooperation
in this field.
Lithuania recognizes the need for universal and
comprehensive reporting under the resolution, with the
aim of identifying shortcomings and challenges that
States may face while implementing it. Malawi’s recent
submission of its first report and request for assistance
shows the importance of direct contacts and cooperation
with States. The Committee and its Group of Experts
should further ensure continued direct interaction with
all States in implementing the goals set out in resolution
1540 (2004). The Group of Experts of the 1540
Committee should continue specific country visits and
participate actively in non-proliferation-related events.
While further strengthening its role as a clearing
house in facilitating matchmaking between assistance
requests and assistance available, the 1540 Committee
should also seek to expand the base of assistance
providers, especially in the field of export controls,
which should be open to all assistance providers
expressing a wish to contribute to the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Lithuania also encourages
the Committee to engage more actively with industry,
civil society, academia and the private sector. In that
regard, it is important that the Committee compile
effective practices and make them available to all
interested actors.
The Committee would also benefit from future
synergies with other Council bodies dealing with
issues related to the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery. Lithuania
would therefore encourage closer interaction among
relevant Committees and their groups of experts, such as
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) on the Islamic Republic of Iran, the CounterTerrorism Committee and the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities.
Finally, I would like to finish by expressing our great
appreciation for the efforts of the Republic of Korea as
Chair of the 1540 Committee, and to Ambassador Oh
Joon personally for his tireless work and commitment
to achieving universal and full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

14-6462111/14

S/PV.7319

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I will start where
the representative of Lithuania ended, by thanking
Ambassador Oh Joon and the Republic of Korea for
their strong leadership of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) over the past two
years. Their engagement and drive has been essential
to the work of this important Committee.
The year 2014 marks the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1540 (2004). It is an important milestone.
The instability currently seen around the world only
strengthens the need for robust controls on all chemical,
biological and nuclear materials. We have to prevent
any proliferation to non-State actors. With even better
national reporting, an increased focus on effective
implementation and the promotion of best practices in
tackling proliferation risks, the 1540 Committee can go
on to make an even greater contribution.
States continue to demonstrate their firm
commitment to implementing resolution 1540 (2004).
The submission in 2014 of the first-ever national reports
from Malawi, Lesotho, Liberia and South Sudan has
reduced the number of non-reporting States to 20.
Further submissions of new updates to national reports
and voluntary national implementation action plans are
also welcome. Resolution 1540 (2004) retains one of
the highest rates of reporting compliance, but we have
not yet achieved universality of reporting. The final
yards can sometimes be the hardest, but also the most
important. I urge those States that have yet to submit
such reports to do so without delay.
Under the Republic of Korea’s able leadership
the Committee has rightly focused on effective
implementation practices. The information the Group
of Experts intend to provide on country matrices will
be an invaluable resource to the Committee in fulfilling
its vital function of matching offers and requests for
assistance.
The United Kingdom continues to play its part in
supporting and promoting best practices. We hosted the
delegation of Committee members and experts earlier
this month on its first visit to the United Kingdom.
We look forward to the report of the Group of Experts
on the visit and encourage more States to engage the
1540 Committee in its outreach functions. As part of
the wider visit to the United Kingdom, my Government
additionally teamed up with Chatham House and
King’s College, London, to host a conference on the
challenges and opportunities presented by the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1540 (2004). This attracted
12/14

24/11/2014

participation from 70 non-proliferation practitioners
from Government, academia and civil society, and
was opened by Virginia Gamba, Director and Deputy
High Representative of the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs.
The continuing relevance of resolution 1540
(2004) to evolving proliferation risks, such as so-called
intangible transfers of technology and information that
could be used to build and deliver weapons of mass
destruction, emerged as a key theme from that event’s
discussions. As we approach the comprehensive review
of the resolution in 2016, I encourage the Committee to
continue to be bold in its ambitions in response to the
proliferation threats we must face together.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Oh Joon, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Korea, for his briefing
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). In view of the fact that this is
his final briefing as Chairman of the Committee, we
would like to thank the Ambassador and the entire
Korean delegation on their leadership of this subsidiary
body of the Council for the past two years.
We cannot fail to mention the useful work of the
Group of Experts in providing substantive support to
the Committee. A recent milestone was the convening
on 7 May of the Council’s high-level open debate on
the theme of non-proliferation (see S/PV.7169). We
held a thorough discussion on a wide range of topics
related to preventing weapons of mass destruction
and their systems of delivery from falling into the
hands of non-State actors. Our agreed presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/7 will serve as a guideline for
the 1540 Committee’s work in the period leading to the
comprehensive review in 2016.
All of us, as responsible members of the international
community, have common long-term interests in
non-proliferation. One of the major challenges is to
achieve the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) by all countries. We note that in resolution
1540 (2004), all three categories of weapons of mass
destruction — nuclear, chemical and biological — are
integrally linked, confirming the equal danger of any
of them falling into the hands of terrorists. For the
past 10 years, a good deal has been done to implement
that legally binding international document. The
vast majority of United Nations Member States have
submitted their first implementation reports. However,
much remains to be done. The delivery of technical
14-64621

24/11/2014

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

assistance to States remains a priority of the Committee’s
work. It is of vital importance that the 1540 Committee
be able to effectively implement its functions as
central coordinator of global implementation efforts
to implement the resolution and to identify goals and
priorities.
Russia, for its part, will continue to participate
actively in that work. In that context, we call for
attention to be directed to countries that have not yet
submitted their first national reports. We look forward
to constructive and productive cooperation with all
partners in the interests of the fuller implementation
of the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004) so as to
prevent weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery from falling into the hands of non-State actors,
especially terrorists. In our view, the objectives of the
resolution have never been more relevant.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Australia.
At the outset, I wish to thank Ambassador Oh
Joon for his report. Let me convey Australia’s deep
appreciation for the Republic of Korea’s energetic
leadership and his own of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) during its Council
term, and for the Republic of Korea’s contribution to
global non-proliferation more broadly. Last month,
Australia attended the regional workshop in Seoul
to which Ambassador Oh referred. The workshop
was valuable for exchanging lessons learned in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004) and in identifying
what we need to do regionally and globally to keep up
with the evolving proliferation threat. We encourage
the Committee in the future to continue the active
advocacy and outreach that the Republic of Korea has
undertaken.
Sadly, as we mark the tenth anniversary year of
resolution 1540 (2004), the threat of non-State actors
acquiring weapons of mass destruction is as real as ever.
Expanded international trade and financial linkages,
greater scope for intangible technology transfer and
technological advances themselves have increased
the challenge of proliferation to both non-State actors
and States. It is therefore all the more urgent that all
States fulfil their obligations to implement resolution
1540 (2004), seeking assistance when they need it and
strengthening regional and international cooperation to
starve proliferators of items, expertise and finance.

S/PV.7319

The comprehensive review of the forward strategy,
as requested by the Council in May, will be vital to
accelerating implementation, to ensuring that the
international community is meeting the evolving
threat, and to enhancing the role of the Committee.
The Committee must always strive to enhance its
accessibility, productivity and effectiveness. A living
points-of-contact network is a welcome initiative. I
should like to identify three areas where we can improve
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
First, it is vital that we continue to improve the
linkages between the 1540 Committee and other
relevant Security Council Committees, United Nations
instruments and multilateral non-proliferation and
export control regimes. The considerable expertise that
rests in those agencies and arrangements can help with
resolution 1540 (2004) implementation, for example by
providing control lists that can form the basis of national
export controls. Earlier this year, in our capacity as
Chair of the Australia Group, members wished us to
advise the Committee that the Australia Group is
ready to provide assistance upon request to support
the implementation of export controls for chemical and
biological transfers. As the representative of Jordan has
pointed out today, such assistance is needed.
Secondly, increasing outreach to industry and the
private sector is crucial to effective export controls.
Australia’s experience in implementing an industry
code of practice for chemical precursors has reinforced
for us that when industry and the private sector
understand the threats surrounding proliferation, they
can be valuable partners rather than adversaries in
countering proliferation. The Wiesbaden process also
reinforces that fact.
Thirdly, we need to assist developing countries in
implementing their 1540 obligations and to ensure that
such assistance is practical and coordinated. Australia
has been working with countries in our own region, as
well as in the Caribbean and in Africa through Kenya,
to build capacity and to leverage the links between
security and development. Detecting and combatting
illicit trafficking in weapons of mass destruction can
also aid in the prevention of small arms, drugs and
wildlife trafficking. For that reason, the Council and its
Committees should look to provide more coordinated
outreach, advice and support across non-proliferation,
counter-terrorism and sanctions obligations. The
Caribbean Community’s regional focal point has

14-6462113/14

S/PV.7319

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

demonstrated how this coordinated approach can be
effectively delivered in the field and how that can ease
the burden on smaller States.
In conclusion, Australia will continue to support
the work of the 1540 Committee. We must close the
gaps in implementation, and we must stay ahead
of technological advances and the techniques of
proliferators.

14/14

24/11/2014

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

14-64621
