.t

&CO

,

4

IQ

Such contrapositions nmy. cause perpl~ty;
Cette, contradiction •peut surprendre les gens
andmisunderstandiIigamong ~e politically
qui inanquent d'experience politique. En fait, il
uninitiated, .whereas in this case,. there is no' n'y aaucune contradiction. Il n'y a pas lieu d'opcontradiction whatever and to set these two
poserl'un a I'autre le systeme de securite et le
propositions _inoppositioIl~is wrOlig, beca1lSe the
desannement, car la reductiol;l des armements et
des force~ armees estl'ull des elements essentiels
reduction of armaments and armed.forces is one
of the essentiaielements in the creation of secnrde la securite, de cette securite quirepond aux
ity, in which all the peace-loving nations' are
interets de tous les peuplespacifiques. L'accominterested. This is precisely the· task with •. which
pllssem.ent de. cetti:':. tache· faitegalement l'objet
the resolution of· the General Assembly of
de la. resolution de l'Assemblee generale en date
14 December 1946 is concerned~ The regulation •~du 14 decembre 1946. Oune sauraitseparc-.!' la
arid reduction of armaments and armed foices is . reglementation des· armements et des' forces
not something apart from the process "p(creat:'
anneesde la creationd'un "systeme de securite"
ing a "system of security'·' with the :necessary . dote de toutes les garanties necessaires et les lier
s·afeguardS. It is a constituent and inseparable
d'une fa~on organique a la securite et aux garanpart in the creation of security and the n~ces.. : ties necessaires pour'son maintien; C'est ainsi, que
sarysafeguards for its maintenance. That is how, se pose:la question. Qu'ilexiSte unecontradicthe matter stands in reality. Any assertion'that tion entre les propositions de reduire les armethere is any contradiction between the de!Dands .. ments et les forces armees, cl'une part; et de creer
and. proposals for the ·reduction of armaments
un "systeme de securite"· dote dE garanties neces.and armed forces .and the ·~ablishment of a
saires, d'autre part, cette affinna,tion ne soutient
"system of security" and the necessary safegriardS : pas l'analyse. La contradiction· n'est ici qu'une
does not bear criticism. The contradictioriisarti- ' fiction, un artifice, e11e n'a aucune existence
ficial, far-fetched and non-existent in reaJ.ity;
reelle. De telles affirmations ne font que troubler
Such assertions merely confuse the situation and· ' la situation. et rendent plus difficile la bonne
thereby prevent aright understanding of .the
intelligence du probleme.·· .
'. •.. ,' '...
' ,
"
question.
I wish to conclude my statem~nt: by pointing
Pour conclure, je veux rappeler que les peuples
out that the peoples who are anxious to estabqui desireritetablirune paix durable et une secu."
lish durable peace and to create real security "will
rit~ reellene jugeront pas des progr~s realises
judge the progress of the United Nations in
par lesNations ,Uniesdans l'application de la
implementing the General Assembly's resolution
resolution de l'AssembIee generale du 14 decem, of,14 December 1946, not by the statements
bre 1946,d'apres les declarations par lesquelles
m~de by the representative of this or that coun-:les membres du' Conseil veulent teinoigner Jeur
desir' de donner effet a cette· resolution. Les
try .in the' Security Council about -desiring to
implement this resolution, but by the actionS of peuples jkgeront d'apres les' actes; ils jugeront
these countries, how far these actions are in fact
'clans· quelle .mesure les actesde Ces pays contridireCted towards the implementation of the decibuent a ]amise en pratique de la: resolution de
sion of the General Assembly, which may, if it
l'Assemblee; resolution qui, si elle.est app~quee
is implemented as it should be, play a great part
conuneilcoilvient, pourra jouer .un grand role
dans l'etablissement d'une pabc dlU'able et de la
in the building up of durable peace and international security.
securite internationale. '
I

The PRESIDENT: (transltiled from French):'
As I still have several_speakers on my list, i pro,pose to adjourn the meeting until 3 o'clock this
afternoon.

Le PRESIDll:NT:Etant donne queplusieul'S
orateurs restentinscrits, je 'proIJOse de suspendre
la seance jusqu'a 15 heures.

The meeting rose at 1.3(Jp.m. ..

La seance est levee a13 h. 30~

NINETY-NINTH MEETING

QUATRE-VINGT:"DIX-NEUVIEME SEANCE,

Held at Lake Success, New Yor1c,
on Tuesday; 4 February'1947; at 3 p.m;

_ Tenu~ a Lake Succe,fs, New-York; ,
le mardi 4 fevrier 19~7, a15·hfJure.s. .

' . '

.

President: Mt.M. F. VAN LANGENHOVE
(Belgium). .

Prlsident: M. M. F. VAN UNGENHOVE
.; (Belgique).

, Presen"t: The representatives of the fo1l9':Ving
countries: .Australia, .Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia,. France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representa,nts des pays ~uivants:
AllStra}ie, Belgique, Bresil" ChiIJ,~, Cololllhie,
Franc:;e, Pologne~ Syrie, Union desRepubliques
soci~tessovi~tiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats~Unis
d'Amerique. . ,.
,.

38. Continuation of the discussion' on the
seneral .regulation and reduction' of
armaments'
,

38.' Suite de la discussion 5ur:la reglementationetla r~du~ion gen~rale!r'des
armements
.

The PRESIDENT ·(translated from French):
The meeting is called to order. Icall:,on the
representative of Australia.

est

Le PRESIDENT: 'Lase~nce
puverte. La;
parole est au representant de l'Australie..
"

Q

•

un

M. HASLUCK (Anstralie) (traduitde l'anMr. l!A.SLUCK (Australia): On behalf of the
glais) :, Au nom de la delegation australienne, je
Australian delegation, I should like to comment
voudrais faire ql1.elques remarques sur les trois
,on the three different aspects of the question
aspects
differents de la 'question qui-nous occupe.
before us. The first aspect is what we call the
En pr~mier lieu, il y a ce que j'appellerai l'aspect
"parliamentary" question, and in regard to that
"parlementaire", et a. ce propos je me contenI do not wish· to say any more than is sufficient
terai de preciser que le Conseil desecurite est
to make, it clear that the Australian resolution
. toujours saisi de la resolution australienne.
is still to be considered as before the Council.
La resolution qu'a presentee, ce matin, le reThe second aspect is that raised by the submission this morning, by the delegation of the presentant des Etats-UIris d'Amerique constitue
le deuxieme aspect de la question. Grace a.l'amaUnited States of America, of a new r~solution.
bilite de la delegation des Etats-Unis,nous avons
Through the courtesy of the United ,States delepris connaissance du texte de cette resolution il,
gation, we had the opportunity of seeing the text
y ,a quelques jours) 'et nous avons pu consulter
of that resolution some days ago) and hence of
notre o-ouvemement.Il resulte de'cette consulta-.
consulting ,our Government. Following that contion que le Gouvernemerit australien nepeut ap.:
sultation, I, have to state that the" Australian
puyer la resolution des Etats-Unis sous la forme
Government cannot support the United States
ou elle est presentee.
resolution as it stands at present.
The reason why we cannot support the
Notry attitude negative s'exp!ique par le fait
United States resol~tion is that, in our estimaqu'a. notre avis" radoption de cette resolution,
tion, the practical effect of the adoption of that
sous sa forme actuelle,aurait pour consequence,
resolution ifr its present- form would be, firstly,
en premier lieu, d'accorder la priorite a l'examen du premier rapport de la ,Commission de
to give priority to the consideration of the First
Report of the Atomic Energy. Commission, and
l'energie ,atomique, et il .est parfa.itement evident
it is quite, plain' that the Council is not going to
ql.te le Conseil n'avancera pas dans ses travaux
make any progress if we try to establish priorities
si nous essayons d'etabIir d~ prioritesdanscedo.,.
maine. En second lieu; le resultat pratique serait
in that way. Further, the practical effect would
be, in our estimation, to defer the commenceun retard, a. notre avis,dans le travail que nous
ment' of, work, directeli ,towards the general
devops entteprenlire, en vue de la regle.menta. tion et de la reducnongenerales des armements.
reduction ·and:regulationof ~aments.
.
'We also believe that the resolution is unsuitNous estimQnsegalement que cette resolution
able 'because we cannot see ,any necessity to
estinaeceptable, parCe qu'il nons parait' llutile
establish, a comm~.ttee !o make ,preliminary
de creer un comite qui serait charge, de determistudi,es regarding, the work to be done by .the
ner les fonctions de la future commission. Il nous
proposed commis~ion, and it seems to us that to semble que sa creation serait de nature a. retartake, the step of establishing the committee will
der nos travaux. D'autre part, le Conseil, de
result 'in some delay. Further, it should be possisecurite devrait pouvoir creer lui-meme:cette
ble for the Security Council itself tu establish
commission, en fixer la composition et determithe commission, to decide on its membership
ner son maildat sans' avoir recours pourcela a.' un
and to agree on its terms of- reference, .without comite special.
necessarily setting up a special committee for the
.,
purpose.Another reason why we do not feel that the
Une autre raison pour laquelle le projet de
United States draft resoltltion exactly meets the
resolution present~ par 'la delegation des Etatsneeds of the ,Council' at the moment is that it
Unisne' nous semble pas repon<ire exactement,
omits any ref~rence to ,other urgent matters,
a.'l'heure actuelle, aux. besoins du Conseil est
particularly to matters requiring the attention
qu'elle ne mentionne pas les autres questions urof the" Military Staff Committee, which were
gentes, et plus particulierement les questions soureferred' to in' the', resolution of, the General
mises a. l'examen du Comite d'etat-major et qui
AsseIp~ly of 14 December.
figurent dans la resolution de I'Assemblee gener?le du 14 decembre.
The'Australian delegation agrees that the
La delegation, australienne est d'accord pC)l,lJ;
matters. rela$g,tothe control of atomic energy
que l'on aborde imm~diatement les que$tions
should be proceeded with immediately, but we
relatives all, contrOle de l'energie atomique, mais
also believe that action to that end should not in
~lle croit aussi qu,'une action dansce domaine ne
any' way delay the cOnSideratioIl., concurrently
de,vrait, en aucune fa~on, retarder l'examen si~.
and on parallel lines; of other matters which the
multane et parallele .des autres, questionssou,~
General Assembly has asked the Security Counmises par I'Assemblee generale al'examendu
cil to examine. It 'seems to us that some of the
Conseil de securite. 11 nous semble donc que pIu;.
specific objections to paragr~phs 2 and 3 or' the sieurs qes .objections prtkisessoulevees, ce matin,
United States resolution, which were raised this
par le representant de I'Union sovietique au
morning by the representative, of the' Soviet sujet des paragraphes2 et 3 de la resolution des
Union were very cogent and convincing., .
EtatS-Unis, ,sont tres congrues et con'Vaincantci.
.
. Having said that,' I· should like to make, clear
. Cela dit,'et 'pour que notre attitude presente
our views regarding certain controversial aspects
ne donne pas lieu a. un malentendu, je voudrais
of th,e control of atomic energy and the. regulapreciser l'opinion de la delegation australienne
tion and reduction of armaments, in' order that sur certains'aspects discutes· du probleme du
b there should be no mis1ll1derstanding, about our controle de l'energie atomique et de la reglemeno

;;

t.

pg

iUS

present position~' III the first' place, AuStralian
_views regarding the recorrunendations· contained
in·the First Report of the Atomic Energy ComIirission have not changed in the least since we
supported. the .adoption of those recommendations in the Atomic Energy Commission, and
the ~ttitude which we _have expressed regarding
the United States resolution does nofin any way
reflect our views· regarding the 'content of .the
Atomic Energy Commission's report. .

42 4

tation et de la reduction ,des :armements. En
premier lieu, notre avis sur les recommandations
qui figurent dans le rapport de la Commission
de l'energie atomique n'ont pas change du tout
depuis que·nous ~l.Vons appuye l'adoption de ces
recommandatioiIs au sein meme de la Commission de l'energie atomlque:. Notre attitude a
l'egard de la resolution des Etats-Unis n'affecte
nuIlement .notre position en ce qui concerne la
tell!~Ur du rapport de la Commission de l'energie
.'
'.'
atonnque.
En second lieu, mon pays apprecie a sa juste
valeur la noble attitude des Etats-Unisd'Amerique. En effet; alors qu'il detient en ce moment
d'enormes puissances destructives, ce pays a declare de son plein. gre qu'il etait dispose a y
ren.oneer afui cl'assurer la paix du monde. Notre
divergence de vues .avec le representant des
Etats-Unis d'Amerique sur une question de procedure ne signifie pas que nous ayons le moins duo
monde oublie l'empressement que ce pays a
manifeste aservir le bien-etre de l'humanite.

. Secondly, I should like to say that the Australian Government has a proper appreciation' of
the nobility of action of the United States of
Anierica, which, being possessed· at this moment
in. history .of an enormous power of destruction,
has-voluntarily 'expressed its 'Yillingness to sur-.
rC?nder that power in order to serve the cause of
world, peace, The fact that we do not· agree now
With, the United States proposals regarding
method does not mean that we have forgotten,
in the leaSt, the readiness of the United States
of Amenca to serve the good of mankind.
, T should also 'like to say that we are fully
Nous sommes aussi parfaitement comcients
aware of the very specJaI problems which face des problemes tres particuliers qui se posent. pour
great· Pow,ers when. they, approach the question . les grandes Puissances, des qu'eUes·abordent la
6fdisarmament, It is true that disaimament is question du desarmement. liest certain que cette
a question that affects~the'lives and the interest question affecte la vie et les ~terets· des peuples
of,peoples from· all parts of ,the world, whether detoutesles parties du monde, qu'ils vivent ou
they live in powerful countries or in countries non dans un: pays puissant. Toutefois, nous corn;.
which are not so powerful. But, at the same prenons bien que la position des grandes Puistirrie, we do see that the great Power is in a sances est tout a fait sp&iale. En effet, il est
special position. The yielding of even a small dur, pour ces Puissances, de ceder ne fut-ce
part of their strength is a step which the strong qu'une niinime partiede leur force; nous ne
usually' find .very hard to take, and we do not '~omptons pas· voir les grandes Puissances renonexpect any great Power to hand over its weapons cer a leurs armements avant que les autres
before other nations do the same. We stand firm nations ne l'aient fait. Nous sommes decides a
on the policy which will surround the reduction soutenir fermement Iapolitique qui etablira des
and regulation' of ~ and control of atomic garantie efficaces et. realisables pour la reglemenenergy with effective and enforce~ble sa~eguards. tation et la reduction des armenients ainsi que
We do not expect any nation to commit suicide lecontrole de I'energie atomique. Nous ne
for public benefit.,
demandons ~ aucun pays de se suicider poUf le
bien de I'Iiumamte: .
.
That is all we wish to say on the second aspect
Voila ceque je voUIais dire en ce qui concerne
of the question-~amely, the aspect which haS le deuxieme aspect du probleme souleve' par la
been bt:ought before us by the s~bmission of the nouvelle resolution. des Etats-Unis .d'Amerique.
new resolution of the United States of America.
. Je voulais .faire, en. passant, que1ques re. I:shoUId like,however, to ~akesome passing
remarks about the general situation in which the marques generales sur la situation devarit laSecUrity Council now finds itself. You yourself, quelle se trouve le Conseil de securite. VousMr. President, made what· I would venture to meme, Monsieur le President, avez tres u#}ecall a very useful sunimary of the points of ment resume, a mon sens, les points sur lesquels
agteementwhich exist in tIlls Council; and lIes membres du Conseil de securite sont d'accord;
think that summary was particularly .usefUl be- votre resume etait d'autant plus· utile q~e vous
cause it dll-ected attention to the fact that there avez souligne le fait que l'accord existait au
is . a very substantial measure of agreement COnSeil sur un nombre import~nt de questions.
among all the members of this Council.
I would also venture to say ~ha~ I think the
J e me permettrai d'ajouter que les quatre
fo~ points which you ~ention in your summary
points qt;le vous avez mentionnes ~:lails v.otre
are p6fl:1ts which, all members of' the Council expose sont acceptables, a mon aviS, pour t,ous
accept. So far as our delegation is concerned,
les membres, du Conseil.- Pour ce qui est ,de la
w~ certainly can accept t~em. But· ha:ving said
delegation australienne, elle les accepte certa~e­
that; 'Iperinit myself to wonder whether or not ment. Cela dit, je me demande toutefois si
the existence of agreement on those four ,points l'existence cl'un· accord sur ces quatre points est
really resolves the' particular difficulty' which is vraiment de nature a resoudre la difficulte partifacing us at thIs,moment.
culiere devant laquelle nous nous t~oUV01:lS en ce
moment.
.. Ce qui retarde, selonnous, Jes travaux d~
, .It s_e~ms .to us 'th~t ·\vha~. is !mpeding the
progress of the SecUrity Council is not theConseil de securite, ce n'est pas la 'question de .....
_._U••II·lIlt••1l:".!ll!l··. ...
mll.II
..
II.II!lIllJiIlllIt!!!lliI.IIIII1I1.IUIIIliILM!iJIIlllllllbII
••
IIII1l1I1I1. ..lilIlllillllllib. . . . . ,..'•..........
1 __.".IiIIIlIilillIIi_ _
iiliI:llTIiIl·

"" ~""""'Y"'!...

1 . . . . . _ _. . . . . . . . . ._
..
. _. . . . .
·

_ .

n
..-------..

_-1l1..

Pi!• • •

---"i6~g~-.;a--------------

m:~asure of agreement, but the practical steps that

We should' :now take; and particularly the very

next step we should take, in order . to give effect
to that agreement. It would be possible for us
to find even more points of agreement than those
yoU" enumerated. There is the resolution' of 'the
General Assembly which has 'been formally
accepted by' this Council~ and that resolution reveals' that every one of us fully accepts 'a; number
CIf poin~ in. relation to both' the control of
atomic' tinex:gy,and the g~m~ral·. rediu:non' and
regulation 'of armaments. ,Where we 'differ 'seems
to be on a very small point: What do .we 'do
next? At the risk of perhaps over-simplifying
the matter, I should like to consider that point
in particular.
I trust the' representatives of the United States

of Americ'a. and bf the Soviet Union will excuse
me . if," ,in what I say, I' refer perhaps rather
p-ointedly to them. 'But the truth of the matter
is that those two delegations are the ones which
hitherto ~ave been the only ones' to reveal any
major difference of opinion" regardiiig this next
step which the Council 'has',1'low to take.' It' has
occurred, '1 am ' sure, to several 'of' their col'"
teagues;and it' has certainly occuz:red to our
de}egatio~, that)t might be possible to find a
ftuddle way' whlch would, be acceptable to both
d£ them.
,.. , ' : "
, , .'
,
"It was in an endeavouttofiiid such a middle
way that, at an earlier session; the representat.ive
of France submitted a ·resolution..SllriiJ.arly, in:
an en4eav.our to find a middle way, the representative of Australia also p~esehted <f'1"esnllltion.,
Boththese;resolutions are110w;befdre you. As
the representative of Austdtliasaidwhen intro4ucing the. Australian resolut~op., w~. 'are not
prepared 'at this moment ta adopt '~ither the
resolution "of the Soviet'Union' or that of the
United States' of America. 'We do riot feel that
there is 'lany useful' purpose to be' served by
going' aHead with either of, those two great
Powers. What we want to be able to do is to
go aheanwith both of them together.
," Having' listened very' carefully to the two
speeches mad~ this morning, :I must confesstd
some puzzlement .as to what is the real difficulty
which prevents t~em from going' ahead. If my
colleagues will excuse me for speaking in a way
that is simple and direct, and that' claiths no
other merit except 'simplicity and di.t~ctness, it
seems to me that the true cause of the trouble
is simply a lack of confidence, and that a good
deal of' our tardiness in making up our minds
~egaraing the method which we are to adopt
appears 'to :be a fear that if such. and such a
method were adopted, the resijlt might be that
one of us might lower his fistS while the other
relpained hi,a threatening attitude. Now,. how
can w,e rebuild the cQnfideQce that is 'necessary
irl order th!tt w~ may act together? .
: You yourself, Mr.. President,and ,other
sp~akers, have referred to the pleasure 6fagreeinent between us. It Seems to us' that if we reexamine, dir~ctly the po~n~ onwlrlch we ~e'in
agr~emen~, ratp.er 'th~n the complexities' that lie
ahead~ 'and if we base ~lUrselves on ~4e preSeq.t
lItSather than po.n'~~~,,~~cetta~nti~ of ~lie' future,'

..-

-_11I_"

savoir jUsqu'a quel point nous sommes d'aceord,
maisquelles mesUl'es pratiques le GomeR va
prendre et, plus precisement, queUe va ette la"
premiere mesure a prendre pour traduire eet
accord clans la realite. n serait possible de
trouver encore plus de poirlts sur lesquels nous
somm:es -cl'accord. n existe une resolution de l'Assemblee gen~rale qui a ete formellement acceptee
par ·le Conseiletqui montre que nous' sommes
tous eritierement d'accordsur une serie de questions relatives au conttole de l'energie atomique
ainsiqu'a la reglemen.tation et a la reduction
general~ des annements. Nos opinions ne diffe·
rent, me semble-t-il, que sur un petit point: que
farre maintenant? Au risque de donnerpeut-etre
une explication trop simpIiste, je voudraisexaminer plus particulierement ce point.
,
Je suiS. certain que lesrepresentarits .des, EtatsUnis d'Ainerique et de,I'Union sovietique vou·
dront bienm'excuser si je m'adresse plus particuliercment aeme. A vrai dire, ces deux' delegations sont .lesseules qui, jUsqu'a present, ont
manifeste de grandes divergences de vues sur la
questioll de savoir ce que le Conseil de' securite
l;loit fairemaintenant en premier lieu. Je pense,
et je suis .sur ,que plusieurs de mes collegues pen·
sent egalement" qu'il est pos~ible' de trouver un
compromis acceptable pour lesdeux pays. .
C'est certainement ,dans cette intention qu'au
cours d'une seance precedentele repr~entant de
la France a soumis une resolution. La delegation'
australienne a agi dans le meme esprit et le
Conseil est maintenant, saisi de ces deux resolutioli$.,Comme I'a declare le representant, de
l'Australieen soumettant sa resolution,ma delegation n'est pas disposee, pour le moment,a
accepter le point de,vue del'Union sovietique ni
celui deS Etats-Unis'd'Amenque. Ce ne serait
pas faire re:uvre utile, . a monavis, que ,de se
ranger .a; l'am de l'une ou de l'autre grande
Puissance separement..Ce que nous voulons, 'e est
etre,d'accord avec toutes les deux a la fois, pour
aller,de l'avant.
, J' ai; ecoute avec beaucoup d'attention les'
exposes qu'ont faits ce matin les representantil de
ces, deux pays. Je dois avouerque je suis un peu
perplexe; je me demande ce qui les empeche.
d'ayancer. Mes collegues I voudront bien excuser
la franchise. et la simplicite de mes paroles-je
ne revendique d'ailleurs que,le merite de la sim·
plicite et de la franchise;-mais ~ me semble que
la .veritable cause de la mesentente· est simplement un manque de confiance. Si nous hesitons
parfois avant de prendre. une decision, sur la
procedure a adopter,' c'est ,parce que nous crai·
gnons qu'en adoptant telle ou. telle mesure, nous
ne nons decouvrions, alors que l'autre gardera
son attitude mena~ante. Com.m.ent pouvons-nous
done retablir cette confiance sans laqu'elle nous
ne pouvons agir en parfaite hannonie?
Vous-meme,Monsieur le President, vous avez
signaie, etd;autres orateurs l'ont fait aussi, qu'un
certain accord regnait parmi nous. A monavis,
/!ii nous examinions avec franchise les points sur
lesq:uels ,l1J)US sommes d'accord, plut8t que les
difficuIt€s devant .1~quelles nous nous tro:uvons,
et si nous envisagions la situation presente plutOt

w~ma.ybeable to·find the .foundation on which

que·les ince~judes de I'avenir, peut~etre .trou. verions~J;lot¥l. cles·. bases sur lesquellesnous pour~
rions nousapp~yer pOUf agir.
, .Le Conseil de securite est un. organe des
As the Security COuncil ~ an organ of the
Nations Uni~. et ne peut rien. batir que sur la
V~tedN_ations, it canI?-0t build on ~y foundaCharte.. Toute son reuvre. doit reposer sur le pos. tion 'other~.than the Charter of .the United
Napons. And,in its building,theSecurity tulat oblig~toire que la Charte des Nations Unies
Councihnust, of nece~ty, assume that the Char~ va etre efIectivement appliquee. I}. est inconcevable et inadmissible qu'au cours de nos travaux,
ter of the United Nations is going to ,be effective.
It is inconceivable, it ~ inadmissible in any part nous envisagions qu'uu jour la Charte cesse
of our work, that we ~hould envisage a. . future ~'etreenvigueur. Sinotrereuvre devait reposer
state in which the Charter of the Ull~ted Nations. sur une. ,autre fondation, ce serait nier le carac~
c.eases to be -effe;.:;tive.U' we were to build on tere viable des NationS Unies.
.
~y ot.I!er foundation~than that, we should at this
.D1dment be den~g the viability of the United
Nations. .
.
Regardons la Charte. Que dit~elle? Elle dit que
Now, if we l.ook a~ the Charter, what -do we
find? We find, that every one of us has accepted ·nous avonstous accepte, entre autres obligations,
obligations, and among these is the obligation
~ellede nous·ab~tenir dans nos relations internathat we ,will refrain in ourinternationairelatiomi
tionalesde "recourir ala menace ou a I'emploi
"from. the threat· or Use of force ... '. in any . . • de la forc,- . • . de toute • • • manie;:e incompamanner. inconsistent· with the purposes of the
tible avec les buts des Nations UIlies". La Charte
declare que les buts des Nations·Unies 'sont de
UIlited· Nations".'· The Charter .reveals that the
pUrposes of the' United Nations a~e to maintain
mainK :rir la paix et lasecurite internationales,
international peace and security, to develop
de developper entre les nations des relations
f.#endly relations and . to achieve international
amicales et de rea1iser la cooperation internacQo::operation in solving international .problems.
tionale en resolvaritles problemes internationaux.
- .1£ we believe in. the Charter; and if we make
Si nous avons foi dans la Charte, et si nous
-the baSiC assuIllption that the Charter is going
partoris du postulat qu'elle va etremise en appli'to be effective, then we should. be able to base
cation; 'noUs pourronsfonder nos travaux sur une
our work on some confidence in each other's
confiance reciproque et trouver en meme temps
r).lotives and, at ~e same tUne, to find some
quelques principes directeurs quant a l'objectif
guidance as .to' the objectives which our work
~al que notre reuvre se propose.
will ultimately serve.
\
Then, beyond :the Charter, we aIsohave the
Outre la Charte, noDs avow aussi les deux
two resolutioIis of the General l'~sembly-the 'resolutions.adoptees par I'AssembIee generale, la
resolution setting up the Atomic Energy Com- premiere prevoyant la creation de la Commismission and the -resolution on the ,principles sion de l'energie atonrique et la deUxieme.conte~
governing the general regulation and -reduction
nant les principes regissant la reglementation et
of armaments. Each one of our Governments
la reduction generales des armements. Les Gouhas .expressed its adherence to,iIlose resolutions.
vernements quenous representons ont accepte ces
By 40irig sa, each of our GovernIneDts proves to resolutions. De ce fait, ils acceptent, premierebe in· agreement, first, that there should be con- Il!oot, d'assurer le controle de l'energie atomique
trol-of aiolnic energy to the extent necessary to
daI,lS la tnesure necessaire pour assurer son utiliensure its-use 'for peaceful purposes;. second, that sation a des fins purement pacifiques; deuxiemeatprnic ,weapons and all other .weapons adaptment, d'eliminer des armements nationaux les
able to mass destruction should be eliminated
armes atomiques et toutes autres armes principalespermettant les destructions massiveS; troi-.. . from national -aimaments; third, that there
should be. an early introduction of a system for
siemement, de mettre sur pied le plus tat possible
the general regulation and reduction of armaun systeme de reglementation et de reduction
ments and armed forces; fourth, that. this system
generales des armements et des forces armees;
~hould be comprehensive, complete and binding
quatriemement, de faire en sorte que ce systeme
on, all nations, and covering both major and
soit complet et detaille, qU'il engage tous les pays
nllnor weapons; fifth, thaf the .system should et porte sur les armes importantes comme sur les
iriclude practical aild ,.effective safeguards by
armes secondaires; cinquiemement, de fake en
way. of .inspection -and other means to protect
sorte qti'au moyen d'inspections ou d'autres procomplying States against the hazards of. viola":
cedes, ce systeme assure aux Etats respj::ctueux de
tions and evasions; sixth, that there should be,
leurs .obligationS des garanties pratiques et efliwith certain provisos, general progressive and
caces confre les risques de violations et de subter-:
balanced reduCtion of national armed forces,
fuge; sixiemement, de proceder, souscertaines
and progressive and balanced withdrawal of
conditions, a la reduction progressive et equili-.
troops stationed in foreign countrieS, and that
brt~e des forces armees nationales, au retrait prothe system of collective security provided .for in
gressif et equilibre· des forces stationnees dans les
Article 43 .of the Charter should be completed
pays etrangers et a la mise en application, aussi-as early as posSible.. '
,., _.
tat que possible, dusysteme desecurite collective
prevu. al'Article 43 de la. Charte.
In .re-stating those principles, I· have based
J'ai rappeIe ces principes, en me .fondaqt tout
my stateme»t squarely on the terms. of the Gensimplement sur les termC$ de la resolution adoperal Assembly resolution, which -we have -all
tee par l'AssembIee .generale et acceptt~e· par
we :can act.

...
•.'"

...
'.

IlI• •lln-.I!•••••

lL

..

,_n-

..

"

d

p

i

accepted, and I suggest that there is complete
agreement on all those proposals, and. thatthose
proposals, taken in conjunction with ourobligations under the Charter and our belief that the
Charter is going to be effective, provide afoun, dation on wl'Jch we should be' prepared to build.
If we are not prepared to build on :it, then I
would submit that we are expressinga.lack of
faith in the viability of the United Nations.
. Up to date, we have heard no challenge whatever to that basic agreement. Every member ,at
this Council table has admitted that a measure
0.Lagr~em~nt exists. Now, our delegation is fplly
COIJ$cious that there are great difficulties surroundiI:lg this questi~n, ~d we are fully aware
of the very. many complexities~ both technical
and 'political, .~J1at Will be' encountered ~ the
course of our future work. We do not WISh to
brush aside or, to diminish in any. way the
ip1po~ceofthe cOIisiderations'of na~onal seC\1~ty that must be uppermost in the nnnd of each
J!ational representative here. But the simple
question" we have to face at this, moment is
whether we have sufficient faith in thestrength
6£ the, agreement we have afready reached to
enable uS' to take the next step side by side,
instead of. trying to get in front of each other.

X'VOO

nous taus. Je pense qu'il y a accord completsur
tous ces points. Ajoutez a cela les obligations que
nous itnpose la Charteet notre convis;tion que.la
Charte sera mise en application, et VOllS avez une
base solide sur laquelleon pOlUTa batir. Ce serait
fai.re preuve d'un' manque de foi dans le cara<;:tere durable de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
que de ne pas accepter de batir sur ces principes.
Jusqu'a present, personne n'a, it ma connaissance, mis.en doute <;:etaccord fondamental.'
Tous l~ membres ici pr~ents l'ontadmis jusqu'a,
ce point. Notre delegation ~ consciente de.s
grandes difficultes que cette question a fait sur~
glr; nous savons fort bien qu'au cours de nos
travaux, DOUS rencontrerons beaucoup de., problemes compliques, d'ordre technique et politique. Nons n'avonspas I'intention de neglige~
ou de so~-estimer le moins du monde l'import~mce des considerations. de ,secmite. nationale.
Ces considerations doivent etre .la preoccupation
premiere des representants. de chaque pays. Mais
en ce moment, nous nous trouvons devant' une
question tres simple, celle desavoit sil'accord que
nous avons etabli, est suffisammentsolide pour
nous permettre de continuer nostravauxen
marchant cote it cote, aulieu d'essayer denous
depasser. .
'
. ;..
Pour sa part, la de~egation austr~lienneest
disposee it accepter cette b~e, et demande, ins:tamment au Conseil d'avancer aussi vite, que
possible, 'dans la tach; que lui aconfiee'l'AssembIee generale.n est un fait que nous admettons
tous: il nous ser~ impossible d'aller utilement de
I'avant sans la collabqration de tou~es les grandes ,
Puissances. 11 s' eilsuit que, si elle,s ne pe:uvent,
co~cilier leurs opinions divergentes" et si nous
ne'sommes pas d'accord sm: les fondations' que
; . nous avons posees, et disposes it construire .€ote
a cote, nostravaux seront indefiniment arretes.

. Now, the ~uStralian delegation'is prepared to
accept that as our foundation, and it would urge
the Council to move forward as expeditiously
as possible to carry out the task which the GeneralAssembly placed on us. The plain fact, of
whidl' we are aware, is that we cannot make
any' useful progress unless all the great Powers
are co-operating. The corrollary to that is that,
if the great Powers cannot r~concile their differingviews, .if' we are not prepared to pass
apprOval ,on the foundation, if we are not prepared to start building side by side, this work
be halted indefinitely.
"
Je ne reprendrai pas id les points contenus
,At this stage, I shall not recapitulate the
dans la resolution australienne. L'ambassadeur
particular .points centainedin the Australian
resolution. They were, fully explained .by the
d'Australie, M. Makin, leS a parfaitement exposes
lorsqu'il a presente cette resolution le mois derAustralian Ambassador, Mr.. Makin, when he
introduced our resolution last month. .
"
r,d,er.
,
.But the idea beIiliid thatresohitioD. is that
L~idee maitresse de .cette resolution est que
tous'le.s aspects du grand probleme qui'noUs ac':
~ th{faSpects of this great task must be pushed
ahead side by side; ,that we' cannot allow one
cupe'doivent etre etudies conjointement et que
phase of the question to lag behind the other.
nous ne pouvoris pas permettre que. I'etude de
One point that struck me in listening to the
telaSpect du probleme soit en retard sur I'etude
speeches this m<?rning ~as the insi'ltence of both
de tel, autre. Ce qui m' a frappe dans les discours
speake~ that this'problem .was a whole 'problem; , que
ecoutes ce matin, .c'est -l'insistailce.cie8.
it was not a problem which could be separated
delpC orateurs it declarer que ceprobleme. cons~
into small parts, but 'a problem tha~ had to be
titriait un tout, qu'il p.'etaitpas possibled'en
considered.asa. whole, and a pr<:>blem which had
isoler certains aspects, et 'qu'il fallait l'exaniiD.er
to be considered in relation to the broader quesdans ses rapports ;:tvec les questions 'plus v.astes
tions of the post.;war settlement and of. collective
du reglement des proble,mes d'apres guerre efde
security.
la securite collectiv~",(" .... ..,'
. ' ,
There is one practical asp'ect of the question,
n y a, toutefois,,:uhaspectpratique dda queshowever, on which I should like to touch bliefly
tion que je ,voudrais·eXQquer brievement parce
before concluding, because it is a matter which
qu'il me semble avoir ca~ quelqueinquietuae.
seems to have caused some concern. It is the
Il s'agit du probleme de la coordination. Cette
problem",of.~o-ordination to prev~nt the work
coordination doit permettre d'6vite'r que nos 'tta- .
from getting -out ~of hancl :an!i nQt progressing
vaux n'echappent it notre conti'ole; eUe doit'per:'
in. an'orderly way and on parallel lines as promettre de les faire avancer avec methode etsimulP9sed by some of the. resolutions. But thatprobtanement~ comme le propo.sen( certaines .reso1ulem .seems to us to be' an .' exceptionally simple
tions. Ce. probleme nous paraitetre _pa~iculiere­
ment
simple du fait que les'memes'membtes font
. .one by reas::_~~_t~~.~~~ty~the composition:

will

nu

"""

....

--roo

AP .. Q.

partie de la Conui:lission de l' ~nergie atomiqu~, de
la commission du desannement qu~ l' on se pro~
pose de creel', et du Conseil de securite. Ces
organismes, bien qu'ils nesoierit pas identiques,
presenteni des &imilitudes assez nombreuses et il
est·hors de doute ·.que le Conseil de securite sera
en rapport continuelavec les deux commissions.
Elles lui' soumettront des rapports et il sera tou~
jours loisibleau Conseil de leur donner des directives. En admettant meme que les "Gouvernements'veuillellt avoir des tep",res'entants differents
dans ces deux organismes, ces Gouvernements
po~rront "se charger eux-memes du travail de
coordination et donner des instructions a leurs
repres~ntants aupres des organismes interesses.
En resume; la delegation australienne est d'avis
To sum up, the Australian delegation takes
the view that, at this stage, we are not required qu'on.'ne demande pas, ence moment, ~ chacun
de nous de prenc4'e, des engagements en. ce qui
to, enter into commitments on policy. We are not
concerne la politique qu'ilse ,propose, de suivre.
being asked to take any action which may endanger our. future actions in formulating plans Nous lie sommes paSappe1es, mailltenant, a
either, for . the control of atomic' energy or ·for prendre urie decision qui engagerait notre attithe •regulation and reduction of armaments. It tudedans I'avenir en fonnulant des projetsrelatifs au controle' de ,I'energie atomique, ou a la
is only necessary for us, at this stage, to setup the
machinery and to provide ourst"lves .With the . teglementatiori et a la reduction des armemen~.
tools with which 'we Gan build. But 'we do feel : La $eulechQSe que l'on requieredenous ~D, ce
that whatever ~ction the Council· takes now' moment est de mettre s).!r pied un mecant<,;rne et.
should fully express our'confidence in each other de nousmunir des ()utils au moyt:n desqu(JS DOUS'
and our,adherence, without any reserve to the
pourrons batir. Maisnou& croyons sincercment,
principles on' which we 'are' already agreed. We que, queUe que soit la mesure adoptee mainte-:
are anxious to push forwm:d, within the terms Ila.nt par le. C.o~IlS-eil, e1le devra exprimer notre
of the GericralAslremblyresoIlluon, With the
confiance mutuelle et notre acceptation' sans
work which we have been asked to per{i:irll.l. We reserve des principes deja etablis. La delegation
do not feel that we cail go ahead in 'that work
australienne est desireuse~ pour se conformer a
either with the United States of America only
la resolution de l'Assemblee generale, de pouror with the Soviet Union only; we wanttogQ suivre la tache qui nous a ete' confiee. Nous
ahead, with both of them together." \Ve have to n'avancerons pas dans nos travaux en nous assostart side by side, work side by side, arid finish
dant isole:ment, soit a la delegation des Etats-,
side by side, and it seems to us 1:here is rio other
Unis d'Amerique,soifa celle de rUmon sovieway. We camiot push each other into disarma- . ; tique;noiIs'voulons agir avec ces deux pays en
ment; we have to get into it together.
meme temps. Nous devons partircote a cote, travailler cote a cote et :finir' cote a cote; il me
sembleqix,'il n;y ~pas d'autre solution. Nous ne
devons. paS nous pousser les uns les autres dans
la voie du desannement~ nous'devons nous y, ~n.,.
gager tous en ~eme temps..
.
'
_ In closing, Mr. President, ancl 'While repeating
Pour tennirier, Monsieur·le President, je repe'" that the Australian.resolution 'is to ,be c6Ilsideted terai d'abord queleConseil'est tOlljQurs saisi de.
as stilI before this Council, I should like.to throw
la' r~lution' 'australierine et je 'me permettrai'
out' a suggestion in the' !tope that it may meet aussi..de fail'e une suggestion avec l'espoir qu'eUe
with the concurrence of members of the Council.
reIl.cgiJ,trt;i'a l'~ppi:obatiort de tous ,les membres
'The' suggeStion. is that," perhaps through your duO Ce:::)Seil. Lorsqtie cett€~ cfiscussion ·sera termigood offices as President, it ,pight .be p9ssible,
nee, peu1;--etre pourriez~vous, en votre qualite de
after further discussion, for the authorS" of the
President, inviter Jes. ,auteurs des, resplutions qui;
various resolutions now before us-tJ,tatisto, say
nous ,sont'soumises, a 8avoir, les repr~entants 'de
the representatives of the Soviet Union, of the
l'Union~ovietique, deS Eta.tS-Unisd'Amerique,
United States of America, of France, of Colomne la Fiance; de la Coloiribie ·et de' r Aust'ralie,.
bia, and of Australia - .. tob~ bro~g~t together
a se reunll: sous..votre direction; offidellement ou
under your guidance, 'eith~~. ~fo!lnally . or ' inofficieusemerit, pour essayer de' prepareruIl. -texte
form.ally, to see 'Yheth~r, ~1.!t.of the various texts
commun qui nouspermettrait de faire' un pas
before them, it:mightnC!)t.~be: possible toprep.. e
ded~if enavant.
a common text which would enable us to mal~e
thiS next decisive step~
,
-..
.·"'7
of the AtomicEn~gy CommisSion,. the proposed
disarmament commission,' and the Security
Council itself. Those bodies are not i<ientical,
but they are very' closely siriiilar, and there is no
doubt that the Security Council will be in constant touch with both commissions. It will receive
the reporis of both commissions and will be in
a position' to give'· directions,' to .them, in their
w~rk. And even though GoverI!Il1en,ts might
choose to have different ,representatives on' these
bodies, the. co-ordination can be safely left in
the hands of the Governments which will direct
the policies of their representatives in. each of
the bodies concerned.

': '

Sir Alexander CAnoGAN(United Kingdom):
"I only want, at this stage, Uf make"one comment
on die particular aspect' c.f the affair which is'
now before't1'J. 'I believe that on 'one point.where '
there appears to'be ~difierence'betweencthe
delegation of the United' States 'of":Am.~nea; and
-_I

5

t~

WY'

:"'-,

",".I

.' Sir 'A1exartder-: c~()riAl'i'; (Royal;Ilne~iJirl),!
(traduit de .l'anglais) :. Je 'd&ire' seule~ent pre-:
senter une observati~n sur l'~pecf partiCu:n~r'de
l'~ffa~e quinous·occupe en ce moment; Amon.

avLs,)a divergebc~ d'op~pn 'QW eJdste s~iW1

pemf:,de Iaquemon entre la ;deIegation de:,;. •

p:.

'

.

,

.'

.','

•

L &

that of the Soviet Umon, that difference is. really Etats-Unis d'Amr.riolle et'cellede l'UnioD sovi6tique est, en realire,~ezillm;oire.
..
,rather illusor.y.
Dans le premier paragraphe de sa resolution,
The United Stat~ resolution~ in· its first .para~
graph, proposes, the' establishment<>f· a com- la delegation des Etats-Unis propose de creer une
commi"c;ion, que j'appellerais la commissioIl .du
mission, which I shall cal!- the commission for
generaldisarinament; and in the sec<>nd para- desarrr• ..lllent general, et, dans le second paragraph it proposes to create a committee, of the graphe, dIe propose de creer un comite du
Conseil de securite, qui ferait au Conseil. des
Security. ,Council to make recommendations to
recommandations sur les fonctions' a attribuer a
the Security Council regardilig the terms of refla comrr ."'ion. Si j'ai bien compris,' le represenerenceof the' proposed commission. I think that,
if L understooa him aright,. the representative of tant de I'Lnion sovietique s'oppose a cette propo-.
ihe 'S'oviet Umon to"61t e?,ceptioil tc)'that proposal, sition parce que la creation d'un comite nouveau
et distinct n'est pas indispensable et qu'elle retarbecause he said it was setting up anew and
derait les travaux. Or, si nous essayons d'imfl.giseparate coinrirlttee' which was' unnecessary and
ner un instant.comment les.:;hoses vont sepasser,
which w<>wd cause delay. Well, now,.if we try
£0' iiriagfue for a moment what in fact the course je n'ai pas l'impression que l'une ou l'autre de
of eventS 'would be, I myself do not believe that
ces objections soit valable.
'
that proposar is 'open to either of' those objections. '
,
., The coinniission for 'general . disannament,
D'une part, 'la comnnsslOn dn desarmement
which it is proposed to create, will be composed general que,1'on envisage de creer se composera
of, the membe(S of" the Security Council. The . des membres du Conseil de securite. D'autrepart,
committee of the .security Council, which the
le comite du Conseil de securitequi, d'apres la
delegation of the' lfnited States ,of America
proposition de la delegation des Etats-Unis
d'Amcrique, doit fixer le mandat de la commis.,
proposed to determine the t~rms, of reference
of the commission, likeWise would consist
sion, se composera egalement d'un representant
of a representative of each member, of
de chaque Etat membre du Consei1. Ces deux
the Council. .The, composition of, those two organismes seront composes de representants des
bodies, .nationally, would be exactly the same$ • mernes pays et nous retrouverons,"je pense, a,'peu
andl think it is quite prObable that the actual
pres les memes personnes dans les deux. Cesepersonnel would be approximately the same. In ront surement les mem.es personnes dans riotre
so far as my Government is concerned, lean
cas-.Qa~J1edhlference"-cela fera,=t-=ildonc?-:-Il.. ne" -,
certaiIlly say that it wbuld be the same. Now,
peut y avoir aucune perte de temps si Qnze perdoes it really make very much difference? It sonnes decident de prendre le 'nom de cQmmiScertainly does not introduce any delay if eleven .'lion et se reunissent'pour definir lerir mandat ou
gentlemen, calling themselves the new commissi ces memes onze personnes, ou a peu pres, pren~
sion, sit down to consider the terms of reference,
nent le nom de comite du Conseil desecurite .:;t
or whether approximately the same eleven gen- se reunissent pour examiner exactement la meme
tlemen, calling themselves a commi~tee of the
question. Si la commission devait etre creee im-Council, sit down to examine exactly the same mediatement et devait commencer sur l'heure
thing. If the commis§ion were to be inStituted
a definir son mandat, je ne vois pas pourquoi
immediately, and ·had to begin at once to deterelle accomplirait cette tache plus rapidement
mine its terms, of reference, I do not see that
qu'un comite du Conseil.
.
,
that determinatic;m would be made any quicker
than if it were discussed by a committee of the
Council.
. It may be said: Well, then, if there is really
On dira peut-etre que s'il n'existe aucrine difno .difference between the two, why not let the
rerence entre les deux organismes, pourquoi ne
commission settle its ownterms of reference? To
pas laisser a la commission le som de fixer son
this, my reply is that I .think that it' would be
propre mandat? A cela, jerepondraiqu'a mon
more.regular for the .Council to determine the
avis, il serait plus normal que le Conseil,sieterms of reference of theeolru.fJlssion in corn- geant Cl CV.lJ.dte, l-eglatcette qtiestionj:c:plutot·que·
mitee than for the commission to determine its
de laisser a la commission le soin de fixer elleown terms of reference. I think that would be a meme son mandat: Cette procedureseraif pluS
more regular and a more properproced~re, and,
reguliere et plus correcte: voila la raison qui
for that reason, I shoUld accept the procedure
m'incite a adopter la resolution des Etats-Unis
prescribed in the resolution of the United States
d'Amerique.
of America.
Je le repHe, je me refuse a eroire qU'il puisse
. As.l say, I cannot see that it would introduce
en resulter une perte de temps, puisque ,le
any delay, because quite possibly the same gencomite et la commission qui etudieront la -questlemen would' be discussing the same subject
tion se composeront probablement desmemes
.under either alternative. Of course, if the per'sonne! of the two bo<li~s is very different, then
personnes. Evidemment, si les deux organismes
se composaient de personnes tres differentes, ce .
~ll. the more do I feel that it should be the' duty
of the Council committee to determine the term3
serait, a fortiori~ aucomite' du Conseil qu'il' apof referen~e. I feel strongly that the terms of - partiendrait de determiner les attributions de la
ref<:rence should be settled not by the commiscommission~ Je crois fermeIiJ.ent que cettetache
incombenon a 1a conuriission elle-merrie, rilais
sion~itself, but by the C0m;tcil.
auConseit'
'

----_..._------------.. .
I make these 'remarks only in the hope that,
in any further study, of the differences which do
exist, it may be found that I am right in thinkingthat this' one has been' rather und1,1ly
magnified and is really rather illusory.

~._---q

J'ai presente ces observations dans l'espoir
qu'en examin~t' de ia~on plus approfondie les
divergences d'opinions qui nous separent, le
Conseil reconnaitra avec moi que l'on a exagere
l'importance de celle dont je viens de parler'et
que, comme je I'ai dit, elle est purement

illusoire.
M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traMr. AUSTIN (United States of America) : I
duit de l'anglais): Je ne desire pas repondre
do not wish to reply now. If any further discusmaintenant., Si le Conseil decide de poursuivre la
sion of this mattexis to occur today, I should
discussion aujourd'hui, je prefererais ne repond"'~
much prefer to make my reply tomorrow. If,
on the other hand, the President is to carry out, que demain. Si, d'autre part, le Presiden'j; ~_
the suggestion made by the representative of
range a l'avis du representant de l'Australie et
convoque les auteurs des differentes resolutions,
AUstralia, and call a meeting 'of the authors of
the several resolutions, I wish it could be called ; je voudrais que la reunion eftt lieu demain et non
tomorrow and not this afternoon, because once
cet apres-midi; car lorsque nous aurons entrepris
we start reconciling our views it would seem as
de concilier nos differents points de vue, il sera
preferable, me semble-t-il, de. prolonger la seance
though weottght to stay in session until we have
jusqu'a ce que nous soyons parvenus a les concifinished and have reconciled them.
Jier effectivement.
.
Je voudrais, en passant, repeter ce que j'ai deja
Let' me repeat, in passing, what I said at the
declare au debut de mon expose: les Etats-Unis
beginning of my statement': the Unit~d States
has no vanity, no' pride of authorship; itis openn'ont aucune vanite d'auteur. C'est l'esprit libre
minded and ready to come to a conclusion after
et. sans parti pris qu'ils se prononceront sur la
considering carefully everybody's views as we
que.stion, apres avoir examine avec attention les
have tried to do.
opinions de chacun, comme nous avons essaye
de le faire.
Nous avons donne notre avis apres examen, What we have presented here is our opinion
after making that study, but now, on review,
mais nonS sommes disposes a reexaminer les
we are just as open-minded as ever. What we
points de vue de chacun, l'esprit tout aussi libre.
are after is ,the great objective of preventing war,
Eviter la gl.lerre; te1 est le but eIeve que nous
nous proposons d'atteindre, mais, bien que la
and although this procedure that 'Ye are considering is a small thing compared to that great
question de procedure que nous ~aminons en ce
objective, the differences that appear to exist
moment ait tres peu d'importance par rapport
here are mere shadows of differences, and I still
la grandeur de notre but final, et que les dihope that b}' tomorrow there' may be no vergences d'opinions qui semblent se faire jour
differences.
ici soient plutot des semblants de divergences
que des divergences reelles, j'espere que bientot,. demain peut-@tre, ces divergences auront
disparu.
.

a

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT': Les discussions d'aujourd'hui
TQday's discussions have been very useful in . ont tres utilement deblaye le terrain et rapproche
clearing the ground and bringing points of view
les points de vue. n est possible que de serieuses
closer tog~ther. There may still be serious differdivergences d'opinions subsistent sur certains asences of opinion with regard to certain aspects
pects du probleme du desarmement general; mais
of the problem of general disarmament; but the
la question immediate qui se pose est de savoir
~,'~ !mmediate, problem before us is to decide what
queUes sont les mesures pratiques a prendre pour
.practical steps must be taken to enable the Secuque le Conseil de securite puisse accomplir la
rity Council to carry out the task entrusted to it
mission que l'AssembIee generale lui a confiee.
by the General Azsembly. On that subject-,and
Acet egard, et la plupart des orateurs qui ont
mostrepreseritativeS,who have spoken made that
pris la parok l'ont fait ressortir, il y a, en fait~
clear-there is actually very little divergence of
bien peu de divergences d'opinions entre nous.
view among us. That being so, if you approve
Des lors, si vous approuvez la· suggestion du rethe Australian representative's suggestion, I shall
presentant de l'Australie, je me mettrai demain
get in touch tomorrow with the authors of the
en rapport avec les auteurs des projets de resodraft resolutions in an endeavour to establish
lution, afin d'essayer d'arriver a la redaction d'un
a joint text likely to obtain, the unanimous aptexte commun qui puisse obtenir l'approbation
proval of members' of the Council. The Council
unanime des membres du Conseil. Le Conseil
might meet again on Thursday,morning in order
pourrait·se reunir de nouveau jeudi matin en vue
to take a decision on this subject, after which
de statuer a ce sujet, apres quoi il passerait nait would of course go on to consider the other
tureUement a l'exat••:n. des. autres questions insquestions on its agenda.
.crites a son ordre, du jour.
If there is no objection to this procedure, I
S'il rty a .pas d'objection a cette procedure, il
.shall take it that the Council has so decided.
en sera ainsi decide.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union 'of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr.
President, I have no objection if the majority ,of

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Monsieur
le' President, si la majorite des membres du

..........

pithe rr:ernbers of. the Council think it would be

useful for those representatives who have submitted draft resolutions to the Security.Council
to exchange views informally. I repeat" that if
the majority think it would be useful, I have no
objection. to such a decision, although I think
we have analysed the various draft resolutions
sufficiently and should be in a position to take
a decision, on the. proposals which have been
submitted to the Council.
I need not repeat that the delegation of the
Soviet Union is of the opinion that the Security
C01IDCil cannot evade taking a decision to create
a commission which would be able "to prepare
concrete proposals for submission to the Security
Council, regarding practical measures to
implement, as soon as possible, the Assembly's
resolution of 14 December 1946.
I listened carefully to the last remarks of Mr.
Austin, which left no' doubt that he also would
like to reflect on a number of questions between
'now and tomorrow. In view of these circumstances, i do not intend to insist that a decision
should necessarily be taken today. It could be
postponed until tomorrow.

Conseil e~time qu'il serait utile de proceder a
un echange de vues officieux entre les· representants qui ont presente des. projets de resolution,
jene m'y opposerai pas. Je ne m'opposerai pas
a cette decision si la majorite estime "que cela
pourrait etre avantageux. 11 me semble cependant que nous connaissons suffisamment les differents projets de resolutions pour pouvoir prendre une decision au sujet des propositions dont
le Conseil est saisi.
Ainsi que je l'ai deja dit, la delegation de
rUnion sovietique estime que le Cnnseil de·securite ne peut eviter de Creel' une commission
chargee de preparer des propositions concretes en
:vue de proceder le plus tat possible a la mise en
pratique de la resolution de l'Assemblee, en date
du 14 decembre 1946.

J' ai ecoute attentivement la derniere declaration de M. Austin; sans doute, veut-il, lui aussi,
reflechir d'ici demain a certaines questions. C'est
pourquoi jen'aipas l'intention d'insister pour
qu'une decision soit prise aujourd'hui. Nous pouvons l'ajourner a demain.

M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America): I
de l'anglais) :Je crains qu'on ne m'ait pas bien
think I have been misunderstood. Perhaps it
compris. Peut-etre ne serait-il pas mauvais que
would do me good to take two days and study
these drafts more than I have. Bu~ I think I am
j'etudie ces projets pendant deux jours encore.
familiar enough with these drafts to haye an
Mais je crois les connattre suffisamment bien pOUI'
adequate opinion about them. to enable me· to
m'etre' fait une opinion, et je pourrais· prend...-e
arrive at a decision right now, if it were left
une decision immediatement si j'etais seul juge de
to me. I am ready now to answer the objections
la question. Je suis dispose repondre tout de suite
to paragraph 2 raised by the Soviet Union and
auxobjections soulevees contre le paragraphe 2
Australia. But our business is not debating. This
par les representants de l'Union sovietique et de
Council is not sitting before the public to· enter- . l'AU8tralie. Mais il ne s'agit pas ici de nous litain the public with keen debate, and I am not
vrer a des debats. Ce Conseil ne. siege pas pour
going to be engaged in that kind of discussion.
donner au public le spectacle de joutes serrees,
et je ne me laisserai pas entrainer a ce genre de
discussion.
Si le Conseil de securite desire poursuivre les
n· .the Security Council wishes to continue,
debatssans plus chercher a concilier les opinions
without any further attempt at reconciliation, to
fight it out here today in debate, I am ready,
divergentes et prendre une decision aujourd'hui,
j'y suis dispose; je m'efforcerai de repondre aux
and I will undertake to answer the objections
made to paragraph 4, for I think that the obobjections soulevees contre le paragraphe 2, car,
jections h:lVe wholly ignored the most important
a mon avis, elles ne tiennent absolument pas
factor in the situation. But, if there is a possicompte d'un des elements les plus impdrtants de
la situation. Mais si nous voulons bien couper'
bility of cutting out the show and getting down
to an agreement in this matter, the United States
court au spectacle et nous mettre en devoir. de
delegation· is 'ready to. try to. agree. And if the
nous entendre sur la question, la delegation des
:representative of the Soviet Union wants to sit
Etats-Unis est prefe a faire une tentative dans
here through the night to do this, the representace sens. Si le representant de l'Union sovietique
tive of the United States is willing to do so also.
desire sieger id toute la nuit, le representant des
But I apprehend that we shall have clearer
Etats-Unis est dispose a fournir le meme effort.
heads and calmer minds and shall arrive at
Mais j'ai l'impression que nous aurons la tete
wiser decisions if we do not attempt to continue
plus reposee et l'esprit plus clair, et que nous
the meetings of the Security Council late into
prendrons des decisions plus sages, si nous n'esthe night. I think it unwise to try to do busisayons pas de poursuivre les deliberatiQns jusqu'a
ness on. that basis, and we should undertake to
une heure tardive. Je crois qu'il ne serait pas
conduct the hearings of the Security Council
sage d'eri decider autrement. Les seances du
within reasonable hours and stop for a recess
Conseil de securite devraient avoir lieu a des
overnight, not to please me or to afford me time
heures raisonnables, et etre sllspendues la nuit,
in which to study what is before us, but because
non pour me faire plaisir ni pour me donner
I think it is wise from every point of view not
le temps d'etudier la question dont nous nous
to carry these meetings into the night.
occupons, mais parce qu'il est sage a tout point
de vue de ne pas poursuivre la discussion jusqu'a
des heures tardives.

a

:

;

I. .

"

.....

M. GROMYKO' (Uhion des Republiques socia- .
listes sovietiques (traduit du russe): Jecrois
qu'on a mal interprete .ma declaration.' Je n'ai
pas dit que c'etait pour pOllVOir proceder a une
etude supplementaire des projets de resolution
que M. Austin desirerait ajourner les debats. Je
n'ai pas dit cela. J'avais simplement l'impression
lIue, en fait, M. Austin ne s'opposerait pas a ce
· que la decision a prendre £Ut ajournee jusqu'a
demain par exemple, etant donne que cela lui
permettrait de reflechir encore sur certaines questions. Voila ce que je voulais dire.

Mr. GROMYKO (Uhion of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): .My re~
mark was not quite accurately interpreted. I did
not say that Mr. Austin woUld like to postpone
a .decision on this question because he wished
to give fu!ther study to the draft resolutions sub~
mitted to the Security Council. I did not say
that. I 'had the impresSion, however; that Mr.
Austin would not really object to postponing it
decision on this subject, let us say, until
tomorrow, in order that he~might have an opportunity for further reflection on a' number of
questio~. That is what I said.
It turns out to be otherwise. Mr. Austin considers that we should postpone a' deciSion on
this matter <!Dd should not take it at the present
meeting on account of the late hour. I am ready
to agree that this reason is also rather valid. It
is certainly better to work on this question when
;we have clear heads.
•

Mais ilparait que ce n'est pas de cela qu'u.
· s'agit. M. Aus!~n estime, en efIet, que c'est en
raison de l'heure avancee qu'ilfaut s'ab~tenir de
: prendre une decision aujourd'hui, et qu'il faut
: l'ajolirner. J'admets quecette raison-la est egalement valable. 11 est certainement preferable de
discuter de cette question a tete reposee.

The PRESIDENT (tra~lated from. French) :
We ha:ve before Us five draft resolutions. I think
that' if we attempted to come to a decjsion or
take a vote today, we should' not obtain .an
entirely satisfactory result reflecting the rapprochement which' has become evident in the
cotU'Se of this discussion.
'
That is why I think th~t oiir Australian colleague's. suggestion is wise, and I invite the
CounciLto support it.
,: lt,l$ JUlder&toodthat. the, proposed meeting of
the authors of the draft resolution would be an
unofficial. meeting, to .give - the President the
opportunity of getting in touch with them. I
note with pleasure that neither the representative
of· the Union· of Soviet Socialist Republics nor
that of' the United States of America has opposed it, and I think I may conclude that the
Security Council, as a whole, is in favour of the
suggestion.

Le PRESIDENT: Nous sommes en presence de
cinq projets de resolution. Je pense que si nous
voulionS statuer ou proceder a un :vote aujour· d'hui, nous n'obtiendrionspas un resultat pleinement satisfaisant et qui correspondlt au
rapprochement qui s'est matrifeste au cours de
· la presente. discussion.
C'est pourquoi je considere que la suggestion
faite par notre collegue d'Australie est sage, et
j'invite le Conseil a s'y rallier.
Ilestentendu que la reunion envisagee des
auteurs de projets de resolutionsseraitunereuhion
; offieieuse1 qui devrait fournir au President l'occa· sion de prendre contact avec eux. Je constate
, d'ailleurs avec plaisir que ni le representant de
rUnion des. RepubIiques socialistes sovietiques,
hi celui des Etats-Unis d'Amerique ne s'y sont
opposes, et je crois pouvoir en condure que' le
Conseil de securite, dans son ensemble, est favorable a cette suggestion.

Mr. Quo Tai-chi (China): Before we ad~
jourIi, I should like to say a few words to explain
the position of the Chinese delegation in regard
to this question.
I
At the last meeting, or rather when I last
__ spoke on this subject at the ninety-second meeting/ I said I would introduce- a resolution in the
light of the remarks I had 'then made: Now, I
think we have~eady five resolutions before 'the
Council..•Wl@e ..the views of my delegation, as
then e.xpressed, have:: riot changed, my intention
of introducing a resolution has. I think that by
not introducing a resolution I shall remain in
good company, the company of the' majority
of the Council. I am the more inclfued not to
introduce a new resolution in view of the revised
resolution of the United States of America which
the Uhited States representative introduced this
,morning, because in this revised res()lution sufficientproper emphasis, to our mind, is given to
the importance of the problem' ofintemational
atomic control.
In my remarks, on'that last occasion, I spe. cially emphasized' the obvious importa,nce,
indeed the. priority, which the General Assembly

M. Quo Tai-chi (Chine) (traduit de ['anglais) : Avant qe nous ajourner, je voudrais preciser en quelques mots la position prise par la
delegation de la Chine dans cette affaire.
Au cours de la derniere seance, ou plutot la,
derniere fois que j'ai pris la parole ace sujet lors
de la quatre-vingt-douzieme seance'", j'ai annonce
mon intention de deposer une resolution
confbrme aux' observations que j'avais faites. Or,
si je ne tne trompe, le Conseil a deja ete saisi de
cinq resolutions. Le point de vue de ma delegation n'a pas change, mais j'ai abandonnel'idee
de soumettre une resolution. Je crois qu'en
m'abstenant, je resterai en bonne compagnie,
puisque je me rangerai parmi la majorite des
membres du Conseil. Je suis d'autant plus endin
a ne pas saisir le Conseil d'une resolution' que.,
dans la resolution modifiee qu'ils ont presentee
ce matin, les Etats-Unis d'Amerique ont, a
notre avis, suflisamment mis en vedette l'importance du probleme du confrole international de
l'energie atomique.
,
La derniere 'fois que j'ai pris la parole, j'ai
solIligne l'importance evidente, la priorite meme,
que l'Assemblee ,generale avait accordee, dans

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 4.

1 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de s8curite.
Deuxieme Annee, No 4.

p
resolution attached -to this problem of atomic
control, and I am glad to see that this· phase of
the problem is covered in the revised United
States proposal. If I may, I should like to congratulate the United States representative on
thi'! revised proposal, not so much on account
of the proposal itself as on the spirit which produced it. As Mr. Austin said, the United States
delegation approached this problem in a true
spirit of compromise, of trying to reach agreement, of trying above all to reach the great
objective to which every member on the Council
and all the people outside the Council attach
such great importance.
I should alSo like to support the motion which
the Australian representative has made-namely,
that all the five .delegations which introduced
proposals on this subject should meet and try to
reduce their differences and reach a common
agreement. And I hope that the spirit which
-animated the production of this revised United
'States - proposal will similarly animate all the
five delegations concerned in their efforts to
reacha. common agreement, as in their efforts
"td appreciate each other's viewpoint, so that we
can have a common resolution as the basis of
our further- discussion.

sa resolution, a ce probleme du controle de l'energie atomique, et je suis heureu.."{ deconstater que,
dans leur nouvelle proposition, les Etats-Unis
tiennent compte de cet aspect du probleme. Si
vous me le permettez, j'aimerais feliciter le representant des Etats-Unis de nous avoir soumis
cette nouvelle propqsition, non pas a cause de la
proposition elle-meme, mais pIutot pour l'esprit
qui a preside a saredaction. Comme M. Austin
l'a dit, la delegation des Etats-Unis a aborde ce
probleme dans un veritable esprit de c~nciliation,
en cherchant un terrain d'entente, en cherchant
par-dessus tout a atteindre l'objectif eleve auquel
chaque membre de ce Conseil et taus les peuples
du monde attachent une si grande importance.
Je voudrais egalement appuyer la motion du
representant de l'Australie, tendant a reunir les
cinq delegations qui ont soumis des propositions
au Conseil sur cette question, pour qu'elles essaient de reduire leurs .divergences de vues·· et
d'arriver a un accord. J'espere que l'esprit qui
a preside a la redaction. de la nouvelle proposition des Etats-UniS animera egalement les membres des cinq delegations lorsqu'ils s'efforceront
de comprendre leurs points de vue reciproques, et
de s'entendre afin que notre prochaine discussion
puisse reprendre sur la base d'une resolution
commune.
'

M. ZURAYK (Syrie)- (traduit de l'anglais):
Mr. ZURAYK (Syria): I should like to say
Je voudrais simplement souligner l'importance
just a few words to stress one aspect of the disd'un des aspects de ce pmbleme, a savoir la mise
cussion of this problem-namely, the question
en application de l'Article 43. de la Charte.
of· the implementation of Article 43 of the
Charter.
This- question is implied, perhaps, both in the La resolution des Etats-Unis d'Amerique et
resolution of the .United States of America and
celle de I'Union des Republiques socialistes soin that of· the Union of Soviet Socialist Repubvietiques font, je crois, toutes deux allusions' a
lics. _It is expressed -a little more clearly in the
cette question. Dans leurs'resolutions, les. deleresolutions presented by the Australian and
gations de l'Australie et de la France s'expriment
French delegations.
ace sujet en tennes un peuplus precis.
In the view of our delegation, this is a very
Notre delegation estime qu'il s'agit la d'un
important and 'fundamental element in the dIsaspect tresimportant, fondamental meme, du
cussioIJ. of this problem. We believe that the probleme qui nous occupe. A notre avis, i1 e&t
carry4lg out of proposals for agreements with
essentiel de donner suite auxprojetsd'accords
the Security Council regarding the maintenance
avec le Conseil de securite en ce qui concerne
of forces to assure international peace and secul'entretien de forces armees en vue du mairltien
rity is very essential, both -from the point of
de la paix et de la securite intemationales.· Cette
view of the regulation of armaments, since the
question est a etudierd'abord sous l'angle de la
commission on _disarmament is going to study
reglementation des armements,question que la
~his question, and also in order to spread further
commission du desarmement va. mettre a l'etude
that spirit of confidence which is necessary to
etensuite, -pour repandre davantageencQrC::,c,et
implement the General Assembly resolution on
esprit de confiance si necessaire a l'application de
disarmament. As a matter of fact, paragraph 7
la resolution de l'AssembIee generale sur le desarof the General Assembly resolution says: "The
mement.En effet, il est stipule au paragr~p~' 7
General Assembly, regarding· the problem of
de cette resolution que "1'AssembIeegenerale,
security as closely connected with that of dis- . considerant le probleme de· la· securit~ comme
armament, recommends the Security Council to ' etroitement lie a celui du desa.rmement~ recomaccelerate as much as possible the placing at its " mande au Conseil de securite de hater dans
disposal of the armed forces mentioned in
toute la mesure du possiB~lami~ea SadlSPQsiArticle 43 of the Charter".
tion des forces anneesvisees a I'.ArticIe43 de la
Charte".
On a confie cette tache au Comite d'etat':'
, The Military Staff Committee has been given
this t~sk;and we hope that" in the resolution major; nous; esperonsque la resolution qui se
degagera de -la discussion generale entre Ies authat" is. to come olit of this general discussion beteurs de la resolution de l'Assemblee mettra en
tween the authors of the resolutions, this element
evidence_aussiclairement. que possible cet aspect
pf th~,~si~u!lltion will be expressed as clearly as
du probleme.En qualite de representant d'une
,possible., M the" representative of a small Power,
I should like to' say. that, to us, this is a very
petite Puissance, permettez-moi -de dire qu~,pour

........

;:;

"'
important element in the whole question' of
disarmament.

nous, cet aspect de la question revel une grande ~,i
importance dans le probleme general du desarmemento
.

M.AusTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amenque) (traduit
Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America):
The United States delegation has :.:ecognized de l'anglais): La delegation des Etats-Unis a
this as
important element of the resolution reconnu que. cette partie de la resolution de
of the General Assembly, and believes that it l'Assemblee g6.terale avait une grande imporconstituted one of the reasons for having para- tance; c'est la une 'desraisonSpour lesquelles
graph 2 inserted in this resolution. With refer- nous avons insere le paragraphe 2 dans cette
ence .toparagraph7 of this resolution, we may resolution.. Peut-etre ne sommes-nous pas tous
not all agree oil the nature of the definite. rela- . d'accord sur la nature precise des relations qui
tionship which should exist between the Military doivent exister entreleComite d'etat-major et le
Staff' -Crimmittee •and the Security Council. If Conseil de securite en ce qui conceme ce parawe were sure in advance of what we could agree
graphe 7 de Ja resolution de l'AssembIee. Si nous
upon, I shoUld be perfectly willing to draft it savions a I'avance sur quoi nous pourrions _nous
into the resolution now, but the difficulty is that
mettre d'accord,- je sera.is parfaitement dispose a
here we deal with realities. The Military Staff
completer dans ce SenS mon projet de resolution.
Conimittee isaIready possessed 01 this business.
Mais nous nous trouvons id devant des realites;
It is 'in their jurisdiction, and they are .acting le Comite d'etat-major a d~ja ete saiside cette
under the Charter, collaborating with the Secu- affaire. La question· rcleve de sa competence; le
rityCouncil. It might be quite offensive for the
Comite ·agit confotmement aux dispositions de
-SccurityCouncilto pass forthwith a. resolution la Chatte, .et collabore avec le Conseil de secuwhich carried in it an element of condemnation rite. Le Conseil de securite ferait peut-etre injure
or criticism for not having reported sooner, and au Comite d'etat-major s'il adoptait sur le champ
commanding or directing the Military Staff. une resolution dans laquelle il semblerait
-Committee, which has a dignity ofitsown that condamner ou critiquer le Comite pour ne lui
should be respected, to make a report by a. cer- avoir pas encore soumis de rapport; le Conseil
tain date. I contend. that that is not the. way for
ne peut pas non plus donner des ordres ou des
U$ to proceed, and yet.I do not know that all
instructions au Comite d'etat-major, qui a sa
the members of this Security Council agree with dignite, que l'on doit respecter,pour qu'il lui
... me on it...
soumette unrannortnour unecertaine date. Bien
que je' nesache pas~ que tous leS membres du
Conseil de securite m'approuvent sur cepoint,
je suis convaincu que nous ne' pouvons pas agir
.
de la sorte.
Si je devaisprendre unedecision tout de suite
. H I were called upon to act right now, tonight, what I should favour 'would be a request et aujourd'hui mem~, je recommanderais que le
by 'the Security Council addressed to the Mili- Conseil de securite invitat le Comite d'etat-major
a'lui Jaire. savoir- sans delai la date a laquelle il
tary Staff Committee calling upon them for
espere pouvoir lui soumettre son rapport et ses
information without delay as to how soon- the
-Security Council could expect a report and reconimandations, conformement aux directives
du ler fevrier 1946. Le Comite d'etat-major a
tecoIllmendationS from the Military Staff Comdeja re~u ces directives. En d"autres termes, 10rs~
;mittee ·according to the directive of 1 February
1946. They already have the directive. In other que nous abordons cette question, nous devons la
words, when we' get on to that ground, we find
traiter conune il se doit, avec calme, officieusea subject which should be handled quietly, in- ment, au.sein du comite dont nous envisageons la
formally and with· dueresp!::<:t,' lnsidethis .com- creationauparagraphe 2. C'est une desraisons
mittee .which is· provided for in paragraph 2.
pour lesquelles nous devrions creer ce ~omite.
That is one reason for having this committee- n y en a d~autres dont je paderai plus ~ard. Mais
set up. There are other reasons to which I shall nous desirons naturellementtraiterce sujet dans
refer later. But, of course,itisourintc~ntion that un esprit de bienveillance,d'impartialite et de
this subject should be dealt with kindly, fairly,
moderation, en tenant compte desrealites. Nous
and reasonably, and in accordance with the
avons deja pris certaines mesures; nous devons, a
realism' of the situation. We have taken certain mon avis, etre logiques avec nous-memes et
steps, and we' must, as I see it, be consistent and
continuer d'agir conformement aux decisions que
catty on in the direction in which we started on noqs avons prises le ler fevrier 19461•
1·February 1946.1

an

The' PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT: Si personne ne demande la
If no representative wishes to speak, I shall re- . parole, je considererai que la suggestion du regard the Australian representative's proposal as ' presentant .de l'Australie est adoptee.
adopted.

Since no representative asked to speak, tke
. proposal of the Australian representative was
adopted.

Aucun representant nedemandant la parole,
la suggestion dU1'epresentant del'Australie est
adoptee.

1 First Ifleeting of the Military Staff Committee. See
Of!!cial Records of .the Se.curity Council, First Year, ,First
Senes, second meeting.

1 Premiere seance du Comite d'etat-major. Voir Proc2sverbaux officiels du Conseil de securiM.Premiere Annee,
Premihe Sene. deuxieme seance.
.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I would ask the members of the Security Council who have submited draft resolutions to meet
tomorrow, at 11 a.m., in the United Nations
offices in the Empire State Building, New York.

Le PRESIDENT: Je prie les membresdu
Conseil de securite qui ont presente des projets
de resolutions de se reunir demain, a 11 heures,
dans les bureaux des Nations Unies, Empire
State Building, a New-York,

The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

La seance est levee a16 h. 50.

"~"
