United Nations

A/RES/65/84

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 January 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 98 (f)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 8 December 2010
[on the report of the First Committee (A/65/411)]

65/84. Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions, in particular resolution 64/61 of
2 December 2009,
Recalling also the guidelines for general and complete disarmament adopted at
its tenth special session, the first special session devoted to disarmament,
Bearing in mind the establishment by the Secretary-General on 28 May 1992
of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa, the purpose of which is to encourage arms limitation, disarmament,
non-proliferation and development in the subregion,
Reaffirming that the purpose of the Standing Advisory Committee is to conduct
reconstruction and confidence-building activities in Central Africa among its
member States, including through confidence-building and arms limitation
measures,
Convinced that the resources released by disarmament, including regional
disarmament, can be devoted to economic and social development and to the
protection of the environment for the benefit of all peoples, in particular those of
developing countries,
Considering the importance and effectiveness of confidence-building measures
taken on the initiative and with the participation of all States concerned and taking
into account the specific characteristics of each region, since such measures can
contribute to regional stability and to international peace and security,
Convinced that development can be achieved only in a climate of peace,
security and mutual confidence both within and among States,

10-51758

*1051758*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/84

Recalling the Brazzaville Declaration on Cooperation for Peace and Security
in Central Africa, 1 the Bata Declaration for the Promotion of Lasting Democracy,
Peace and Development in Central Africa 2 and the Yaoundé Declaration on Peace,
Security and Stability in Central Africa, 3
0F

1F

2F

Bearing in mind resolutions 1196 (1998) and 1197 (1998), adopted by the
Security Council on 16 and 18 September 1998 respectively, following its
consideration of the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa, 4
3F

Emphasizing the need to strengthen the capacity for conflict prevention and
peacekeeping in Africa, and welcoming the close cooperation established between
the United Nations and the Economic Community of Central African States for that
purpose,
Reaffirms its support for efforts aimed at promoting confidence-building
1.
measures at the regional and subregional levels in order to ease tensions and
conflicts in Central Africa and to further sustainable peace, stability and
development in the subregion;
Reaffirms the importance of disarmament and arms limitation
2.
programmes in Central Africa carried out by the States of the subregion with the
support of the United Nations, the African Union and other international partners;
Welcomes the adoption by the States members of the United Nations
3.
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa on 30 April
2010 of the Central African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and Light
Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used for
Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly, called the Kinshasa Convention, 5 and
encourages interested countries to provide financial support for its implementation;
4F

4.
Also welcomes the holding in Kinshasa on 24 and 25 April 2010 of the
subregional meeting on small arms and light weapons;
5.
Further welcomes the active participation of several ministers of States
members of the Standing Advisory Committee at the Fourth Biennial Meeting of
States to Consider the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, held in New York from 14 to 18 June 2010;
Encourages the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee to
6.
carry out the programmes of activities adopted at their ministerial meetings;
7.
Also encourages the States members of the Standing Advisory
Committee to continue their efforts to render the early-warning mechanism for
Central Africa fully operational as an instrument for analysing and monitoring the
political situation in the subregion within the framework of the prevention of crises
and armed conflicts, and requests the Secretary-General to provide the assistance
necessary for its smooth functioning;

_______________
1

A/50/474, annex I.
A/53/258-S/1998/763, annex II, appendix I.
3
A/53/868-S/1999/303, annex II.
4
A/52/871-S/1998/318.
5
A/65/517-S/2010/534, annex.
2

2

A/RES/65/84

8.
Appeals to the international community to support the efforts undertaken
by the States concerned to implement disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes;
Also appeals to the international community to support the efforts
9.
undertaken by the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee under the
plan for implementation of the Kinshasa Convention;
10. Requests the Secretary-General and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to continue to assist the countries of Central
Africa in tackling the problems of refugees and displaced persons in their territories;
11. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to provide their full assistance for the
proper functioning of the Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in
Central Africa;
12. Reminds the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee of the
commitments they undertook at the adoption of the Declaration on the Trust Fund of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa (Libreville Declaration) 6 on 8 May 2009, and invites those States members of
the Committee that have not already done so to contribute to the Trust Fund;
5F

13. Urges other Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to support the activities of the Standing Advisory Committee
effectively through voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund;
14. Expresses its satisfaction to the Secretary-General for his support for the
revitalization of the activities of the Standing Advisory Committee, and requests
him to continue to provide the assistance needed to ensure the success of its regular
biannual meetings;
15. Also expresses its satisfaction to the Secretary-General for his support for
the establishment of a United Nations regional office for Central Africa, and
welcomes its endorsement by the Security Council;
16. Urges the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000, to
include a gender component in the various meetings of the Committee relating to
disarmament and international security;
17. Calls upon the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at
its sixty-sixth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the
item entitled “Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa”.
60th plenary meeting
8 December 2010

_______________
6

A/64/85-S/2009/288, annex I.

3
