A /73/PV.65

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

65th plenary meeting

Friday, 21 December 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Ten-Pow
(Guyana), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 130 (continued)
International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals
Letter from the President of the
Security Council (A/73/578)
Memorandum by the Secretary-General
(A/73/577)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/73/566)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will continue its consideration of agenda item 130, on
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, to elect two judges to the roster of the
Residual Mechanism.
Since no candidate obtained an absolute majority
in the first round of balloting earlier today (see A/73/
PV.64), the General Assembly will proceed to the next
round of balloting.
Before beginning the voting process, I should like
to remind representatives that, pursuant to rule 88 of the
rules of procedure, after the President has announced
the beginning of the voting process, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order
in connection with the actual conduct of the voting.
Any announcements, including those concerning

withdrawals of candidatures, should therefore be made
prior to the commencement of the voting process, that
is to say, before the announcement of the beginning of
the voting process.
I give the floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Mehdiyeva (Azerbaijan): First of all, I
would like to express our sincere gratitude to all of
the delegations that supported the candidature of
Azerbaijan. I have asked for the floor to announce the
withdrawal of the candidature of Mr. Hafiz Nasibov, in
favour of Mr. Yusuf Aksar of Turkey.
The Acting President: The withdrawal of the
candidature of Azerbaijan is duly noted.
We shall now proceed with the second round of
balloting. Ballot papers will now be distributed. Ballot
papers will be given only to the representative seated
directly behind the country’s nameplate.
Once again, I would like to remind representatives
that they are requested to use only the ballot papers
that are being distributed. Only those candidates
whose names appear on the ballot papers are eligible.
Representatives will indicate the two candidates for
whom they wish to vote by placing crosses in the boxes
at the left of their names on the ballot papers. Ballot
papers on which more than two names are checked will
be considered invalid. Votes may be cast for only those
whose names appear on the ballot papers. If a ballot
contains votes other than votes for the candidates listed
on the ballot paper, those votes will not be counted.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-46469 (E)

*1846469*

A/73/PV.65

As the General Assembly decided this morning, any
second and subsequent balloting will be unrestricted.
Votes may accordingly be cast in any second or
subsequent ballot for any eligible candidate who has
not yet been elected.
At the invitation of the Acting President,
Ms. Macdonal Álvarez (Plurinational State of
Bolivia), Mr. Serpico (Italy), Mr. Asuta (Kenya),
Ms. Korren (Malta), Mr. Chua (Singapore) and
Ms. Laučiková (Slovakia) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 3.25 p.m. and
resumed at 3.50 p.m.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Number of ballot papers:
188
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
188
Abstentions:
0
Number of members voting:
188
Required absolute majority:
98
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Yusuf Aksar (Turkey)
77
Mr. Guénaël Mettraux (Switzerland)
77
Mr. Mustapha El Baaj (Morocco)
70
Mr. Michael A. Newton
(United States of America)
65
Mr. Constant K. Hometowu (Ghana)
29
Mr. Mame Mandiaye Niang (Senegal)
28
Mr. Elyakim Rubinstein (Israel)
18
Mr. Aboubacar Demba Camara (Guinea) 5
The Acting President: Since no candidate obtained
an absolute majority in the second round of balloting,
the General Assembly will proceed to a third round
of balloting.
Before beginning the voting process, I should like
to again remind representatives that pursuant to rule
88 of the rules of procedure, after the President has
announced the beginning of voting, no representative
shall interrupt the voting, except on a point of order
in connection with the actual conduct of the voting.
Any announcements, including those concerning the
withdrawal of candidatures, should therefore be made
prior to the commencement of the voting process, that
is to say, before the announcement of the beginning of
the voting process.
2/27

21/12/2018

I call on the reresentative of Israel.
Mr. Wax (Israel): Israel would like to withdraw the
candidature of Mr. Elyakim Rubinstein.
The Acting President: The Secretariat has taken
due note.
I now call on the representative of Guinea.
Mr. Conte (Guinea) (spoke in French): At this
stage of the voting, my delegation would like to thank
all those who have supported the candidacy of Judge
Aboubacar Demba Camara. I would like to take this
opportunity to withdraw his candidacy.
The Acting President: The Secretariat has taken
due note.
I now call on the representative of Senegal.
Mr. Dieng (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation would like to thank all those who
voted for our candidate, Mr. Mame Mandiaye Niang.
At this time, we would like to withdraw our candidacy.
The Acting President: I call on the representative
of Ghana.
Ms. Abbey (Ghana): I would like to thank each and
every person who supported the candidature of Ghana.
I take this opportunity to withdraw the candidature of
Constant K. Hometowu of Ghana.
The Acting President: As four candidates now
remain, I will suspend the meeting for a few minutes to
give the Secretariat time to redo the ballot papers.
The meeting was suspended at 4.10 p.m. and
resumed at 4.40 p.m.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed
to the third round of balloting and begin the voting
process. Ballot papers will now be distributed. Ballot
papers will be given only to the representatives seated
directly behind country nameplates. Representatives
are requested to use only the ballot papers now being
distributed. Only those candidates whose names appear
on the ballot papers are eligible. Representatives will
indicate the two candidates for whom they wish to vote
by placing a cross in the box at the left of the names on
the ballot papers. Ballot papers on which more than two
names are checked will be considered invalid. Votes
may be cast for only those whose names appear on the
ballot papers. If a ballot contains votes other than votes
for the candidates listed on the ballot paper, those votes
18-46469

21/12/2018

A/73/PV.65

will not be counted. As the General Assembly decided
this morning, any second and subsequent balloting will
be unrestricted. Votes may accordingly be cast in any
second or subsequent ballot for any eligible candidate
who has not yet been elected.
At the invitation of the Acting President,
Ms. Macdonal Álvarez (Plurinational State of
Bolivia), Mr. Serpico (Italy), Mr. Asuta (Kenya),
Ms. Korren (Malta), Mr. Chua (Singapore) and
Ms. Laučiková (Slovakia) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 4.55 p.m. and
resumed at 5.15 p.m.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Absolute majority required:
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Yusuf Aksar (Turkey)
Mr. Guénaël Mettraux (Switzerland)
Mr. Mustapha El Baaj (Morocco)
Mr. Michael A. Newton
(United States of America)

190
0
190
2
188
98
101
97
91
77

The Acting President: Since only one candidate
has obtained an absolute majority in the third round of
balloting, the General Assembly will now proceed to a
fourth round of balloting to fill the second remaining
vacancy. Before beginning the voting process, I should
like to again remind representatives that, pursuant to
rule 88 of the rules of procedure, after the President has
announced the beginning of voting, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order
in connection with the actual conduct of the voting.
Any announcements, including those concerning the
withdrawal of candidatures, should therefore be made
prior to the commencement of the voting process, that
is to say, before the announcement of the beginning of
the voting process.
We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot
papers will now be distributed. Ballot papers will be
given only to the representatives seated directly behind
country nameplates. Representatives are requested to
use only the ballot papers now being distributed. Only

those candidates whose names appear on the ballot
papers are eligible. Representatives will indicate the
one candidate for whom they wish to vote by placing
a cross in the box at the left of the names on the ballot
papers. Ballot papers on which more than one name
is checked will be considered invalid. Votes may be
cast for only those whose names appear on the ballot
papers. If a ballot contains votes other than votes for
the candidates listed on the ballot paper, those votes
will not be counted. As the General Assembly decided
this morning, any second and subsequent balloting will
be unrestricted. Votes may accordingly be cast in any
fourth or subsequent ballot for any eligible candidate
who has not yet been elected.
At the invitation of the Acting President,
Ms. Macdonal Álvarez (Plurinational State of
Bolivia), Mr. Serpico (Italy), Mr. Asuta (Kenya),
Ms. Korren (Malta), Mr. Chua (Singapore) and
Ms. Laucikova (Slovakia) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 5.20 p.m. and
resumed at 5.50 p.m.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required absolute majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Guénaël Mettraux (Switzerland):
Mr. Mustapha El Baaj (Morocco):
Mr. Michael A. Newton
(United States of America):

188
7
181
2
179
98
77
72
30

The Acting President: Since no candidate obtained
an absolute majority in the fourth round of balloting,
the General Assembly will proceed to a fifth round
of balloting.
Before beginning the voting process, I should like
to again remind representatives that, pursuant to rule
88 of the rules of procedure, after the President has
announced the beginning of voting, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order
in connection with the actual conduct of the voting.
Any announcements, including those concerning
withdrawals of candidatures, should therefore be made

18-464693/27

A/73/PV.65

21/12/2018

prior to the commencement of the voting process, that
is to say, before the announcement of the beginning of
the voting process.
We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot
papers will now be distributed. Ballot papers will be
given only to the representatives seated directly behind
country nameplates. Representatives are requested to
use only the ballot papers now being distributed.
Only those candidates whose names appear on the
ballot papers are eligible.
Representatives will indicate the one candidate
for whom they wish to vote by placing a cross in the
box at the left of the names on the ballot papers. Ballot
papers on which more than one name is checked will
be considered invalid. Votes may be cast for only those
whose names appear on the ballot papers. If a ballot
contains votes other than votes for the candidates listed
on the ballot paper, those votes will not be counted.
As the General Assembly decided this morning,
any second and subsequent balloting will be
unrestricted. Votes may accordingly be cast in any fifth
or subsequent ballot for any eligible candidate who has
not yet been elected.
At the invitation of the Acting President,
Ms. Macdonal Álvarez (Plurinational State of
Bolivia), Mr. Serpico (Italy), Mr. Asuta (Kenya),
Ms. Korren (Malta), Mr. Chua (Singapore) and
Ms. Laučiková (Slovakia) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 5.55 p.m. and
resumed at 6 p.m.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Absolute majority required:
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Guénaël Mettraux (Switzerland)
Mr. Mustapha El Baaj (Morocco)
Mr. Michael A. Newton
(United States of America)
4/27

186
3
183
2
181
98
85
75
21

The Acting President: Since no candidate has
obtained an absolute majority in the fifth round of
balloting, the General Assembly will now proceed to
a sixth round of balloting to fill the second remaining
vacancy. Before beginning the voting process, I should
like to again remind representatives that, pursuant to
rule 88 of the rules of procedure, after the President has
announced the beginning of voting, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order
in connection with the actual conduct of the voting.
Any announcements, including those concerning the
withdrawal of candidatures, should therefore be made
prior to the commencement of the voting process, that
is to say, before the announcement of the beginning of
the voting process.
We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot
papers will now be distributed. Ballot papers will be
given only to the representatives seated directly behind
country nameplates. Representatives are requested to
use only the ballot papers now being distributed. Only
those candidates whose names appear on the ballot
papers are eligible. Representatives will indicate the
one candidate for whom they wish to vote by placing
a cross in the box at the left of the names on the ballot
papers. Ballot papers on which more than one name
is checked will be considered invalid. Votes may be
cast for only those whose names appear on the ballot
papers. If a ballot contains votes other than votes for
the candidates listed on the ballot paper, those votes
will not be counted. As the General Assembly decided
this morning, any second and subsequent balloting will
be unrestricted. Votes may accordingly be cast in any
sixth or subsequent ballot for any eligible candidate
who has not yet been elected.
At the invitation of the Acting President,
Ms. Macdonal Álvarez (Plurinational State of
Bolivia), Mr. Serpico (Italy), Mr. Asuta (Kenya),
Ms. Korren (Malta), Mr. Chua (Singapore) and
Ms. Laučiková (Slovakia) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 6.05 p.m. and
resumed at 6.20 p.m.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:

186
1
185
18-46469

21/12/2018

Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required absolute majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Guénaël Mettraux (Switzerland)
Mustapha El Baaj (Morocco)
Michael A. Newton
(United States of America)

A/73/PV.65

1
184
98
88
74
22

The Acting President: Since no candidate has
obtained an absolute majority in the sixth round of
balloting, a further round of balloting will be required.
However, in view of the lateness of the hour, the General
Assembly will resume its consideration of this item at a
later date to be announced.
I call on the representative of Switzerland on a
point of order.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I thank all the
representatives who are still in the Hall. I would simply
like to ask the Secretariat, through you, Sir, whether it
is possible to hold another round of voting this evening.
It seems to me that, if we have to postpone this to any
of the upcoming days, it will be very difficult to have a
sufficient number of delegations in the Hall to arrive at
an absolute majority. The voting requirements for this
organ are quite special and strange. I would therefore
like to ask the Secretariat, through you, Sir, to hold one
more round, and maybe close out this business in 2018,
as foreseen.
The Acting President: The request of the
representative of Switzerland is understandable. In
fact, I had already consulted the Secretariat and,
because of the strict limitation on the availability of
the interpreters, it will not be possible to extend the
meeting further.
I call on the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I do not want to insist
too much, but is it possible to do it without interpreters?
Is that a technical possibility?

Programme of work
The Acting President: I would like to draw the
attention of members to the date of recess of the current
session. Members will recall that at its 41st plenary
meeting, on 28 November, the General Assembly
agreed to postpone the date of recess of the seventythird session to Friday, 21 December. In the light of
the work still to be completed in Fifth Committee, I
would like to propose to the Assembly that the date of
recess of the current session now be further postponed
to Saturday, 22 December.
If there is no objection, may I take it that the
Assembly agrees to further postpone the date of recess
of the seventy-third session to Saturday, 22 December?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I should also like to
consult members regarding an extension of the work
of the Fifth Committee. Members will recall that, at
its 52nd plenary meeting, on 13 December, the General
Assembly decided to extend the work of the Fifth
Committee to Friday, 21 December.
However, the President of the General Assembly
has been informed by the Chair of the Fifth Committee
that the Committee requests a further extension of its
work, to Saturday, 22 December, in view of the fact that
such an extension would facilitate reaching consensus
on the pending draft resolutions before it.
May I take it, therefore, that the General Assembly
agrees to extend the work of the Fifth Committee until
tomorrow, Saturday, 22 December?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Before suspending the
meeting, I would like to remind the Assembly that
the other items listed in today’s Journal — namely,
sub-item (g) of agenda item 20, sub-item (b) of agenda
item 72, sub-item (c) of agenda item 74, items 82, 96
and 104 and sub-item (d) of agenda item 128 — will
be taken up only once the Fifth Committee completes
its work.
The President took the Chair.

The Acting President: I have been advised by the
Secretariat that formal meetings of the plenary require
full interpretation in all official languages.

The meeting was suspended at 6.25 p.m. on
21 December and resumed at 9.55 p.m. on
22 December.

The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 130.

The President: I congratulate the members of the
General Assembly on having successfully concluded

18-464695/27

A/73/PV.65

their work during the main session­fashionably on
time, three days before Christmas. For members’
information, in the past decade, concluding the work
of the Assembly on 22 December is the best record so
far. I wish to commend the Chairperson of the Fifth
Committee, Ambassador Gillian Bird, and her team, as
well as members of the Bureau, for their dedication and
skill in steering the work of the Committee. I would
also like to recognize the outstanding and dedicated
Secretariat team, led by Ms. Sharon Van Buerle, for
the tireless support provided to the Fifth Committee.
My appreciation also goes to the interpreters and
to conference services staff who are here with us
tonight — a Saturday night.
The decisions the Assembly has taken will have
a bearing on how the United Nations functions, today
and tomorrow. Members have agreed on the scale of
assessments for the regular budget and for peacekeeping
operations, which set out our collective responsibilities
to finance the Organization from 2019 through 2021.
They have adopted resolution 73/139, which approves
an additional appropriation of the Secretariat’s share
of the resident coordinator system, reaffirming their
strong support for our reinvigorated and strengthened
system. They have also considered other topics,
including special political missions, construction, first
performance reports and revised estimates resulting
from resolutions and decisions adopted by the Human
Rights Council, among other very important topics.
Decisions on such complex issues require intensive
work and countless hours of negotiations. More
importantly, reaching consensus requires difficult
compromises on all sides, for which members have
shown their willingess. I thank them all for working in
a spirit of cooperation, transparency and inclusiveness.

21/12/2018

take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t i o n 73/ 2 6 0) .

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (g) of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work
The President: As announced at the 50th plenary
meeting, on 11 December, the draft resolution on the
effects of atomic radiation adopted at the 48th plenary
meeting on 7 December had programme budget
implications, as mentioned in paragraph 6 of the
report of the Fourth Committee. Therefore, pursuant
to rule 153, the Acting President announced that
agenda item 52 would be reopened in order to again
put the draft resolution before the General Assembly
for its consideration, including a recorded vote on its
operative paragraph 21 (e), when the report of the Fifth
Committee became available. May I therefore take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to reopen its
consideration of agenda item 52?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 52 (continued)
Effects of atomic radiation

Agenda item 20

Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/73/521)

Sustainable development

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/677)

(g) Report of the United Nations Environment
Assembly of the United Nations Environment
Programme
Report of the Second Committee (A/73/538/
Add.7)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/684)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Second Committee
in paragraph 19 of its report. The Assembly will now
6/27

The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution entitled “Effects of atomic radiation”,
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 11 of
its report. The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of the draft resolution
is contained in document A/73/677. The text of the
report, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/73/L.19, section A.
In order for the Assembly to take action on the
draft resolution, it must first agree, under rule 81 of its
18-46469

21/12/2018

rules of procedure, to reconsider the resolution entitled
“Effects of atomic radiation”. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to reconsider the resolution?
It was so decided.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A separate, recorded vote has been requested on
operative paragraph 21 (e). We will first take a vote on
operative paragraph 21 (e).
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Fiji, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,

A/73/PV.65

Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Albania, Belgium, Cyprus, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, Grenada, Iceland, Jordan, Lebanon,
Netherlands, Paraguay, Sudan, Togo
Operative paragraph 21 (e) was retained by 148
votes to none, with 14 abstentions.
The President: The Special Political and
Decolonization Committee adopted the draft resolution,
as a whole, without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution, as a whole, was
a d o p t e d (r e s ol u t i o n 73/ 2 61) .
[S u b s e q u e n t l y, t h e d e l e g a t i o n s of Albania,
Belgium, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, Iceland,
Jordan, Lebanon and the Netherlands informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour;
the delegations of Israel and the United States had
intended to vote against.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 52?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 72 (continued)
Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/587)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/682)
The President: The Assembly has before it
draft resolution II, recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 26 of its report. The report of the Fifth
Committee on the programme budget implications of
the draft resolution is contained in document A/73/682.
The text of the report, for the time being, is contained
in document A/C.5/73/L.19, section F.

18-464697/27

A/73/PV.65

We will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “A global call for concrete action for the total
elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance and the comprehensive
implementation of and follow-up to the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action”. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, France,
Germany, Israel, Japan, Marshall Islands, Nauru,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia,
8/27

21/12/2018

Finland, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine
Draft resolution II was adopted by 120 votes to 11,
with 41 abstentions (resolution 73/262).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Pakistan informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 72?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
72 and its sub-item (b).
Agenda item 74 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/589/
Add.3)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/681)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 88 of its report. The report of the Fifth
Committee on the programme budget implications of
draft resolution III is contained in document A/73/685.
The text of the report, for the time being, is contained
in document A/C.5/73/L.19, section I. The report of the
Fifth Committee on the programme budget implications
of draft resolution V is contained in document A/73/681.
The text of the report, for the time being, is contained
in document A/C.5/73/L.19, section E.
I shall now call on those representatives who wish
to speak in explanation of vote before the voting.
Mr. Davidson (South Africa): South Africa
would like to place on record its position relating to
18-46469

21/12/2018

the draft resolution before us contained in document
A/C.3/73/L.51, entitled “Situation of human rights
in Myanmar”.
South Africa continues to adhere to the general
principles of international law, including, among other
areas, respect for the territorial integrity of other States,
especially in resolving inter-State challenges. We take
a cautious approach on country-specific issues in
respect of matters of human rights, preferring instead
to promote dialogue in resolving disputes, including
in situations of human rights violations. Furthermore,
my Government remains on guard at all times to
ensure that votes on country-specific human rights
draft resolutions are also not used to engage in regime
changes or to destabilize countries.
That position notwithstanding, South Africa
expresses its deep concern about the deteriorating human
rights situation in Myanmar and calls for an end to the
human suffering experienced by the Rohingya people.
South Africa has consistently condemned human
rights violations in Myanmar, including at the recent
Indian Ocean Rim Association Meeting of the Council
of Ministers, held in Durban. South Africa’s foreign
policy will continue to be anchored in respect for the
promotion and protection of human rights, and we will
therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have asked for the floor to speak about draft
resolution III, entitled “Situation of human rights in
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol, Ukraine”.
The draft resolution before the Assembly is one
of a series of so-called country-specific resolutions
of the Third Committee, all of which are extremely
politicized. As a rule, they are based on unreliable
and sometimes openly fabricated information and
have little to do with the real state of affairs. However,
the draft resolution on Crimea is particularly special.
It is purely anti-Russian. It is false and guileful, and
on top of that its content is meaningless. With all due
respect for the views of our good — and I emphasize
“good” — colleagues from Guatemala, Honduras, the
Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Samoa, the Solomon
Islands and other States that voted in favour of this
draft resolution in the Third Committee, Crimea cannot
be forced back into its brief Ukrainian past. Under the
leadership of the Kyiv regime, with its belligerent,
hateful and unforgivable anti-Russian rhetoric, and its

A/73/PV.65

collapsing economy, religious sectarianism, corruption
and general misery, Ukraine today has ceased to be
a welcoming environment even for Ukrainians. Its
population is shrinking disastrously, with some leaving
for Russia and others for its neighbours Poland and
Hungary and even farther west.
Until 2014, the Autonomous Republic of Crimea
to which the draft resolution refers was part of
Ukraine, during which time it was a depressed region.
Today the Republic of Crimea is very different, with
three official languages, Russian, Crimean Tatar
and Ukrainian. It is a place where Crimean Tatars
and every other ethnic group can exercise their right
to participate in decision-making, where hospitals,
schools, kindergartens, cultural centres, mosques and
cathedrals are being built, where basic infrastructure
is being restored and where billions are being
invested in creating new energy, transportation and
engineering networks for the needs of its residents.
Most importantly, Crimea is a place where people are
happy and have voluntarily chosen Russia as their
home and shaken off more than 20 years of depression
as part of an independent Ukraine, whose authorities
cared nothing for Crimea, just as they cared nothing for
the Crimean Tatars, incidentally, whom they suddenly
remembered and disingenuously began caring about
only when Crimea was irretrievably lost. Do not be
deceived. Crimea is merely a bargaining chip in the
Kyiv regime’s anti-Russian frenzy.
We invite everyone to visit Crimea and see the real
state of affairs on the peninsula for themselves. We
should point out that hundreds of thousands of ordinary
Ukrainians visit it every year. Ask them if the rights
of the peninsula’s residents, or their own rights, are
being infringed on. We are willing to have a dialogue,
including with specialized intergovernmental bodies,
within the framework of the Russian Federation’s
procedures for ensuring those rights on its territory,
and to host their missions to Crimea if they are sent as
part of the mandate of a specific organization in full
compliance with all procedures applicable to visiting
our country. The Russian Federation guarantees respect
for human rights and freedoms and protects them
throughout its territory, including Crimea.
We sincerely hope that the majority of States
members of the General Assembly, as in previous
years, will refrain from associating themselves with
this anti-Russian draft resolution. As article 1 of the

18-464699/27

A/73/PV.65

Universal Declaration of Human Rights states, all
human beings are endowed with reason and conscience.
In conclusion, I would separately like to thank the
Fifth Committee of the General Assembly, which some
hours ago refused to appropriate funds from the regular
budget for the implementation of this draft resolution.
Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic):
The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic would like
to express its complete rejection of draft resolution III,
on the situation of human rights in the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea. It is simply yet another political
attempt to target the Russian Federation for reasons
unrelated to human rights. We say that based on our
firm position regarding the politicization of human
rights issues and the use of relevant United Nations
mechanisms to target specific States and further the
interests of influential members of this Organization
and their allies.
The Syrian Arab Republic helped to found the
Human Rights Council, and Member States had
high hopes for the possibility of leaving behind the
overpoliticization that had plagued the Human Rights
Commission for a better situation, by establishing an
inclusive mechanism that relies on what are known
as international reports, enabling the mechanism to
consider human rights issues occurring in any Member
State, without selectivity on the part of one State or
another. Regrettably, we have to confront the fact that
all the hopes we had for the Human Rights Council
have been dashed. Worse still, some members are
trying to compete with the Human Rights Council in
Geneva by submitting draft resolutions here in New
York, thereby undermining the credibility of such lofty
and important issues. When we established the Human
Rights Council, we all agreed to examine such matters
only in Geneva. We therefore believe that the draft
resolution submitted against the Russian Federation
is simply a waste of time. It is also a waste of United
Nations efforts and represents the blatant politicization
of human rights mechanisms. For all those reasons, my
delegation will vote against the draft resolution.
Mr. Suan (Myanamar): My delegation will vote
against draft resolution V, entitled “Situation of human
rights in Myanmar”, which unfairly targets my country,
with the clear intention of putting unwarranted political
pressure on Myanmar. It is just another step in a series
of unprecedented discriminatory efforts at scrutiny by
abusing various mechanisms in the name of human
10/27

21/12/2018

rights. Its tone and tenor are hostile and provocative and
display total disregard for the dignity and sovereignty
of a State Member of the United Nations. It is a classic
example of double standards and of the selective and
discriminatory application of human rights norms to
a developing country that is in a delicate transition
to democracy with mounting political, social and
economic challenges.
The draft resolution is clearly not trying to find
solutions to the complex situation in Rakhine state but
rather sows seeds of mistrust and further polarizes the
various communities of the region, and its adoption
would be detrimental not only to the repatriation process
but to Myanmar’s efforts to build peace and harmony
in Rakhine, and would further alienate the people of
Myanmar from the international community. The
international community’s constructive engagement,
and its support and encouragement of Myanmar’s
efforts to address the complex issue in Rakhine state,
is the only viable way to achieve sustainable peace and
development in Myanmar. No one is in a better position
than the Government and the people of Myanmar
to understand the depth and complexity of their
own challenges.
We shall not be bound by this unfair draft resolution.
However, we shall continue to work for the voluntary,
safe and dignified repatriation of displaced persons to
build the rule of law, peace, harmony and sustainable
development for all people in Rakhine state and ensure
the true implementation of the Annan Commission
recommendation and the Myanmar sustainable
development plan. We take seriously the accountability
issue; the Independent Commission of Inquiry has been
established to take up the matter independently, with
transparency and credibility. At the same time, we shall
continue to maintain our bilateral cooperation with
Bangladesh for the repatriation of displaced persons,
in accordance with the agreements and arrangements
signed between the two countries.
The Myanmar Government will maintain the
present momentum of collaboration efforts with the
United Nations Development Programme and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to facilitate the repatriation and resettlement
of returnees, as per the tripartite memorandum of
understanding. We are going to speed up cooperation
with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), though the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for
Humanitarian Assistance on disaster management, in
18-46469

21/12/2018

the process of repatriation and resettlement. Myanmar
attaches great importance to engaging with the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar. We are
now working closely with her. We will continue to
maintain constructive engagement with the United
Nations, including the Security Council, the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Sexual Violence in Conflict. The Government and the
people of Myanmar are united in their commitment to
strive for lasting peace, the rule of law, democracy and
sustainable development for all citizens of the country.
We shall be relentless in our efforts.
I would like to express my Government’s most
sincere gratitude to those delegations that stood firm on
their principled position and voted against, abstained or
did not participate in the voting on this discriminatory
draft resolution in the Third Committee. Once again,
I would like to urge all friends and colleagues present
to stand together on principle and vote against draft
resolution V, entitled “Situation of human rights
in Myanmar”.
Mr. Kazi (Bangladesh): Bangladesh wishes to take
the floor in connection with draft resolution V, entitled
“Situation of human rights in Myanmar”. There are a
number of provisions in the draft resolution related to
Bangladesh as a State party affected by the protracted
Rohingya humanitarian crisis. We take this opportunity
to reaffirm our support for the draft resolution, as well
as our compliance with the provisions of the draft
resolution that are relevant to Bangladesh. On our part,
we will also continue to support the activities of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar.
We are somewhat disappointed that, in the programme
budget implications for the Special Envoy’s work, a
50 per cent reduction has been made in terms of ground
transportation for her Office. However, we would expect
that the Myanmar authorities will continue to facilitate
the movement and transportation of the Special Envoy
and her team.
As one of Myanmar’s neighbours, Bangladesh
remains committed to promoting peace and security,
human rights and sustainable development in Myanmar.
We take note of the assurance by the Permanent
Representative of Myanmar in connection with
facilitating the voluntary, safe and dignified return of
the Rohingya to their homes or places of their choice

A/73/PV.65

in Rakhine state. Bangladesh looks forward to further
momentum in that regard in the coming year.
Mr. Ri Song Chol (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea opposes country-specific draft
resolutions, which clearly show the politicization of
human rights and selectivity and double standards
when considering human rights issues. Politicized
country-specific draft resolutions have nothing to do
with the genuine promotion and protection of human
rights. They serve only to encourage confrontation,
rather than an atmosphere favourable to considering
human rights issues. The Universal Periodic Review
of the Human Rights Council is recognized as the
appropriate mechanism in which the human rights
situations of all countries are considered on an equal
and impartial basis.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea rejects and will vote against draft
resolution III, entitled “Situation of human rights in
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol, Ukraine”.
The President: We will now take a decision on
draft resolutions III and V, one by one.
Draft resolution III is entitled “Situation of human
rights in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the
city of Sevastopol, Ukraine”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bulgaria, Canada,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain

18-4646911/27

A/73/PV.65

and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Vanuatu
Against:
Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Burundi, Cambodia, Chad, China, Comoros, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Eritrea,
India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Russian
Federation, Serbia, South Africa, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Uganda, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria,
Argentina,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cabo
Verde, Cameroon, Chile, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Republic
of Korea, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Thailand,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Viet Nam, Zambia
Draft resolution III was adopted by 65 votes to 27,
with 70 abstentions (resolution 73/263).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Botswana and
Yemen informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour; the delegations of
Jamaica and Tunisia had intended to abstain.]
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Situation of human rights in Myanmar”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
12/27

21/12/2018

Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cabo Verde, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States
of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
Belarus, Cambodia, China, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Philippines,
Russian Federation, Viet Nam
Abstaining:
Bhutan, Cameroon, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Equatorial Guinea, India, Japan, Kenya,
Mongolia, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Papua New
Guinea, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Serbia,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Zimbabwe
Draft resolution V was adopted by 136 votes to 8,
with 22 abstentions (resolution 73/264).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 74 and of agenda item 74
as a whole?
18-46469

21/12/2018

It was so decided.
Agenda item 82
Report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its seventieth session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/556)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 12 of its report. The report of the Fifth
Committee on the programme budget implications of
draft resolution I is contained in document A/73/680.
The text of the report, for the time being, is contained
in document A/C.5/73/L.19, section D.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 73/265).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 82?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 96 (continued)
Developments in the field of information and
telecommunications in the context of international
security
Report of the First Committee (А/73/505)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/678)
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft resolution II, recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report (A/73/505).
The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme
budget implications of draft resolution II is contained
in document A/73/678. The text of the report is, for
the time being, contained in document A/C.5/73/L.19,
section B.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution II, entitled “Advancing responsible
State behaviour in cyberspace in the context of
international security”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

A/73/PV.65

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen
Against:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Comoros,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Nicaragua,
Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Belarus, Botswana, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malawi, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Pakistan, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Senegal

18-4646913/27

A/73/PV.65

Draft resolution II was adopted by 138 votes to 12,
with 16 abstentions (resolution 73/266).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 96?
It was so decided.

21/12/2018

Arab

Republic,

Tajikistan,

Thailand,

Tonga,

Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
United

Arab

Tanzania,

Emirates,

Uzbekistan,

United
Venezuela

Republic

of

(Bolivarian

Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:

Agenda item 104 (continued)

Israel, Liberia, Micronesia (Federated States of),

The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East

United States of America

Report of the First Committee (A/73/513)

Abstaining:

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/679)

Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,

The President: The Assembly will now take
action on the draft decision recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report (A/73/513).
The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme
budget implications of the draft decision is contained
in document A/73/679. The text of the report is, for
the time being, contained in document A/C.5/73/L.19,
section C.

Bahamas, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,

We shall now take a decision on the draft decision,
entitled “Convening a conference on the establishment
of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction”.

Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Chile, China, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian
14/27

Brazil,

Bulgaria,

Cameroon,

Canada,

Chad,

Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu
The draft decision was adopted by 88 votes to 4,
with 75 abstentions (decision 73/546).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Nepal informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour;
the delegation of Uganda had intended to abstain.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 104?
It was so decided.
18-46469

21/12/2018

Agenda item 128 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(d) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/683)
Draft resolution (A/73/L.23)
The President: The report of the Fifth Committee
on the programme budget implications of the draft
resolution is contained in document A/73/683. The
text of the report is, for the time being, contained in
document A/C.5/73/L.19, section G.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/73/L.23.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic):
Our statement today is in line with the position that my
country expressed in the statement that we delivered
during the 40th plenary meeting, held on 26 November,
on agenda item 128, in particular sub-item (d), entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States”.
Based on the political facts and legal arguments
contained in the statement in exercise of the right
of reply made by the delegation of the Syrian Arab
Republic during that meeting, in response to the
statement made by the observer of the League of Arab
States, we reiterate today our request that a recorded
vote be taken on the draft resolution contained in
document A/73/L.23.
The Syrian Arab Republic continues to believe that
the League of Arab States will be able to restore its
role and credibility if it immediately begins a serious
and comprehensive review of its work over the past
decade in particular so as to re-establish its democratic
mechanisms for collective action, which are the basis
of every regional and international organization. Only
then will the League of Arab States be able once again
to play its role and carry out its responsibilities as a
regional organization representing common Arab

A/73/PV.65

interests, an organization that protects the common
Arab security concept and engages with its region and
the world in a manner that accords with the genuine
interests of the peoples of Arab States, not those of only
one or two States members of that organization.
In that context, we continue to hope that the League
of Arab States will view the situation in Syria and
act in a constructive and positive manner, especially
by revoking its illegal decision to suspend Syria’s
participation in its meetings and by cooperating and
coordinating directly with the Syrian Government
while supporting its efforts to counter terrorism and
ensure the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons to their homes, as well as by supporting
the reconstruction process and ending all foreign
occupation of its territories.
In closing, I should like to stress that my country’s
position today is not against the League of Arab States,
of which we are a founder. It is a principled position
because we care about this regional organization, whose
goal is to bring together the Arab countries, protect their
interests and reject interference in their internal affairs,
as well as achieve social and economic development in
all those countries without discrimination or exception
in order to ensure that no one is left behind.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the only speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
(spoke in English)
We will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/73/L.23, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States”. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,

18-4646915/27

A/73/PV.65

Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Côte d’Ivoire, Republic of Korea, Syrian Arab
Republic
Draft resolution A/73/L.23 was adopted by 155 votes
to none, with 3 abstentions (resolution 73/267).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Côte d’Ivoire and
the Republic of Korea informed the Secretariat that
they had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(d) of agenda item 128?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on sub-item
16/27

21/12/2018

(b) of agenda item 117 and agenda items 134 to 137, 139,
140, 143, 144, 146 to 149 and 165.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Hicham Oussihamou of Morocco, to introduce in
one intervention the reports of the Fifth Committee that
are before the Assembly today.
Mr. Oussihamou (Morocco), Rapporteur of the
Fifth Committee: I have the honour to present the
reports of the Fifth Committee.
The Fifth Committee met from 6 October to
22 December 2018 and held 26 plenary meetings and
numerous informal consultations.
The Committee’s reports on the following
agenda items were already considered by the General
Assembly at its 19th and 35th plenary meetings, on
12 October and 15 November 2018: agenda item 140,
entitled “Scale of assessments for the apportionment of
the expenses of the United Nations”, specifically under
Article 19 of the Charter, and agenda item 117, entitled
“Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments”. Let me now present the
additional reports of the Fifth Committee containing
recommendations on issues that require action during
the main part of the seventy-third session of the
General Assembly.
With regard to sub-item (b) of agenda item 117,
entitled “Appointments of members of the Committee
on Contributions”, in paragraph 4 of its report
contained in document A/73/483/Add.1, the Committee
recommends that the General Assembly appoint Jakub
Chmielewski of Poland as a member of the Committee
on Contributions for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2019.
With regard to agenda item 134, entitled “Financial
reports and audited financial statements and reports of
the Board of Auditors”, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly, in paragraph 7 of its report
contained in document A/73/671, the adoption of a
draft resolution, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
With regard to agenda item 137, entitled
“Programme planning”, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report
contained in document A/73/667, the adoption of a
draft resolution, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
18-46469

21/12/2018

With regard to agenda item 140, entitled “Scale
of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses
of the United Nations”, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly, in paragraph 8 of its report
contained in document A/73/421/Add.1, the adoption
of a draft resolution, which the Committee adopted
without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 139, entitled “Pattern
of conferences”, the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report
contained in document A/73/675, the adoption of a
draft resolution, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
With regard to agenda item 143, entitled “United
Nations common system”, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report
contained in document A/73/676, the adoption of a
draft resolution, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
With regard to agenda item 144, entitled “United
Nations pension system”, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report
contained in document A/73/673, the adoption of a
draft resolution, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
With regard to agenda item 146, entitled “Report
of the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/73/672, the adoption of a draft resolution,
which the Committee adopted without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 147, entitled
“Administration of justice at the United Nations”, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly,
in paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/73/669, the adoption of a draft resolution, which the
Committee adopted without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 148, entitled “Financing
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/73/670, the adoption of a draft resolution,
which the Committee adopted without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 149, entitled “Scale
of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses
of United Nations peacekeeping operations”, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly,

A/73/PV.65

in paragraph 10 of its report contained in document
A/73/668, the adoption of a draft resolution, which the
Committee adopted without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 165, entitled “Financing
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/73/674, the adoption of a draft resolution,
which the Committee adopted without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 136, entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2018-2019”,
in document A/73/686, the Committee considered
two draft resolutions. In draft resolution I, entitled
“Special subject relating to the programme budget
for the biennium 2018-2019”, oral amendments were
introduced as follows.
On section XIV, entitled “Estimates in respect
of special political missions, good offices and other
political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly
and/or the Security Council”, the representative of Cuba
introduced an oral amendment. A recorded vote on the
amendment was requested, in which the Committee
voted not to include the oral amendment.
On section XVIII, entitled “Revised estimates
resulting from resolutions and decisions adopted
by the Human Rights Council at its thirty-seventh,
thirty-eighth, thirty-ninth sessions and twenty-eighth
special session”, an amendment was introduced by the
representative of Israel, followed by a recorded vote
on the amendment, in which the Committee voted not
to include the proposed amendment. The Committee
subsequently adopted the draft resolution as a whole
without a vote. The Committee, in paragraph 60 of
document A/C.5/73/L.21, recommended to the General
Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution contained
in document A/C.5/73/L.20.
In paragraph 9, the Committee also recommended
to the General Assembly the adoption of the revised
budget appropriation from the biennium 2018-2019, the
revised income estimate for the biennium 2018-2019
and the financing of the appropriation for the year 2019.
Under the same agenda item, the Committee also
recommended the adoption of nine statements of
programme budget implications. The reports of the
Fifth Committee on those statements werer issued in
documents A/73/677 to A/73/685.

18-4646917/27

A/73/PV.65

Finally, under agenda item 135, entitled “Review
of the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, in paragraph 9 of its
report contained in document A/73/687, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
the draft resolution entitled “Shifting the management
paradigm in the United Nations”.
Also, in paragraph 10 of the same report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of the draft decision entitled “Questions
deferred for future consideration”, which the Committee
adopted without a vote.
I thank delegations for their cooperation and assure
them that the changes made during the twenty-sixth
formal meeting of the Fifth Committee will be reflected
in the draft resolutions, decisions and reports, which
will be issued shortly.
On a personal note, allow me to thank the Chair
of the Fifth Committee, Ambassador Gillian Bird,
for the dedicated way in which she guided us through
our difficult work, as well as my fellow colleagues
in the Bureau, working with whom is always a truly
gratifying experience. I am grateful to the Secretariat
of the Fifth Committee, Ms. Sharon Van Buerle, and
her terrific team for their continued support and
professionalism. Their support was crucial throughout
the session. I would also like to thank the interpreters,
conference officers — namely, Ivanka Sporysova,
Andrew Kowalchuk and Tyler To — as well as the
sound engineers for their dedication, collaboration and
hard work.
In conclusion, let me express my deepest gratitude
to my Ambassador, His Excellency Mr. Omar Hilale,
Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of Morocco
to the United Nations. Without his generous support
and solicitude, my life in the Fifth Committee would
be harder.
The President: I thank the Rapporteur of the
Fifth Committee.
Before proceeding further, I would like to emphasize
that, as the Fifth Committee finished its work only
earlier this evening, the reports are available in English
only. It is my understanding that all of the reports will
be issued in all official languages as soon as possible. I
thank representatives for their understanding.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
18/27

21/12/2018

made clear in the Committee and are reflected in
the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the reports of the Fifth Committee that are before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of position. I would like to
remind members that, under paragraph 7 of decision
34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee.”
May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. That means
that, where recorded votes were taken, we will do the
same. I also hope that we may proceed to adopt without a
vote those recommendations that were adopted without
a vote in the Fifth Committee. The results of the votes
will be uploaded to the PaperSmart portal.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contribution
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/483/Add.1)
The President: In paragraph 4 of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint Mr. Jakub Chmielewski of Poland
as a member of the Committee on Contributions for a
three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2019.
18-46469

21/12/2018

A/73/PV.65

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Mr. Jakub Chmielewski as a member of the
Committee on Contributions for a three-year term of
office beginning on 1 January 2019?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 117?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 134
Financial reports and audited financial statements
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/671)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/73/L.12.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t i o n 73/ 2 6 8) .

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 134.
Agenda item 137 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/667)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/73/L.3.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t i o n 73/ 2 69) .

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 137.
Agenda item 139
Pattern of conferences
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/675)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/73/L.17.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t i o n 73/ 270) .

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 139.
Agenda item 140
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/421/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/73/L.8.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t i o n 73/ 271) .

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 140.

18-4646919/27

A/73/PV.65

21/12/2018

Agenda item 149 (continued)

Agenda item 144

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of United Nations peacekeeping operations

United Nations pension system

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/668)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 10 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/73/L.9. The Assembly will now take a decision
on the draft resolution.
I would like to confirm the understanding of
the Assembly that, on an exceptional basis for the
2019-2021 scale period only, three countries in level
B — the Bahamas, Bahrain and Saudi Arabia — would
be afforded discounts of 7.5 per cent to their assessment
rates, and that those discounts shall be borne on
a pro rata basis by the permanent members of the
Security Council.
We will now take action on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t i o n 73/ 272) .

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 149.
Agenda item 143
United Nations common system
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/676)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/73/L.18.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t i o n 73/ 273) .

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 143.
20/27

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/673)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/73/L.15.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t i o n 73/ 274) .

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 144.
Agenda item 146
Report on the activities of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/672)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/73/L.13.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t i o n 73/ 275 ) .

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 146.
Agenda item 147
Administration of justice at the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/669)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
18-46469

21/12/2018

A/73/PV.65

in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/73/L.10, as orally revised.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution, as orally revised, was adopted
(resolution 73/276).

The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t i o n 73/ 278) .

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 165.
Agenda item 136
Programme budget for the biennium 2018-2019
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/686)

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 147.

The President: The Assembly has before it draft
resolutions I, II A, II B and II C, recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 60 of its report.

Agenda item 148

I give the floor to the representative of Cuba to
introduce oral amendments to draft resolution I.

Financing of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/670)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/73/L.11.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t i o n 73/ 277 ) .

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 148.
Agenda item 165
Financing of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/674)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/73/L.16.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?

Mrs. De Armas Bonchang (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation would like to refer to agenda
item 136 of the programme, in particular to draft
resolution I, entitled “Special subjects relating to the
programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019”, and
specifically section XIV, entitled “Estimates in respect
of special political missions, good offices and other
political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly
and/or the Security Council”.
As we have made clear for more than a decade,
there is no negotiated intergovernmental agreement
on the responsibility to protect, and therefore no legal
basis on which to carry out activities related to it.
Throughout the past 10 years, the Secretariat has
not been able to submit the legislative mandate prepared
by Member States, which would make it possible to
advance in the implementation of that concept. The
resources related to the Office of the Special Adviser
on the Responsibility to Protect appear to have been
mixed with those requested for the Special Adviser of
the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide,
whose functions our delegation fully supports as part
of the position of principle of the Government of Cuba
against genocide.
The amendments I will now propose do not seek to
undermine the functions or the resources of the Office of
the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide. The
delegation of Cuba firmly believes that the budgetary
estimates and the associated narrative that have been
submitted for the Special Adviser on the Responsibility
to Protect must be deleted and should be considered
only once the General Assembly has reached a decision

18-4646921/27

A/73/PV.65

on the concept, its implementation, its scope and other
related issues.
I would therefore like to repeat Cuba’s request that
the following amendments be made to section XIV
of draft resolution I, which is before the Assembly
for consideration.
The first preambular paragraph should read
as follows:
“Recalling that the General Assembly has not
taken a decision on the concept of the responsibility
to protect, its scope, its implications and the
possible forms of putting it into practice”.
The second preambular paragraph should read
as follows:
“Noting that the estimates relating to thematic
cluster I include descriptions, functions, expected
benefits, indicators of achievement, outcomes and
other information related to the Special Adviser
of the Secretary-General on the Responsibility
to Protect”.
Operative paragraph 1 should read as follows:
“Decides to eliminate all references to the
activities, functions, expected benefits, indicators
of achievement, outcomes and other information
relating to the Special Adviser of the SecretaryGeneral on the Responsibility to Protect, as laid out
in the strategic framework and the corresponding
description provided by the Office of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide.”
Operative paragraph 2 should read as follows:
“Requests the Secretary-General to publish
a correction to his report contained in document
A/73/352/Add.1.”
In conclusion, we ask delegations to duly consider
the amendments that I have just submitted in order to
ensure that we can properly finance the mandates that
enjoy intergovernmental consensus and vote in favour
of them.
The President: I shall now give the floor to
speakers who wish to make statements in explanation
of vote before the voting.
Mr. Galoumian (Canada) (spoke in French):
During the 2005 World Summit, Heads of State and
22/27

21/12/2018

Government adopted a declaration with a section entitled
“Responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity”. The tangible effect of the implementation of
that declaration, which the General Assembly adopted
by consensus, was the establishment of the post of the
Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect.
Since then the General Assembly has annually
reaffirmed its support for the mandate of the Special
Adviser by renewing its funding. Each year the Fifth
Committee and the General Assembly have voted
against the oral amendments that were introduced today
by a large majority, thereby reaffirming the Assembly’s
support for the role of the Special Adviser.
For those reasons, Canada asks for a vote on the
oral amendments. We encourage all Member States to
vote against them.
Mr. Escoto González (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation thanks the representative of
Cuba for introducing the oral amendments to draft
resolution I, entitled “Special subjects relating to the
programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019”,
and specifically with regard to the section entitled
“Thematic cluster I: special and personal envoys,
advisers and representatives of the Secretary-General”.
Nicaragua believes that it is inappropriate and
without merit to allocate resources to the Special
Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect. We recall
that the concept of the responsibility to protect does
not enjoy consensus in the General Assembly. For that
reason, my delegation supports the oral amendments
introduced by the delegation of Cuba. We urge other
Member States to vote in favour of them.
Mr. Tavoli (Islamic Republic of Iran): The Islamic
Republic of Iran will vote in favour of the amendments
proposed by the delegation of Cuba to section XIV of
draft resolution I, on special political missions, and
invites others to do the same.
I would like to draw the attention of Member
States to the serious risk of a biased interpretation
and application of the responsibility to protect. My
delegation reaffirms Iran’s unwavering commitment
to the noble goal of protecting civilians. Needless to
say, every State should embrace that responsibility
vis-à-vis its population. That by no means whatsoever
may imply permission to use force against other
States under any pretext, such as humanitarian or
18-46469

21/12/2018

pre-emptive intervention. Notwithstanding the formal
discussion on the responsibility to protect that took
place in the General Assembly, we are still far from
a consensual understanding of its implementation. The
formal discussion in the General Assembly is not an
appropriate format for addressing existing conceptual
differences among Member States.
Mr. Ri Song Chol (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea strongly supports the amendment
proposed by the Republic of Cuba to section XIV of the
draft resolution contained in document A/C.5/73/L.20.
As we are well aware, the concept of the responsibility
to protect has not been agreed by consensus by all
Member States in the General Assembly to date. It is
still under discussion by Member States, as the concept
entails some dangerous elements that can be, and have
been, manipulated in practice for political purposes,
as we have witnessed in recent history, to bring down
legitimate Governments in developing countries.
My delegation would therefore like to request that
incorporating into the role of the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide
the narratives, functions, expected accomplishments,
indicators of achievement, outputs and other information
related to the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
on the Responsibility to Protect should be deleted from
the draft resolution and that we wait until the concept
is agreed by all by consensus. Therefore, the delegation
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will vote
in favour of the amendment proposed by delegation of
the Republic of Cuba.
The President: We will now take a decision on
draft resolutions I to II C, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Special subjects
relating to the programme budget for the biennium
2018–2019”, the text of which, for the time being, is
contained in document A/C.5/73/L.20.
The representative of Cuba introduced a draft
oral amendment to section XIV of draft resolution I.
In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure,
the Assembly will now take a decision on the draft oral
amendment. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

A/73/PV.65

In favour:
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burundi,
Cambodia, Central African Republic, Comoros,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Nicaragua, Pakistan, Papua New
Guinea, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Zimbabwe
Against:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Belize, Bhutan, Brunei
Darussalam, Cameroon, China, Colombia, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, Oman, Paraguay,
Philippines, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Yemen
The draft oral amendment was rejected by 73 votes
to 22, with 53 abstentions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel to introduce a draft oral
amendment to section XVIII of draft resolution I.

18-4646923/27

A/73/PV.65

Mr. Wax (Israel): My delegation would like to
propose an oral amendment to section XVIII of draft
resolution I, as contained in document A/C.5/73/L.20.
The amendment shall read as the following
operative paragraph:
“Decides not to appropriate any resources
for the implementation of Human Rights Council
resolution A/HRC/RES/S-28/1.”
The President: I shall now give the floor to
delegations that wish to explain their vote or position
before we take action on the proposals before us.
Mr. Alyahya (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the Group of Arab States, I request that a recorded
vote be taken on the draft oral amendment introduced
by the delegation of Israel, as we asked during the
meeting of the Fifth Committee. Human Rights Council
resolution A/HRC/RES/S-28/1 seeks to mobilize
resources for the Human Rights Council to investigate
human rights violations in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. In that regard, we
emphasize the importance of mobilizing resources to
finance the implementation of that resolution. We call
on all Member States to vote accordingly.
The President: The representative of Israel has
introduced an oral amendment to section XVIII of draft
resolution I. In accordance with rule 90 of the rules
of procedure, the Assembly will now take a decision
on the draft oral amendment. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Australia, Israel, Liberia, United States of America
Against:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cambodia, Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
24/27

21/12/2018

Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Montenegro,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic, Equatorial Guinea,
Fiji, Georgia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Kenya,
Malawi, Myanmar, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Solomon Islands, Togo, Ukraine, United Republic
of Tanzania, Vanuatu
The draft oral amendment was rejected by 125
votes to 4, with 24 abstentions.
The President: The General Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution I, entitled “Special
subjects relating to the proposed programme budget for
the biennium 2018-2019”. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 73/279).
The President: Draft resolution II A is entitled
“Revised budget appropriations for the biennium
2018–2019”, the text of which, for the time being,
is contained in document A/C.5/73/L.21. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II
(r e s ol u t i o n 73/ 2 8 0 A) .

A

was

adopted

The President: Draft resolution II B is entitled
“Revised income estimates for the biennium 2018–
18-46469

21/12/2018

A/73/PV.65

2019”, the text of which, for the time being, is contained
in document A/C.5/73/L.21. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II
(r e s ol u t i o n 73/ 2 8 0 B) .

B

was

adopted

The President: Draft resolution II C is entitled
“Financing of the appropriations for the year 2019”,
the text of which, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/73/L.21. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II
(r e s ol u t i o n 73/ 2 8 0 C ) .

C

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote or position, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation joined the consensus on
resolution 73/279, entitled “Special subjects relating to
the programme budget for the biennium 2018-2019”. We
also joined the consensus in favour of section XIV of
the resolution, entitled “Estimates in respect of special
political missions, good offices and other political
initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or
the Security Council”. However, my delegation would
like to express its reservations about appropriating
financial resources for the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General involved with the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). Moreover,
we note in that regard that Terje Rød-Larsen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, was going beyond
the mandate that was entrusted to him by the Security
Council in resolution 1559 (2004). Mr. Rød-Larsen did
not have the necessary criteria stipulated in paragraph
12 of resolution 63/261. Nevertheless, until the day
he resigned, on 13 January 2016, the Special Envoy
continued to go beyond the mandate he was entrusted
with by the Security Council in resolution 1559 (2004).
Unfortunately, we have not seen any change
in that approach in the preparation of the reports on
that resolution since the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs temporarily took over the
responsibility of submitting those reports, especially
in terms of mentioning matters that are considered the

internal affairs of two sovereign States, namely, Syria
and Lebanon, and in terms of what was referred to in
paragraphs 80 and 88 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral contained in document A/73/352/Add.1. Those
two paragraphs noted the demarcation of the joint borders
between Syria and Lebanon and the establishment of
diplomatic ties between the two States. It is as if to date
it had not occurred to those who prepare the reports of
the Secretary-General that there is a Lebanese Embassy
in Damascus and a Syrian Embassy in Beirut. Those two
Embassies have been operating at the ambassadorial
level for more than 10 years. Therefore, such mistaken
information prompts us to question the credibility of
those reports. We consider the content of the reports in
that regard to be in gross violation of the Charter of the
United Nations, in particular a violation of sovereignty
and blatant interference in the internal affairs of those
two sisterly States.
Moreover, we reaffirm that the reports of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
1559 (2004) continue to be blatantly biased towards
Israel, the occupying Power. They intentionally
disregard the fact that Israel has not implemented any
of its obligations stipulated by resolution 1559 (2004),
especially Israel’s withdrawal from the occupied
Lebanese territories.
While the Syrian delegation joined the consensus
on resolution 73/279, when it comes to its section XVIII,
entitled “Revised estimates resulting from resolutions
and decisions adopted by the Human Rights Council
at its thirty-seventh, thirty-eighth and thirty-ninth
sessions and twenty-eighth special session”, the Syrian
delegation would like to express its reservations on
the appropriation of financial resources to implement
the resolutions of the Human Rights Council on the
situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic.
That emanates from our principled and well-known
stance, which rejects the use of human rights issues to
target certain States in order to further the interests of
some countries that are influential in this Organization
and their allies in a selective manner that is illegitimate
and politicized. That is aimed at interfering in the
internal affairs of States using various pretexts and in a
manner that runs counter to the purposes and principles
of the Charter, especially sovereign equality and
non-interference in the internal affairs of other Member
States, keeping in mind the lack of credibility and the
lack of impartiality of the Human Rights Council,
which adopted those resolutions.

18-4646925/27

A/73/PV.65

Mr. Fernández Rivera (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation has
requested the floor in reference to the subject matter
of the report contained in document A/73/477, entitled
“Revised estimates resulting from resolutions and
decisions adopted by the Human Rights Council at its
thirty-seventh, thirty-eighth and thirty-ninth sessions
and twenty-eighth special session”, and resolution
73/280, on the same subject, which was just adopted
by consensus and which my delegation supported.
My delegation wishes to place on record that it
disassociates itself from the document mentioned in the
report — identified by the symbol A/HRC/39/1 — on
the basis of the following positions of principle.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela was in
favour of the resolution concerning the report of the
Human Rights Council contained in document A/73/53
as it pertains to the 2018 sessions, in accordance with
its principled position reaffirming the importance of
that subsidiary body of the General Assembly as the
supreme forum responsible for addressing this vital
issue from the perspective of cooperation and dialogue
with States.
However, Venezuela reiterates its condemnation
of the adoption of resolutions and special procedures
or any other mechanism on the human rights situation
in specific countries. Furthermore, my country rejects
selectivity in the handling of this issue for politically
motivated purposes, which constitutes a violation of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. In that
regard, Venezuela reiterates that it disassociates itself
from the document contained in A/HRC/39/1.
The continued practice of the selective adoption
of resolutions regarding human rights situations in
specific countries violates the principles of universality,
objectivity and non-selectivity with which human rights
issues must be addressed. Cooperation and dialogue
are the appropriate channels and essential principles
for the effective promotion and protection of human
rights. In that regard, we support the ongoing calls of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries in relation to
this issue.
Venezuela urges that the positive progress that
has been made since the establishment of the Human
Rights Council be continued. The Universal Periodic
Review mechanism should be the preferred formula
for cooperation to address the issue of human rights.
Venezuela also calls for the elimination of the practice of
26/27

21/12/2018

the selective adoption of resolutions by countries, which
weakens the mandate of the Human Rights Council.
Mr. Wax (Israel): I would like to state for the
record that Israel disassociates itself from the decision
to appropriate resources for the implementation of
Human Rights Council resolution S-28/1.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 136.
Agenda item 135
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/687)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 9 of its report and a draft decision
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 10
of the same report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution
and the draft decision. The General Assembly will
turn first to the draft resolution entitled “Shifting
the management paradigm in the United Nations:
comparative assessment of human resources structures”,
the text of which, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/73/L.14.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t i o n 73/ 2 81) .

was

adopted

The President: The draft decision is entitled
“Questions deferred for future consideration”, the text
of which, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/73/L.22, as orally revised. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 73/547).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 135.
18-46469

21/12/2018

Agenda item 117 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(h) Appointment of the judges of the
United Nations Dispute Tribunal
The President: Members will recall that by
its resolution 73/276, of 22 December, the General
Assembly decided, inter alia, to extend the positions
of the two ad litem judges in Geneva and Nairobi
whose current terms of office are about to expire. The
Assembly also decided not to extend the ad litem judge
position in New York. The three ad litem judges whose
terms expire on 31 December are Rowan Downing
of Australia, in Geneva; Alessandra Greceanu of
Romania, in New York; and Nkemdilim Amelia Izuako
of Nigeria, in Nairobi.
The General Assembly will now proceed to the
extension of the terms of the two ad litem judges in
Geneva and Nairobi, in accordance with paragraph 37
of resolution 73/276, by which the Assembly decided to
extend the positions of the two ad litem judges in Geneva
and Nairobi and current incumbent judges, pending
the nomination of candidates by the Internal Justice
Council and the appointment of the aforementioned
four half-time judges by the General Assembly, which
should take place no later than 31 December 2019.
May I therefore take it that the Assembly wishes to
extend the terms of office of the two ad litem judges,
namely, Rowan Downing of Australia, in Geneva, and
Nkemdilim Amelia Izuako of Nigeria, in Nairobi?
It was so decided (decision 73/408).
The President: May I take that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (h) of agenda item 117?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The President: With regard to the programme of
work of the General Assembly, apart from organizational
matters and items that may have to be considered by
operation of the rules of procedure of the Assembly,
and bearing in mind that consideration and action have
already been taken by the Assembly on a majority of
items, I should like to inform members that the following
agenda items remain open for consideration during the

A/73/PV.65

seventy-third session of the General Assembly: agenda
items 9, 11, 13, 14, 16, 18, 18 (d), 19, 20, 20 (a), 20 (b),
20 (d) and 20 (h), 22, 22 (b), 23, 23 (b), 25, 25 (b), 31-33,
34, 35-39, 41, 42, 44-50, 56, 65-68, 70, 70 (a), 71, 71 (a),
72, 75, 78, 78 (a), 88, 89, 101, 109, 113, 114, 115, 116 (a)
and (b), 117 (g) and (h), 118-127, 128, 128 (a), (c), (e), (f),
(g), (h), (i), (j), (m), (p), (r), (s), (t), (x) and (z), 129-132,
134-166 and 168.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
take note of those agenda items that remain open for
consideration during the seventy-third session of the
Assembly?
It was so decided.
Statement by the President
The President: I think we are reaching the end. I
will just say a few words in Spanish, because we are all
very tired.
(spoke in Spanish)
We have reached the end of an important phase
of our work. I am very satisfied with, and proud of,
what we have achieved up to this point. I would like
to congratulate all delegations for their dedication and
their commitment to reaching the necessary agreements
that allow our Organization, the United Nations, to be
more relevant for all peoples. Members’ efforts were
indeed worthwhile. I would also like to thank the
Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly, the Chairs
and the Bureaus of the Main Committees, as well as
the Secretariat for its extraordinary work and support.
Now is the time to take a break to recharge so
that we can begin the new year with the necessary
momentum. It will be a year replete not only with
challenges, but also with opportunities. In 2019 we
will have an intensive programme of work and will
have to address many items in need of our attention. I
count on Member States to continue to build together a
promising future for the millions of people who expect
from our Organization results that will have a positive
impact on their lives.
In the meantime, it is a time to rest, share and
celebrate with our families and loved ones. I extend my
best wishes for peace, happiness, health and prosperity
for all throughout this holiday season and, once again, I
express my sincerest thanks.
The meeting rose at 11.45 p.m.

18-4646927/27
