301

IX. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

and on ways and means of combating it, including, in­
ter alia, the convening, under the auspices of the United
Nations, of an international conference to deal with inter­
national terrorism in the light of the proposal referred to
in the penultimate preambular paragraph of the present
resolution;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General to follow
up, as appropriate, the implementation of the present reso­
lution and to submit a report in this respect to the General
Assembly at its forty-fourth session;
14. Considers that nothing in the present resolution
could in any way prejudice the right to self-determination,
freedom and independence, as derived from the Charter of
the United Nations, of peoples forcibly deprived of that
right referred to in the Declaration on Principles of Inter­
national Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co­
operation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, particularly peoples under colonial
and racist regimes and foreign occupation or other forms
of colonial domination, nor, in accordance with the princi­
ples of the Charter and in conformity with the above­
mentioned Declaration, the right of these peoples to strug­
gle to this end and to seek and receive support;
15. Decides to include the item in the provisional
agenda of its forty-fourth session.

94th plenary meeting
7 December 1987
42/210.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country
A

The General Assembly,

Having considered the report of the Committee on Rela­

tions with the Host Country, 59
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Na­
tions, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of
the United Nations6() and the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regard­
ing the Headquarters of the United Nations,6 1
Recalling further that the problems related to the privi­
leges and immunities of all missions accredited to the
United Nations, the security of the missions and the safety
of their personnel are of great importance and concern to
Member States, as well as the primary responsibility of the
host country,
Noting with deep concern the continued acts violating
the security and the safety of the personnel of the missions
accredited to the United Nations,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to
be taken by the competent authorities of the host country,
in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of
missions and the safety of their personnel,
Considering further the issues raised by certain States
Members of the United Nations in response to the request
and to action by the host country to reduce the size of their
missions,
Conscious of the increased interest shown by Member
States in participating in the work of the Committee,

59 Ojjiciul Records of the General Aswml,l_v. Furty-sccond Se.1.\/1)11
Su&lement No. 26 (A/42/26 and Corri)

Resolution 22 A (I).
6l See resolution 169 (II).

l. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country contained in para­
graph 83 of its report;
2. Strongly condemns any criminal acts violating the
security of missions accredited to the United Nations and
the safety of their personnel;
3. Urges the host country to take all necessary mea­
sures to continue to prevent criminal acts, including
harassment and violations of the security of missions and
the safety of their personnel or infringements of the inviol­
ability of their property, in order to ensure the existence
and functioning of all missions, including practicable mea­
sures to prohibit illegal activities of persons, groups and
organizations that encourage, instigate, organize or en­
gage in the perpetration of acts and activities against the
security and safety of such missions and representatives;
4. Renews its request to the host country and the Mem­
ber States that raised the issues in response to the request
and to action by the host country to reduce the size of their
missions to follow consultations with a view to reaching
solutions to this matter, in accordance with the Agree­
ment between the United Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters of the United Na­
tions;
5. Stresses the importance of a positive perception of
the work of the United Nations, expresses concern about a
negative public image and, therefore, urges that efforts be
continued to build up public awareness by explaining,
through all available means, the importance of the role
played by the United Nations and the missions accredited
to it in the strengthening of international peace and
security;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively
engaged in all aspects of the relations of the United Na­
tions with the host country and to continue to stress the
importance of effective measures to avoid acts of terror­
ism, violence and harassment against the missions and
their personnel, as well as the need for any pertinent legis­
lation adopted by the host country to be in accord with the
Headquarters Agreement and its other relevant obliga­
tions;
7. Decides to consider at its forty-third session the
question of the composition of the Committee on Rela­
tions with the Host Country;
8. Requests the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country to continue its work, in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 281q (XXVI) of 15 December 1971;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Report of the Com­
mittee on Relations with the Host Country".

98th plenary meeting
17 December 1987
B

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of

the United Nations and its relevant provisions,
Guided also by the Agreement between the United Na­
tions and the United States of America regarding the
Headquarters of the United Nations, of 26 June 1()47, 61
Taking note of the report of the Committee on Relations
with the Host Country.'\ 9
Having been apprised of the action being considered in
the host country, the United States of America, which

302

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

might impede the maintenance of facilities of the Perma­
nent Observer Mission ofthe Palestine Liberation Organi­
zation to the United Nations in New York, which enables
it to discharge its official functions,
Recalling its resolutions 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November
1974 and 3375 (XXX) of 10 November 1975,
Taking note with appreciation ofthe Secretary-General's
position on the Permanent Observer Mission ofthe Pales­
tine Liberation Organization to the United Nations, as de­
scribed in the statement of22 October 1987, which reads:
"The members of the Palestine Liberation Organization
Observer Mission are, by virtue of resolution
3237 (XXIX), invitees to the United Nations. As such,
they are covered by sections 11, 12 and 13 of the Head­
quarters Agreement of 26 June 1947. There is therefore a
treaty obligation on the host country to permit Palestine
Liberation Organization Observer Mission personnel to
enter and remain in the United States to carry out their of­
ficial functions at United Nations Headquarters.",
1. Reiterates that the Permanent Observer Mission of
the Palestine Liberation Organization to the United Na­
tions in New York is covered by the provisions of the

Agreement between the United Nations and the United
States of America regarding the Headquarters of the
United Nations and should be enabled to establish and
maintain premises and adequate functional facilities, and
that the personnel ofthe Mission should be enabled to en­
ter and remain in the United States to carry out their offi­
cial functions;
2. Requests the host country to abide by its treaty obli­
gations under the Agreement and in this connection to re­
frain from taking any action that would prevent the dis­
charge ofthe official functions ofthe Permanent Observer
Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization to the
United Nations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take effective
measures to ensure full respect for the Agreement and to
report, without delay, to the General Assembly on any
further development in this matter;
4. Decides to keep this matter under active review.
98th plenary meeting
17 December 1987
