United Nations

ace

:an-

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

, its

THIRTIETH SESSION

ien-

Official Records

~ity

~ar­

rely

eci-

ise.
:anlost
1 is
)ne
ake
say
:Iiaces
line

iied
use
nee
on,
Jla:re,

'h):

:mk
for

ieth
lCU-

inth

CONTENTS

2402nd

PLENARY MEETING

•
PUI/"

Agenda item 22:
Admission of new Members to the United Nations (('onci,.'ued):
(b) O'ner reports of the Security Council.............

815

President: Mr. Gaston THORN
(Luxembourg).
In the absence of the President, Mr. Mutuale
Tshikankie (Zaire), Vice-President, took the Chair.
AGENDA ITEM 22

Admission of new Members to the United Nations
(continued):
(b) Other reports of the Security Council
1. The PRESIUENT (interprrtation from French):
This morning we shall consider ~enda item 22, entitled
"Admission of new Members to the United Nations".
In document A/10302, the Security Council has recommended the admission of the Comoros to membership
in the United Nations. A draft resolution, which
appears in document A/L.772 and Add.l, has been
distributed.
2. Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation
from French): The Assembly will recall that France,
having on 15 June 1973 affirmed the aspirations of
the ComoltOs to independence, on 22 December
1974, organized a plebiscite among the populatio~ of
that archipelago. The results indicated an over·
whelming majority of voters in favour of independence. However, two thirds of the inhabitants of the
island of Mayotte decided otherwise. France had
hoped, in accordance with tradition, to sponsor the
candidature of a new f&iendly State for accession to
internatiolllal life. To its great regret, it had to adopt
a different position.
3. Speaking in the Security Council on 17 October
last, t the representative of France pointed out that the
request for admission submitted by the National
Executive Council gave rse to a serious problem, as
far as we were concerned, inasmuch as we had to
reconcile our concern to facilitate the emergence of a
State having a1! the necessary attributes of statehood
with the procedure laid down by French constitutional
law.
4. But, having set the new State on the road to independence, the French Government obviously did not
want to oppose its admission to the United Nations.
That is why, not being able to associate itself with it,
but not wishing by abstaining from voting to give the
impression that it could itesitate between "Yes"
815

Wednesday, 12 November 1975,
at ! 1.05 a.m.,
NEW YORK

and "No", the French delegation in the Security
Council decided not to participate in the voting.
5. As was indicated by its Minister for Foreign Affairs
to the Assembly on 26 September last [2364th meeting],
the French Government still hopes that an agreement
among the Comorians will make possible: the establishment of a framework within which the new State will
begin its future, and has endeavoured in recent months
to reconcile the points of view of the parties. A bill
offering the population ef Mayotte the option of
choosing or refusing to belong to the Comorian entity
has therefore been prepared and should shortly be
submitted to Parliament. Those in favour of unity, of
course, can prepare a campaign, and it is not impossible
that the consultation could take place in the presence
of international o!)servers.
6. Needless to say, France seeks no advantage for
itself in this matter. It is always willing to grant independence to peoples that desire it, but it cannot oppose
the self-determination of peoples.
7. These considerations explain why the French
delegation, to its great regret, cannot participate in a
consensus on the text by which the Comoros will be
admitted to the Organization.
8. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
May I take it that the General Assembly accepts the
recommendation of the Security Council and adopts
draft resolution AIL. 772 and Add. 1?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 3385
(XXX».
9. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I dedare the Comoros admitted to membership in the
United Nations.
The delegation of the Comoro~ was escorted to its
place in the General Assembly Hall.
10. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
On behalfof the General Assembly, it is an honour and
a pleasure for me to offer sincere congratulations to
the delegation of the Comoros and to w~lcome it
warmly to the United Nations.
11. I now call on th:~ Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation ofthe Declaration on the Granting ofIndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, Mr. Salim.
12. Mr. SALIM (United Republic; of Tanzani~),
Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situatic.n
with regard to th~ Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting or' Independ~nce to Colonial Countries
and Peoples: A little more than a month ago I had the
pleasure of coming to this rostrum to welcome, on
behalf of the Special Committee, the admission of
Papua New Guinea to the United Nations. Today, in
the same capacity of Chairman of that Committee, it
is my honour and privilege to welcome warmly the
newest Member of our Organization, the Comoros.
A/PV.2402

816

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session-Plenary Meetings

13. The natull <illd circumstances of the struggles
of the peoples of the Comoros and of Papua New
Guinea were different, but there are common factors
which linked the two peoples' struggles, and these
are the factors which were and are common to all
former colonial and current colonial territories. Two of
these factors merit highlighting. First, irrespective
of the nature of the struggle of the subject people, be it
peaceful or violent, the common denominator has
always been the uncompromising determination of the
people to attain its inalienable right to self-determination and independence. Secondly, whether the struggle
for self-determination has been through the ballot-box
or through the bullet, the United Nations, particularly
in the aftermath of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, has
never been found hesitant in its support of the legitimate struggle ofcolonial peoples. Thus it has now come
to be an accepted truism that a victory for a subjugated
people has simultaneously been considered a victory
tor this Organization.
14. Therefore, as we welcome the Comoros as the
newest Member of the United Nations, we salute, first
and foremost, the determination and persistence of
the people of those beautiful islands in regaining their
human dignity and freedom, and to its eminent representatives here-and I single out with particular
satisfaction the presence of the head of State and
President of the Govemment of the Comoros, Mr. Said
Mohamed Jafar-and through them to the people ofthe
Comoros we convey our warm and heartfelt congratulations on this auspicious occasion.
15. Even at the risk of being guilty of immodesty,
I should like to say that on occasicns like this the
United Nations also is to be congratulated on the
important supportive role that it has played in making
this day possible for the people of the Comoros. The
Special Committee is particularly conscious of the
significance of this occasion. Having actively supported the struggle of the people of the archipelago
for self-determination and independence, the Committee unequivocally welcomed the proclamation
of independence by the Comoros on 6 July this year
and extended its warm congratulations and support
to its people on the achievement of the goals set forth
in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the Charter of
the United Nations. The position of the Special Committee was made public in a statement on 22 August of
this year2 and it is only logical that, as Chairman of
the Committee, I should express the Committee's
sentiments on this important day in the history of
the Comoros.

16. This is a solemn occasion, a happy occasion,
and in normal circumstances, following the established practice anG convention, all our remarks on a day
like this should be confined to compliments and congratulations. Regrettably, however, the circumstances
are not entirely normal. The statement made by the
representative of France before this Assembly took
its decision today is indicative of that. The administering Power, whose responsibility it was to fulfil its
obligations under the Charter in accordance with
General Assembly decisions, has in this cas'e maintained a position which not only leaves much to be
desired but also, I must say in all honesty, causes

serious concern not sirr:.piy in the Comoros, not even
just in Africa, but, I submit, in our Organization itself.
Thus, despite my deliberate objective of maintaining
maximum restraint in my statement, I feel compelled
at least to speak out in defence of certain basic principles which are dear to our Organization, as they are
certainly dear to the independent and sovereign
State of the Comoros. I am referring to the attempts
made by France to adopt measures which could result
only in violating the unity and territorial integrity of
the Comoros, contrary to the principles of the United
Nations, in defiance of the many decisions of this
Organization which France itself has not opposed, and
in complete contravention of the decisions of the
Organization of African Unity [OA U].
17. It is at the same time significant that this new
attitude of France-and I use the word "new" advisedly-is in complete contradiction to the declared
policies of the French Government on the question of
the independence and territorial integrity of the
Comoros. Indeed, by its current approach France
has sought to negate its own commitments as an
administering Power, as expressed by its representatives both within this Organization and outside it.
I do not need to go into the long history of the position
of France on this matter. It will suffice to make some
pertinent observations.
18. The international community is not unaware
of the statement made by the Government of France
on 26 August 1974 to the effect that a plebiscite on
the independence of the Comoros would be organized
on an archipelago-wide basis, that the Comoros would
retain "the frontiers that it had as a colony" and that
for the French Government "a multip!!~ity of different statuses for the various islands of the archipelago is inconceivable" . 3
19. That was a serious and responsible statement,
and Members of this Organization had no reasOi, ,,0
doubt either its authenticity or its motivation, and
certainly no one could have reasonably questioned
its sincerity--at least the Special Committee did not.
In addition to that statement there have been other
reassuring, responsible and unequivocal statements
made by many eminent statesmen of France.
20. When I addressed the Security Council on
!7 October this year, I had occasion to refer to a statement on this matter made by the highest authority in
France. In view of the significance of that statement,
considering the regrettable evolution of the French
position since that time, and taking into account the
statement made this morning by the representative
of France, I deem it necessary to refer again to the
statement made by the President of France, Mr. Giscard d'Estaing; addressing a press conference on
24 October 1974 he remarked:
"The Comorian population is a homogeneous
or;t:, in which there does not exist a settlement of
French origin-or at least a very limited one. Will
it be reasonable to imagine one part of the archipelago becoming independent while one island, no
matter what sentiments we may cherish for its
inhabitants, retains a different status? I believe we
iJave to accept the contemporary realities. The
Comoros are one; they have always been one; it
is only natural that they should have a common
destiny, even if some of them may have wished for

another soluti
of the indepe
the breaking u
terized the uni
That was the sta
21. Against th
followed with en
referendum cond
1974. I use the w
we had every rea
clear-cut positio
would be no f
decolonization.
22. The refere
an overwhelmin
pelago preferring
great as 94.56
standards. Out 0
Mayotte did not
out of a total po
opposedindepen
the opinion of
frustrate the wi
there? Is it lawti
dictate the desti
wishes of the 0
exactly what Fra
and measures, h
23. In brief, the
embarked on a
the unity and terr
a smoke-screen
determination.
unjustified. It ne
ments of France,
and to the intern
hopelessly attem
principle of self-

24. As I have
and the world cl
the referendum w
an island-to-islan
in doubt as to t
global character
were clearly put
nence and autho
so-called French
tion Eura/rique
have commented:

"Why a glo
plebiscite for e
of France is n
independence.
whose inhabit
have the same
political interes
bering the terri
efforts of the C
a rapprocheme

25. Clearly, this
with the current
overwhelming ver
recourse to move
will have danger

2402nd meeting-12 November 1975

another solution. We have no right, on the occasion
of the independence of one Territory, to propose
the breaking up of a unity that has always characterized the unique Comorian archipelago".4
That was the statement of the President of France.
21. Against that background, the United Nations
followed with enthusiasm and anticipation the popular
referendum conducted in the Comoros on 22 December
1974. I use the word "anticipation" advisedly, because
we had every reason to believe that, in the light of the
clear-cut position of the administering Power, there
would be no further obstacles to the process of
decolonization.
22. The referendum held in the Comoros showed
an overwhelming majority of the people of the archipelago preferring independence; that majority was as
great as 94.56 per cent, a high percentage by any
standards. Out of the majority, only 8,853 people in
Mayotte did not favour independence: in other words,
out of a total population of 286,762 people only 8,853
opposed independence. Is it really logical or legal that
the opinion of that relatively tiny minority should
frustrate the wishes of the majority of the people
there? Is it lawful that the result in one area should
dictate the destiny of the country, regardless of the
wishes of the overwhelming majority? Yet that is
exactly what France, by its recent statements, policies,
and measures, has been seeking to do.
23. In brief, the French Government appears to have
embarked on a course of action designed to disrupt
the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros under
a smoke-screen of respect for the principle of selfdetermination. This position of France is wholly
unjustified. It negates the undertakings and commitments of France, both to the people of the Comoros
and to the international community. It also vainly and
hopelessly attempts to give a new meaning to the
principle of self-determination.
24. As I have already stated, the United Nations
and the world clearly understood that the results of
the referendum would be evaluated globally and not on
an island-to-island basis. And indeed, if anyone was
in doubt as to the meaning and significance of the
global character of the referendum, such doubts
were clearly put to rest by an official of no less eminence and authority than the current Minister of the
so-called French Overseas Territories. In the publication EUl'lIfrique of October 1974, he is reported to
have commented:
"Why a global referendum and not a separate
plebiscite for each island? It is because the intention
of France is not to divide countries which attain
independence. This is the case of the Comoros,
whose inhabitants all practise the same religion,
have the same language, the same economic and
political interests. Far from being one of dismembering the territorial entity, our role is to help the
efforts of the Comorian people themselves towards
a rapprochement."
25.. Clearly, this interpretation does not correspond
with the current manoeuvres designed to ignore the
overwhelming verdict of the Comorian people or to the
recourse to moves which not only are unfortunate but
will have dangerous consequences for the stability

817

and independence of the Comoros, and indeed for
the stability of the region itself.
26. In an attempt to bamboozle world public opinion,
reports are now being sent out from Paris that the
French Government is determined to respect the selfdetermination of the people of Mayotte. Indeed, it is
most regrettable that, even after the Security Council
recommended the Comoros for membership in the
Organization, the French Government did not abandon
its manoeuvres, which unquestionably threaten the
territorial integrity of the Comoros.
27. We are told that there is to be another referendum
in Mayotte, and perhaps even two-all that in order
to give a semblance of legitimacy to a completely
illegitimate and unacceptable situation. It has been
argued that through such a referendum the people of
Mayotte will be enabled to exercise their right to selfdetermination. But why does France choose to ignore
the referendum that it organized in the four islands in
December 1974? What sort of new principle of selfdetermination is the Government of France wishing
to invoke, in complete violation of the General Assembly resolutions and, in partic.ular, in flagrant
violation of the provisions of resolution ]514 (XV),
which specifically stipulates that any attempt aimed
at the partial or total disruption of the national unity
and the territorial integrity of a Territory is incompatible with the purposes and principles ofthe Charte~.
28. Have words really lost their meaning? How can
one possibly invoke the principle of self-determination to compartmentalize and Balkanize a territory?
Are we really to believe that France, that land of
liberty, equality and fraternity-the land that produced
Charles de Gaulle, an eminent statesman, who,
realizing that the nationalist resistance in Algeria could
not be crushed, boldly proceeded to negotiate its
independence and thereby built bridges and promoted relations with the Arab and African countriesare we to believe that that country is now about to
emulate concepts which find respectability only in the
apartheid regime of South Africa, as evidenced in its
nonsensical claims of promoting the rights to selfdetermination of peoples, bantustan-style?
29. Is this a serious conception of self-determination? It is certainly not a United Nations conception.
If the promotion of self-determination-as encouraged
by France-is to be taken to its logical conclusion,
then one can envisage a situation where that principle
could be applied to a region, a province, a district .or
even a village. I really wonder how many countnes
Members of this Organization, not excluding France,
would emerge unaffected if that preposterous concept
were to be put into experimentation.
30. In a special session of the Special Committee on
IS October this year, I voiced our regrets at the continued moves by France threatening the unity and
territorial integrity of the Comoros. In my appeal to
the Government of France, I had the following to say:
"It is therefore our hope that France, whose
relations and interests in Africa are extensive, will
pay heed to the demands of Africa and the international community and desist forthwith from any
such policy. I am making use of this solemn occasion
to launch an earnest appeal to the Government of
France to respect the independence, unity and

818

General Assembly-ThIrtieth Sesskm-Plenary MeeUnp

territorial integrity of Comoro and to resist the
dangerous temptation of promoting separatist
tendencies using dubious and irrational excuses
which are repugnant to our Charter and the provisions of resolution 1514 (XV). "S
31. That appeal was made about a month ago, but
I believe that on this auspicious occasion I should
make use of the opportunity to renew that appeal in
all solemnity and in all seriousness. In this connexion,
we would urge France to desist from proceeding with
the so-called referendum in Mayotte, as such an
action, apart from constituting an obvious interference
in the internal affairs of the Comoros, can only be
construed ~s a calculated policy of France to dismember the Comoros. We would urge them, rather
than proceeding on this perilous path, to choose a path
of co-operation, friendship and mutual respect with
the new State of the Comoros.
32. We would wish them to remember that but for
the case of so-called French Somaliland-DjiboutiFrance, with the independence of the Comoros, has
decisively terminated its role as a colonial power in
Africa. Its friendship and co-operation with many
African States are valued and reciprocated. France's
positive approach in many international issues has
won world-wide acclaim. Would it really be in the longterm interest of France to continue to be haunted by
its short-sighted, illogical and wholly irrational position threatening the territorial integrity of the Comoros? We urge it to follow the path of reason and of
justice.
33. Allow me before concluding to say a few words
on behalf of the Government and people of the United
Republic of Tanzania. We rejoice with our brothers
of the Comoros on this historic day for their country.
Tanzania and the Comoros are in the same geographical
area, and our two peoples share the same cultural
background which has always strengthened our
common bonds and cultural heritage. It was therefore
only logical that Tanzania should fully support the
struggle for freedom and independence ofthe3r brothers
in the Comoros. For us it was not just a question of
respecting the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, it was not just a question of abiding faithfully by the position and decisions of OAU: for us the
struggle of the people of the Comoros was our own
struggle, and thus their victories are justly being regarded by our people as their own.
34. We welcome, therefore, the proclamation of the
independence of the Comoros as a logical step in their
struggle for freedom and independence. In the same
light we welcome the recognition of that independence
by OAU, the support of the Non-Aligned Movement
and the admission of the Comoros to this Organization today. It is our hope that our relations will
continue to grow to the mutual benefit and in the
interests of Africa as a whole.
35. Needless to emphasize, Tanzania will continue
to support the people of the Comoros in their struggle
to maintain their independence and their territorial
int.egrity. As wc admit the Comoros to the United
Nations today, let me make it quite clear that Tanzania,
like the other sponsors of the draft n::solution which
was before this Assembly, wishes to emphasize that
the Comoros is composed of the four islands of
Aruouan, Grande Comore, Mayotte and Moheli.

36. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I now call on Mr. Ecua Miko, representative of Equatorial Guinea, who will speak on behalf of the group
of African States.
37. Mr. ECUA MIKO (Equatorial Guinea) (interpret(1f;on from Spanish): The thirtieth session of the
General Assembly is a landmark in the history of the
United Nations in the area of decolonization. There
have been very few sessions which have felt so strongly
the impact of decolonization. In the course of it the
great family of the United Nations has been joined
by the heroic peoples of Cape Verde, Mozambique,
Sao Tome and Principe and Papua New Guinea.
38. I should have liked to have the pleasure of
mentioning the two Republics of Viet Nam also, had
truth and justice triumphed within one of the most
important organs of the United Nations, the Security
Council, which unfortunately and repeatedly has
allowed one of its permanent members, the United
States, to impose its will. But in spite of this, colonialism and imperialism have not been completely
victorious, for we also have the pleasure of welcoming
the brave people of Cambodia, which has regained its
rightful place in the United Nations.
39. And now the General Assembly is admitting to
membership another victim of colonialism, the Comoros, whose heroic people, aware oftheir history and
their responsibilities to society, unilaterally proclaimed
their independence Ok! 6 July 1975, as the first manifestation of the will of the overwhelming majority of
the Comorian people as freely expressed during the
referendum of 22 December 1974.
40. The Council of Ministers of OAU, meeting at
Kampala from 18 to 25 July 1975, paid tribute to the
valiant people of the Comoros for their sacrifice and
their efforts in the arduous struggle for national liberation and, on the basis of its principles and objectives
offreeing the entire African continent from colonialism
and removing the last vestiges of foreign domination
in all its forms and manifestations, warmly welcomed
the Comoros as a full member by its resolution CM/
Res.419 (XXV) [see A/J0297, annex I].
41. Today the achievement of the Comoros has been
welcomed by all countries which love peace, justice
and liberty. In this context, the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries,
meeting at Lima from 25 to 30 August 1975, not only
welcomed the pr<~clamation of independence by the
peopre of the Comoros, but at the same time condemned any attempt to disrupt the national unity and
territorial integrity of the Comoros, reaffirming their
support in this respect [A/10217 and Corr.I, annex,
para. 4/].
42. As I have already said, today the General Assembly has just admitted the Comorian State as a
Member of the United Nations. On behalf of my
delegation, and on behalf of the African group in the
United Nations, over which I have the honour to
preside during this month of November, I wish to
express our sincere gratitude to all del~gations here
for their support and recognition of the Comoros, and
to extend to the delegation of the Comoros, presided
over by the President, Mr. Said Mohamed Jafar, our
sincere good wishes for the prosperity 'of the people
and Government of their country.

43. In the li
representativ
of this OPPO
sembly to the
44. Historic
whether we I
of the self-det
eral Assembl
that some do
situation still
andZimbabw
sacred princi
beginning to
Consequently
munity canno
to reach its fi
45. Therefor
to France, as
at Kampala b
its resolution
the Conferen
Non-Aligned
the island of
of the soverei
a result of the
proclaimed its
of course,
encompass th
46. The Unit
of France on t
violation of th
dence of whi
a country whi
mitted as a M
47. The Fren
practice ofcon
prefer freedo
is concerned,
of Mayotte,
public opinion
racy. The Fre
the Governme
proceed to
recognize the i
constituting th
operated with
of restoring a
security.
48. In conclu
Government t
urgent steps t
flicted on the
and military
iIlegally to oc
restore peace
49. We are c
the delegations
and freedom i
50. TI:~ PRE
I now call on
PuntsagnoTOv,
of Asian State
51. Mr. PUN
on behalf of th
delegation as

240Zod meeting-U November 1975

43. In the light of the statement just made by the
representative of France, I should like to avail myself
of this opportunity to draw the attention of the Assembly to the following.
44. Historical truth cannot be concealed or ignored,
whether we like it or not. The sacrosanct principle
of the self-determination of peoples enshrined in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), despite the fact
that some do not wish to recognize it and despite the
situation still prevailing in South Africa, Namibia
and Zimbabwe, is now fully accepted. By virtue of this
sacred principle, the last vestiges of colonialism are
beginning to disappear in various parts of the world.
Consequently, we who make up the international community cannot stem this historical tide which is about
to reach its final destination.
45. Therefore we reiterate at this rostrum the appeal
to France, as the former administering Power, made
at Kampala by the Council of Ministers of OAU in
its resolution CM/Res.421 (XXV), and at Lima, by
the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Non-Aligned Countries, to withdraw in good faith from
the island of Mayotte, because it is an integral part
of the sovereign territory of the Comoros, which, as
a result of the referendum held on 22 December 1974,
proclaimed its independence on 6 Jt,ly 1975-that is,
of course, within its national boundaries, which
encomp2SS the four islands of which it is composed.
46. The United Nations should not allow the presence
of France on the island of Mayotte now; it is an overt
violation of the sovereignty of a country the independence of which has been recognized internationallY,
a country which the General Assembly has just admitted as a Member of the United Nations.
47. The French Government should abandon the old
practice ofconsulting the population as to whether they
prefer freedom or slavery. As far as my delegation
is concerned, this kind of referendum, as in the case
of Mayotte, not only is absurd but also questions
public opinion and violates the principles of democracy. The French Government, in collaboration with
the Government of the Comoros, should immediately
proceed to make the necessary arrangements to
recognize the independence ofthe group offour islands
constituting the Comoros. France will thus have cooperated with the United Nations in its difficult task
of restoring and maintaining international peace and
security.
48. In conclusion, we appeal once more to the French
Government to act as the situation requires, by taking
urgent steps to put an end to the atrocities being inflicted on the people of Mayotte by the French civilian
and military authorities who to this day contInue
illegally to occupy the island. This must be done to
restore peace and order to that part of the world.
49. We are convinced that we shall be supported by
the delegations ofall countries devoted to peace ,justice
and freedom in the implementation of these aims.
50. Th~ PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I now call on the representative of Mongolia, Mr.
Puntsagnorov, who will speak on behalf of the group
of Asian States.
51. Mr. PUNTSAGNOROV (Mongolia): Permit me,
on behalf of the Asian group and in the name of my
delegation as well, to congratulate warmly the repre-.

819

sentatives of the Comoros on the admission of their
country to membership in this great community of
nations. Representing an Asian country, I am particularly delighted to welcome the birth of this new
State in the sister continent of Africa, which is linked
with Asia by bonds of common aspiration.
52. My country has always remained dedicated to
the sacred principle of the right of every nation to
self-determination and independence, embodied in the
Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples. The advent of the Comoros to independence constitutes yet another achievement on the
rocky road to the complete elimination of the last
vestiges of colonialism remaining in the world, in
particular in the southern part of Africa and its vicinity.
The political independence attained by the people of
the Comoros marks a new era in the history of that
nation and one which opens up broad perspectives for
the development of that country along the road of
progress. In tackling its new tasks, the people of the
Comoros will certainly benefit from the co-operation
and support of the forces devoted to the cause of
peace, independence and the progress of nations.
The admission of the Comoros to United Nations
membership also represents another step towards
achieving the final goal of true universality in this
world body and it will further increase the contribution of that country and the contribution of Africa to
the United Naticns.
53. Speaking of the achievements of national liberation movements, my delegation expresses its deep
satisfaction in connexion with the proclamation of the
People's Republic of Angola yesterday, II November
1975, and looks forward to eariy membership for
that new republic in the United Nations. At the same
time, my delegation expresses its confidence that the
Angolan people will surely overcome the present
difficulties caused by the intrigues of the imperialist,
reactionary forces, and preserve the unity and territorial integrity of their country.
54. I take this opportunity to request the representatives of the Comoros to convey to their Government and people our good wishes for every success
in their endeavours for social progress and the economic prosperity of their country.
55. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I now call on the representative of Poland, Mr.
Jaroszek, who will speak on behalf of the group of
Eastern European States.
56. Mr. JAROSZEK (Poland): As Chairman of the
group of Eastern European States for the month of
November, I take pleasure in extending to the Government and the people of the Comoros our warm
welcome and congratulations on their admission to
membership in the United Nations.
57. We take special note of this solemn occasion,
as the present admission of a new Member State is
already the fifth during the current session of the General Assembly and it is taking place in the thirtieth
year of the existence of the United Nations. It represents but a fitting tribute to the fifteenth anniversary
of the unprecedented Dec1aration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
initiated, as it was, and adopted by this Assembly

820

-

than
I !la

sum
Unit
to tl
as th
58.

the r
imp(]
peop
lama
a 10

shou
phas
inde
sam(
the c
59.
on th
and I
of a
(XXJ

port(
self-(
politi
coun
their
in tl
deter
thep
We I
State
60.
com(
This
regre
year
Nam
their
61.
East(
to th(
its er
tions
tinue
devel
62.
Corn
Jafar
opera
princ
Nati(]
63.
I no\
Mr. I
of La
64.
gathe
furth(
State.
prom
and if
it a !
curre
Latin

810

Genenl Aaembly-Thlrtlelh Sealcn-Plenary Meellnp

thanks to the relentless efforts of the group of States
l have the honour to represent. Indeed. when we
sum up today the record of accomplishment of the
United Nations in the last 30 years. its contribution
to the cause of the liberation of nations stands out
as the most prominent feat.
58. Accession to independence and the enjoyment of
the right to self-determination are events of the utmost
importance in the life and history of countries and
peoples liberated from colonial bondage. The proclamation of independence. to which they had to travel
a long road of unremitting and sacrificial struggle.
should rightly be regarded as the beginning of a new
phase of life in human dignity. But the attainment of
independence by the people of the Comoros is at the
same time a new and important stage in the process of
the complete liquidation of colonialism.
59. Within the framework of the historic Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples and the adoption in 1970 of the programme
of action for its implementation [resolution 2621
(XXV)), the United Nations has whole-heartedly supported the struggle of peoples for independence and
self-determination. Marching in the forefront of the
political struggle to eliminate the colonial system. the
countries of the Socialist community have always lent
their full support and solidarity to colonial peoples
in their struggle towards independence and selfdetermination. It was in this context that we welcomed
the proclamation of independence of Angola yesterday.
We look forward to the early admission of the new
State to this Organization.
60. In admitting the Comoros. our Organization has
come yet another step closer to its full universality.
This happy event. however, brings to mind a highly
regrettable development outside this Hall which this
year has prevented the Democratic Republic of Viet
Nam and the Republic of South Viet Nam from taking
their rightful places in our midst.
61. Permit me to reiterate, on behalf of the group of
Eastern European States. our sincere congratulations
to the people and ~he Government of the Comoros on
its entry into the United Nations. These congratulations are accompanied by our best wishes for continued success in the political, economic and social
development of their country.
62. May i also assure the representatives of the
Comoros, headed by the President, Mr. Said Mohamed
Jafar, of our readiness for close and friendly cooperation with a view to attaining the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations.
63. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I now call on the representative of the Bahamas,
Mr. Hepburn, who will speak on behalf of the group
of Latin American States.
64. Mr. HEPBURN (Bahamas): 'Representatives
gathered here to welcome a new Member need no
further reminder of the hard work that Latin American
States have done and are still doing in an effort to
promote the exercise of the right to self-determination
and independence by all peoples. Such a record makes
it a special honour and privilege for the Bahamas,
current Chairman of the group of Member States of the
Latin American region, to act as their portavoz in

extending a warm and sincere welcome to the Comorians as they take their rightful place in this Assembly.
65. Despite the fact that the seasoned veterans of
this Organization have effective techniques for leadership. young Members of the ilk of the Comoros. who
have experienced untold difficulties in their struggles
for independence. also bring with them new ideas
which will. besides helping to boost the credibility
of the United Nations. prove invaluable to the perpetuation of human rights and the strengthening of
peace and security throughout the world.
66. There is an old adage which says that variety is
the spice of life. As a result of the diversity of races.
languages. customs. cultures, beliefs and skills that
the United Nations membership embodies, it has
become an interesting and challenging Organization.
By adding one more today to the family. the United
Nations becomes all the more constructive and indispensable. Only when all peoples under colonial domination are free to exercise their inalienable right to
sovereignty will the true value and the real purpose
of this body be achieved and appreciated. With the
coming of our new brother-if the Assembly will
pardon the chauvinism-we can all look forward to the
early demise of colonialism.
67. I cannot conclude without saying to the Comorians, "You have become a Member of the United
Nations at a time when the Organization is rapidly
losing its image as an exclusive club and taking on the
appearance ofa working body concerned with pertinent
issues, many of them controversial. but nevertheless
necessary for the growth and development of all
concerned."
68. It is with a great sense of humility that I express
to the representatives of the Comoros that today Latin
America is proud to extend the right hand offellowship
and brotherhood, and looks forward to a harmonious
relationship of co-operation and shared experiences.
69. The Bahamas delegation requests that best wishes
for success be conveyed to the Government and people
of the Comoros.
70. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I now call on the representative of Australia,
Mr. Harry, who will speak on behalf of the group of
Western European and other States.
71. Mr. HARRY (Australia): It is an honour and
pleasure for me to be able to welcome the Comoros to
membership in the United Nations on behalf of the
group of Western European and other States. It would
be inappropriate for me in this capacity to make any
comment on the matters raised in the statement of
the representative of France or on the remarks of the
Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting ofIndependence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples. My sole role, and a welcome role, is to
welcome the admission of the Comorian delegation to
our ranks as a further step towards achieving the goal
of universal membership in our Organization. We look
forward to co-operating closely with them in our future
work. The tradition in accordance with which new
Members are welcomed by representatives of all
regional groups is a reminder that the United Nations
is not, and must not be, an organization in which coun-

tries pursu
group intere
part of the
Nations is i
of the Cha
ences and t
ests of man
72. With
also like to
delegation.
of the Co
with the F
declaration
concerning
islands; an
in Decem
State, a Me
significant
peaceful de
task of the
completion
73. Austra
Organizatio
with Africa
delegation I
as a regiona
well-being 0
74. The P
I now call 0
who wili sp
75. Mr.
Arabic): All
extend to t
our warmes
an expressi
the people
76. The m
Nations cro
achieved by
factor of op
77. Undou
Nations and
of coloniali
of vital imp
right to self-

78. Unfort
some States
the indepen
rule and thre
dent States
order to pro
sideration fo
prevail in i
today in Ang
foreign inter
of Angola an

79. We wel
international
the sovereig
Comoros, so
international
backwardnes
achieve a b
social devel

2402.nd meetlna-12 November 1975

tries pursue merely their own particular national or
group interests. though the group system is an essential
part of the United Nations procedure. The United
Nations is in its essence a cominunity, the brotherhood
of the Charter, in which we seek to harmonize differences and to identify and promote the common interests of mankind.
72. With your permission, Mr. President, I should
also like to add a few words on behalf of my own
delegation. Australia has followed closely the evolution
of the Comoro islands to independence beginning
with the French and Comorian Governments' joint
declaration in June 1973; the law of November 1974
concerning the organization of a referendum in the
islands; and the referendum itself, which took place
in December last year. Now that the Comoros is a
State, a Member of the United Nations, yet another
significant advance has been made in the process of
peaceful decolonization. We earnestly hope that the
task of the United Nations in this field will go on to
completion in the not too distant future.
73. Australia is particularly glad to welcome to this
Organization a new Member which has links not only
with Africa but with the Indian Ocean. The Australian
delegation looks forward to working with the Comoros
as a regional neighbour in promoting the interests and
well-being of the people of this area.
74. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I now call on the representative of Yemen, Mr. Makki.
who win speak on behalf of the Arab States.
75. Mr. MAKKI (Yemen) (interpretation from

Arabic): Allow me, on behalf of the Arab States, to
extend to the delegation and people of the Comoros
our warmest congratulations and sincere welcome as
an expression of the historic and human ties that bind
the peop Ie 0 f the Comoros to the Arab peopIe.
76. The membership of the Comoros in the United
Nations crowns the victories and successes being
achieved by the peoples of the world against every
factor of oppression and blackmail.
77. Undoubtedly, the role played by the United
Nations and its agencies and organs in the liquidation
of colonialism and its remaining vestiges has been
of vital importance in securing for the peoples the
right to self-determination and national sovereignty.
78. Unfortunately. and with deep regret, we find that

some States have impeded, and continue to impede.
the independence of peoples still under colonialist
rule and threaten the independence of newly independent States by causing dissension and civil war in
order to protect their own interests, without due consideration for the human rights and moral values that
prevail in international society. The events we see
today in Angola are a clear indication of the fact that it is
foreign interests that threaten the unity of the people
of Angola and its right to self-determination.
79. We welcome the people of the Comoros to the
international community and urge all States to respect
the sovereignty, national integrity and unity of the
Comoros, so that it may participate positively in the
international community and in the fight against
backwardness and under-development, in order to
achieve a better future and greater economic and
social development.

821

80. The group of Arab States has done and will
continue to do everything in its power. through the
fight against colonialism and its continued support of
the struggle of peoples, to help the people of the
Comoros to consolidate and strengthen their independence and to lead a fuller life.
81. I ask the delegation of the Comoros to take back
with them the expression of the great aspirations and
sincere desire of the Arab States to consolidate close
co-operation with them so that a better society and a
just peace may prevail in all countries for all peoples.
82. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I now call on the representative of the host country.
Mr. Sherer.
83. Mr. SHERER (United States of America):
The United States was pleased to vote in the Security
Council for the admission of the Comoros to the
United Nations. As representative of the host country,
I welcome the Comoros to the United Nations family.
To the people of those islands, whose location at a
crossroads of the Indian Ocean has brought them
cultural diversity and richness, we extend a warm
welcome and all good wishes as they assume the full
duties and responsibilities of a Member State.
84. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I now call on the representative of Madagascar,
Mr. Rabetatika.
85. Mr. RABETAFIKA(Madagascar)(interpretation
from French): Undoubtedly, no other occasion could
give more satisfaction to the delegation of Madagascar
than that which allows it today to hail the accession
of the Comoro Archipelago to international recognition
and full sovereignty, and to sponsor the draft resolution confirming the admission of that country to the
United Nations. The Comorian and Malagasy peoples
actually share a common heritage strengthened by very
old cultural, historical and political links. It is therefore natural that the support and the solidarity of our
people and our Government should be fully granted to
every authentic nationalist movement the main objective of which is to free territory from colonialism and
neo-colonialism so as to achieve such results we are
all welcoming today.
86. The Government of Madagascar also welcomes
the renascence of an independent political life in the
countries of the western subregion of the Indian Ocean,
of which Mozambique and the Comoros are now the
most recent members. We are certain that within this
framework, as within OAU and the United Nations,
we shall continue to have relations of trusting and
fruitful co-operation with our Comorian brothers.
87. However, the future of the Comoro Archipelago
and its ability to preserve its national unity and territorial integrity are of some concern to the international
community because, following on the referendum held
in December 1974, in which all of the Comorian population participated, it seems that a second referendum
is being contemplated to determine the political future
of part of the Territory.
88. Since the Comorian Government proclaimed the
independence of the Comoros on 6 July 1975 and
extended the scope of this proclamation to all the
islands of the archipelago-, what authority could be
invoked to deny the logical and legal effects of that-

90

cu
all
ex
di
91
de
t

las
an
be
92
co
of
als
by
a
ap
93.
Co
its

a
of
tw
au
ce
th
I
tio

m

General Assembly-Tbirtieth Session-Plenary Meetings

act of sovereignty and to proceed to another plebiscite?
In order to make matters quite clear, we wish to note
that, at the time of the proclamation, the administering
Power had not contested the legality, the legitimacy
or the representative character of the Comorian
Government, which was effectively exercising authority over the whole archipelago.
89. Let us grant that account must be taken of the
will of the "peoples" of the archipelago. Let us grant
that, historically, Anjouan, Grande C..,more, Mayotte
and Moheli were administered by various sultans. Let
us grant also that the whims of the colonists and the
rivalries between two colonial Powers led the administering authorities to attach Mayotte now to the island
of Reunion, now to Nossi-Be of Madagascar. Nevertheless, there remain valid considerations of a permanent character which make of the four islands a
natural and indivisible whole.
90. Indeed, how could one ignore the human and
cultural history which these islands have shared with
all the peoples of the Indian Ocean basin, a unique
experience which has favoured the emergence of a
diversified civilization, open and original?
91. How could one ignore either that the common
destiny of these islands has been manifest for 13 centuries, or even longer, or that from the middle of the
last century they suffered together from the domination
and exploitation whose adverse consequences are still
being felt?
92. It is undeniable that there has always been a
common aspiration and struggle for the recognition
of Comorian existence and Comorian identity. It is
also undeniable that that aspiration was strengthened
by the determination to consolidate their national unity,
a determination which until recently received the
approval of the administering Power.
93. The national unity and territorial integrity of the
Comoros have been sanctioned by French legislation
itself, starting with the law I)f 25 July 1912 making
a colony of all these islands and ending with the law
of 1974 on the referendum, Including between these
two dates the law of 1947 making the Territory an
autonomous administrative unit, the law of 22 December 1961 relating to the political organization of
the Comoro Archipelago and the law of 3 January
1968 which modified and completed the last-mentioned.
94. The problem undoubtedly goes beyond the legitimate and true interests ofall the Comorians to become,
as always,-let us say-a question of presence and of
a military presence. The desire for such a presence can
be easily understood after the changes that have
occurred in the region and is perhaps the only explanation for wishing to defy the sovereign will of the
Comorians and the legal and political principles recognized since 26 August 1974 by the administering
Power itself, which declared, inter alia, that "under
the rules of international law a territory retains the
frontiers that it had as a colony" and that Ha multiplicity of different statuses for the various islands of
the archipelago is inconceivable".
95. For its part the Government of Madagascar is
of the view that we cannot depart from the principles
of resolution 1514 (XV), according to which any
attempt aimed at partial or total destruction of the

national unity and territorial integrity of a country is
incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations.
We reaffirm the legitimacy of the struggle of authentic
liberation movements, which we shall continue to
support as long as their objectives have not been
fully achieved.
96. Finally, we believe that, in the spirit of that same
resolution, and without any restriction wha.tsoever,
the people's will whereby in December 1974 the independence of the Comoros in unity and integrity was
overwhelmingly approved must be recognized. Such
an attitude cannot but contribute to strengthening
peace, security and co-operation in the region.
97. We warmly congratulate and extend a fraternal
welcome to the Comorian delegation, led by the President, Said Mohamed Jafar, and we are convinced
that it will receive in the United Nations all the support
it may need to defend and promote the interests of the
Comorian people and to have its rights prevail.
98. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I now call on the representative of Uganda, Mr.
Kinene, who will address the Assembly on behalf
of the Organization of African Unity.
h
.
d
99. Mr. KINENE (Uganda): We avejust wltnesse
a most pleasant event in the history of our Organization and in the history of everyone of the Members
of the Organization, namely, the admission of the
Comoros as a full Member of the United Nations.
100. We in Africa take great pride and feel very much
honoured whenever a new country joins this Organization after liberating itself from the colonial yoke.
This, among other reasons, is because such an event is
a recognition of the right of all peoples-great or
small-to self-determination, independence, so vereignty and territorial integrity. The admission of the
Comoros today provides yet another new and happy
occasion for us to reaffirm those sacred principles
which are well enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and which constitute the very foundations
upon which the Organization is based.

101. I therefore have the great honour and pleasure,
on behalf of my President, Field Marshal Al Hadji Idi
Amin Dada, President of the Republic of Uganda and
current Chairman of OAU, to extend our warmest
congratulations and best wishes to the President of the
Comoros, Mr. Said Mohamed Jafar, his Government
and the Comorian people on the occasion of the admission of the Comoros to the United Nations. Indeed,
the Comoros, as Vice-Chairman of OAU, has already
made a very great contribution to the cause of African
unity and freedom. We are confident that the Comoros
will play its full role in a positive manner and contribute to the achievement of the objectives of our
Organization.
102. Uganda and, in fact, OAU were the first to
recognize the full independence of the Comoros, and
for the sake of clarity I want to state here that, as far
as OAU is concerned, that State, the Comoros, is
composed of the following islands: Anjouan, Grande
Comore, Mayotte and Moheli. It is that Comoros,
comprising those four islands, that we have admitted
today to membership of the United Nations.
103. However, we note with great concern the continued illegal occupation of a part of the Comoros,

namely,
France.
present
two war
mandos
the terri
Nations
security
104. W
troops fi
105. Fi
Comoro
commun
organiza
technic
just reg
thatcou
have ha
Theirna
that if w
may not

107. M
Spanish)
my dele
A/L.772
we wan
andexte
Member
108. T
dence of
with suc
attention
Special
of years.
some w
self-dete
not-toosidering
jected to
resistanc
the antithe Corn
who wis
109. Th
plex and
sovereig
develop
firm and

110. It
the nati
Comoros
fundame
the very
coexiste
integrity
of the pri
Assembl
and in th
taken pia
the spons
in the d

2402nd meetlng-12 November 1975

namely, the island of Mayotte, by~foreign troops from
France. The latest information is that Mayotte is at
present occupied by 400 Legionnaires, 50 gendarmes,
two warships and one aircraft carrier and three commandos d'elite. This is not only a flagrant violation of
the territorial integrity of a Member State of the United
Nations but also a threat to international peace and
security in that area.
104. We call for the immediate withdrawal offoreign
troops from the Comoros.
105. Finally, having endorsed the admission of the
Comoros, we should not sit back and relax: the world
community, the specialized agencies and private
organizations should continue rendering economic and
technical assistance to our new brothers who have
just regained their independence. The world knows
that countries that have a history ofcolonial dominadon
have had terrible wounds inflicted on their economies.
Their natural resources have been depleted for so long
that if we do not extend a helping hand to them they
may not be able to stand on their own feet.
106. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):

J call on Mr. Alarc6n, the representative of Cuba.

107. Mr. ALARCON (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): Prompted by a profound spirit of solidarity,
my delegation joined the sponsors of draft resolution
A/L.772 and Add.1, adopted by this Assembly. Hence
we want to hail the independence of the Comoros
and extend a warm welcome to that State as the newest
Member of the United Nations.
108. The long struggle for freedom and independence of the people of the Comoros has been crowned
with success. Their quest for liberty occupied the
attention of this Assembly, and particularly that of the
Special Committee on decolonization, for a number
of years. Because it is a small Territory, there were
some who wanted to deny its people their right to
self-determination and independence. Indeed, in the
not-too-distant past there was still opposition to considering that Territory among those that were subjected to colonialism. Had it not been for the tenacious
resistance of its people and for the vigilant action of
the anti-colonialist forces within the United Nations,
the Comoro islands might have succumbed to those
who wished to assimilate and absorb them.
109. The new independent State now faces the complex and difficult task offully consolidating its political
sovereignty and promoting its economic and social
development. In that task it will have to receive the
firm and full support of the United Nations.
110. It is of particular importance that respect for
the national unity and territorial integrity of the
Comoros should be unreservedly guaranteed. That is a
fundamental principle of our Organization, and one of
the very bases of the Charter and of international
coexistence in the contemporary world. The territorial
integrity of colonial and dependent countries is one
of the principles solemnly proclaimed by the General
Assembly in resolution 1514 (XV). It is for this reason
and in the light of the unfortunate events that have
taken place recently in the Comoro Archipelago that
the sponsors included the third preambular paragraph
in the draft resolution.

111. The Comoros comes into the Organization at a
crucial time for the United Nations: it is joining us as
the Organization is becoming more and more genuinely
representative of mankind and, thanks to the new
majority made up of socialist and non-aligned States,
is acting in keeping with the true interests of all peoples
and with the cause of peace, justice and freedom.
112. This new victory of those who struggle for the
emancipation of nations is taking place at a time when
the progressive States of the third world are the object
of the most shameless campaign of threats, pressures
and slander as a result of recent decisions of this Assembly. Judging from what the press has been saying
recentlY, for some representatives of Western Powers
parliamentary democracy was a useful tool only when
a handful of them could impose their will capriciously
on the Assembly. Now that this is no longer so easy,
some of them seem to feel nostalgia for a colonialist
past that they would do well to consider gone for
ever. This may be the best lesson that the admission
of a newly independent Member can teach the Organization. What is necessary now is the spiritual decolonization of those who still try to oppose the opinion
of the majority with insults or senseless statements.
113. The admission of the Comoros occurs at a
decisive moment for the decolonization process in
Mrica too. Only yesterday, with the termination of
Portuguese domination, the independence of the
People's Republic of Angola was proclaimed. Cuba,
which extended immediate diplomatic recognition to
Angola, greets that new African State, its President,
Agostinho Neto, and the Movimento Popular de
Liberta~ao de Angola, the sole representative of the
Angolan people, the· only vehicle of expression for that
people's desire for independence over the last two
decades, the only movement that consistently and
heroically waged an armed struggle against Portuguese
colonialism for 14 years.
114. To save Angola, resolutely to support its independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, is the
most urgent and inescapable task for all those who
call themselves enemies ofcolonialism. At this decisive
time for Mrica, a time when we are welcoming a new
Member to our Organization from that continent, it is
essential to express the most resolute solidarity with
the People's Republic of Angola, which is today facing
the aggression of the imperialists who, with their
colonialist and racist mercenaries, are trying, 15 years
after the event, to put on a repeat performance of the
painful events of the Congo. We must act now, without
hesitation, to prevent that. Cuba appeals to all revolutionary forces, to all progressive States, to all those
who oppose colonialism, to close their ranks in militant
solidarity with the People's Republic of Angola.
115. In greeting the independence of the Comoros
and its admission to the United Nations, we reiterate
our decision to continue to struggle against colonialism
in all its forms and manifestations wherever it may
arise in the world, until we have turned into reality for
all those peoples still subject to the colonial yoke the
promises contained in the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
[resolution 1514 (XV)].
116. In reiterating our welcome to the Comoros
we wish to assure its representatives of the readiness
of our delegation to co-operate with them in the com-

General Assembly-Tblrtleth Sesslo_P1enary Meetings

mon effort to promote the ideals of the Organization,
for which its valiant people have consistently struggled.
117. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I now have the honour of inviting the head of State and
President ofthe Government of the Comoros, Mr. Said
Mohamed Jafar, to address the General Assembly.
118. Mr. Said Mohamed JAFAR (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, may I first, on behalf of the
Comorian people, express our profound gratitude
for the warm welcome extended to the young State
of the Comoros. Our thanks go first to the members
ofthe Security Council, whose favourable and unequivocal recommendation led to the virtually unanimous
decision of the General Assembly.
119. We are pleased today to be able to recall proudly
before this Assembly the main stages, as well as the
methods, of our liberation struggle. Aware of our
.material insufficiency in all areas, the small size of our
territory and the problems connected with its geographical location, the Comorian people has chosen
to free itselffrom colonial domination solely by peaceful means based on persuasion and dialogue with the
administering Power.
120. Although independence was already being
discussed in the 1960s, the decisive stage was the vote
on a resolution whereby, on 22 December 1972, the
Comorian people, through its representatives, solemnly committed itself to working towards the independence, national unity and territorial integrity of the
Comoros.
121. The process thus begun led to the agreements
of 15 June 1973 by which France officially recognized
the will of the Comoros, one and indivisible, to independence.
122. The referendum of 22 December 1974, through
the overwhelmingly affirmative vote of 95 per cent of
our people in favour of independence, with an electoral
participation of 93 per cent, sanctioned the Comorian
people's unshakable determination for freedom and
emancipation. That action vis-a-vis the administering
Power was facilitated by the effective support of a vast
number of countries, particularly those of our African
brothers, of the Islamic world _and of all peoples that
love peace and freedom. OAU, through its Liberation
Committee, the African group in this Assembly, and
the United Nations, through its Special Committee on
decolonization, worked to alert international opinion to
the threat hanging over the integrity of our national
territory, while retaining the calm necessary to commend the efforts made at each stage of our journey
towards independence by the parties concerned.
123. How could the Comorian people remain insensitive to such solidarity and such mobilization of
support?
124. However, despite that support, we stand before
this Assembly alone. The National Executive Council
asked France to sponsor the candidature of the Comoros for membership in the U1'1ited Nations, in
accordance with tradition. France did not see fit to
respond favourably to our appeal. Is it fate that the
affairs of the Comoros should always be shrouded in
mystery? Allah, the All-Knowing, alone can tell.
125. We regret the French attitude all the more
because during the very short period that elapsed

·~'1'~1"':·:-::
(.~'--~

,

between 22 December 1972 and 6 July 1975, and that
included the time of the self-determination referendum
of 22 December 1974, France made the independence
of the Comoros conditional upon our meeting certain
deadlines and fulfilling certain new demands which
could only encourage the partition of our country.
126. The unilateral declaration of independenc~
of 6 July 1975 was not an act of defiance of France,
but rather the expression ofour will and our determination in the face of the manoeuvres of certain circles
within the French Republic which, despite the irresistible tide of history, remained desperately attached
to the pleasures of colonization.
127. The independence of the Comoros and the
admission of our country to this Organization apply
to our entire national territory. This position stems
from the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations and has been reaffirmed by resolution 1514 (XV) of December 1960.
128. As far as the Comoros is concerned, General
Assembly resolutions 3161 (XXVIII) and 3291 (XXIX),
as well as the declarations of the French Government
of 26 August and 24 October 1974, are categorical.
129. Since we declared our independence, the former
administering Power has established direct administration over a part of our territory. This is outside the
legitimate authority of our Government, and ignores,
first, our sovereignty and, secondly, the provisions
of the Statute of Internal Autonomy.
130. The talks between the French and the Comorian
Governments during the first half of last October on
the transfer of powers for our entire territory had to
be suspended because of essential differences between
the two sovereign States concerning the sacrosanct,
non-negotiable nature of our territorial integrity. and
on the principle of non-interference in internal affairs.
131. Since that date, we have witnessed in our
country a bitter political and human tragedy. On the
one hand, we see the authorities of the former administering Power attempting to disrupt our national unity
through procedures called institutional, but alien and
inapplicable to our young sovereign State. On the other
hand, gangs of fanatics systematically raze to the
ground entire villages, and organize the mass deportation of a peaceful, defenceless population, with the
passive and active co~nivance of French police, the
Foreign Legion and Frenchfusiliers marins.
132. We leave it up to the Assembly to assess the
gravity of this _situation, while ardently hoping that
together, and with all the parties concerned, we may
find a just, equitable and appropriate solution.
133. The Comoros are a group offour islands located
in the Indian Ocean. Situated at the mouth of the
Mozambique Channel, we occupy a privileged but
difficult position on the petroleum route. Whereas
the Indian Ocean has remained a zone of peace, we
are justly concerned by all the signs indicating that
this region is becoming a zone of confrontation.
134. With 300,000 inhabitants spread over 2,235
square kilometres, the archipelago is a small territory.
It is also an under-developed country. The disastrous
economic and social situation is fraught with serious
problems. All this makes us vulnerable, but it is precisely because we are weak that our desire for inter-

natio
beca
prefe
tion.
provi
ful s
respe
135.
Unit
to gi
Unit
of s
creat
to so
and
peopl
can
order
being
136.
since
defen
hege
finan
hope
demo
will
cemb
worth
the d
expre

2402Dd meetiDg-12 November 1975

national co-operation is strong and genuine. And it is
because we are a peaceful country that we always
prefer, whenever it is possible, the supranational SOlllltion. Thus we support without reservation all the
provisions of the Charter which provide for the peaceful settlement of disputes and the development of
respect for international law.
135. As a third-world country we rely greatly on the
United Nations, and within our means we shall work
to give it the chance to respond to our hopes. The
United Nations can and must safeguard the sovereignty
of small States. The United Nations can and must
create all the legal and practical conditions conducive
to solidarity among States. The United Nations can
and must znable us to humanize relations among the
peoples of the world. And, finally, the United Nations
can and must accept a new international economic
order based on justice, equality and the right to wellbeing.
136. France has resolutely undertaken decolonization
since the beginning of the 196Os. Often, it has been a
defender of the third world, rejecting policies of
hegemony, and questioning an unjust economic and
financial order. We do not wish to forget this and we
hope that France, true to its ideal of freedom and its
democratic traditions, will respect the overwhelming
will expressed by the Comorian people on 22 December 1974. That is the only attitude that would be
worthy of France, and the only one in keeping with
the desire for friendship and co-operation repeatedly
expressed by our two peoples.

82S

137. Before concluding, I should like to extend the
congratulations of my country to the President of the
General Assembly on his election to the presidency.
I am certain that under his wise and skilled guidance
the work of this Assembly will be crowned with
success.
138. To mark our faith in the Organization, we have
decided that today, 12 November, the date of our
admission as a united and sovereign State to membership in the United Nations, will be designated our
national day.
139. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
On behalf of the General Assembly, I thank the head
of State and President of the Government of the
Comoros for his important statement.

The meeting rose at /.05 p.m.

NOTES
I Official Records of the Security Council. Thirtieth Year.
l848th meeting, paras. 6-10.
2 A/AC.I09/507.
3 Official Records of the General Assembly. Twenty-ninth Session. Supplement No. 23, chap. XI, annex, para. 32.
4 Official Records of the Security Council. Thirtieth Year,
l848th meeting, para. 24.
5 See A!AC. 109/PV.I021 , p. 22.
